Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Content
Learning competencies
4.1 Cell cycle
Outline the series of events taking place in the cell cycle
4.2 Cell division
Identify the two types of cell division
4.2.1 Mitosis
Compare and contrast Mitosis and Meiosis
4.2.2 Meiosis
Explain the importance of cell division
4.3 Renowned Geneticist in
Recognize the occurrence of cancer cells due to failure to con-
Ethiopia
trol the cell cycle
Appreciate the works of renowned Ethiopian Geneticist
4.1 Cell cycle
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define cell cycle,
outline the different stages of cell cycle and
collect information on cancer
What are the main divisions of a cell cycle ?
Before dealing with cell cycle, it is important to refresh your memory
about cell structure and function, particularly the nucleus where key
Why not a cell
diminishes in size
processes of cell reproduction takes place. The next activity (Activity
through repeated cell
4.1) gives you opportunity to construct at least two dimensional (2D)
division? What should
cell model to show an animal cell and arrangement of cell organelles
happen before and after
using a cardboard or stiff paper. You can follow the same procedure
cell division to maintain
to prepare a model of plant cell, where chloroplasts and cell wall are
cell size?
included as additional structures. The presence of cell wall in your
model creates difference in the cytoplasmic division of plant cells and
animal cells, which you will learn in the next lesson of cell division.
Grade 10 Biology
81
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
ACTIVITY 4.1 MODELING
Materials required: Card board or stiff paper. Glue, threads (with different colours), puncher, colored
paper, small beads or small seeds (e. g. pea , chickpea, lentils), wool or cotton , Scissor
Direction: Perform the activity in small group of two students sharing a seat or a table.
First create a round boundary by colour thread to represent the shape and the cell membrane
Fix the piece of rolled wool or cotton and the colour bead with glue at the center to show the
position of the nucleus and nucleolus
Then, fix small colored paper (punched out), beads (seeds of similar size or shape) and thin
colour threads with glue to represent the different organelles as shown in the figure below
Draw the diagram on a paper and label the parts without looking the Figure. Exchange your paper
with your neighbor and make corrections to the parts labeled wrong.
Discuss why nucleus is important for cell division. Identify the difference between nucleus and
nucleolus.
Mitochondrion
Golgi apparatus
Endoplasmic reticulum
(Smooth)
Vacuole
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Endoplasmic reticulum
(Rough - with ribosomes)
Lysosome
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
A cell cycle is a sequence of events that takes place in the parent cell
as a means of distributing genetic materials thereby forming daughter
G2
cells (Figure 4.1). There are two main divisions of the cell cycle:
M
Interphase and cell division.
S
Interphase is divided into three phases called G₁, S, and G2.
G₁ Phase (First Gap): is the first stage of interphase. During this stage,
G1
cells are quite active metabolically. They accumulate the building
blocks of chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins as well as
store sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of replicating
G1 growth
each chromosome in the nucleus.
S - DNA synthesis
G2 - Growth and
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA): is the stage of DNA replication
preparation for mitosis
(Synthesis).
M Mitosis
G2 Phase (second gap): is the stage where the cell replenishes its
Figure 4.1 Stages of the cell
energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosome
cycle
manipulation and movement. Some cell organelles are duplicated
during this stage. Cells may continue growing during the G, phase.
Cells make the final preparations before entering into the mitotic
phase.
82
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
The cell division, on the other hand, includes nuclear division -
Karyokinesis (mitosis, or, M - stage) followed by cytoplasmic
division (Cytokinesis). This ultimately results in two identical
daughter cells. Each daughter cell grows and starts the cycle the
mother cell has undergone.
In the next group activity you will have an opportunity to combine
skills in computation with geometry to estimate time spent or
determine the proportion (percentage) of each stage or phase of cell
cycle using Figure 4.1. This can help you to create paper time clock
taking one round cell cycle as 360 degree and assuming the whole
cell cycle is completed within 24 hrs.
ACTIVITY 4. 2 CRITICAL THINKING
Direction:
Form a small group of 2 or 3 students. Use Figure 4.1 while measuring degree of angles for each stage
with corresponding time from the 24 hr ( Hint: 15° = 1 hr )
For efficient way to accomplish your task, first divide the circle representing cell cycle into two halves
down in the middle with a ruler, and then in half again horizontally. You will get four quarters of 90°.
This can easily divide your cell cycle into 6 hrs of 15° each.
Once the cell cycle is divided into four segments and the hours will be labeled (24 hr at the top) with
one hr (15°) interval clock wise.
Measure the degree bounding each stage of the cell cycle and calculate the exact time spent for
each stage/phase of cell cycle.
Use the formula : (Degree measured / 360°) X 24 hr. Then summarize you results as shown in the next
table.
Variable
Interphase
Cell division
Total
G¹
S
G2
(mitosis + cytokinesis)
Measured degree
Time spent (hr)
Percentage
Questions
What is the proportion of time spent in interphase as compared to cell division ( mitosis &
cytokinesis)?
Why does a cell spend most of its time in the interphase?
Each stage of cell cycle is not static. What does this mean?
What will happen if cell cycle is not controlled?
The cell cycle in general and cell division has an internal controlling
system that enables it to follow regular pattern. If such regulatory
system fails to work properly, the cells excessively divide, and this
may be called "cell madness". Cancer will occur as a result of failure
Grade 10 Biology
83
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
of controlling cell division, Cancer cells do not respond normally to
Attention
the cell cycle controlling system; they divide in unregulated manner
Cancer can start when the
and may invade other tissues of the body
controlling factors over cell
division and cell growth fail.
ACTIVITY 4. 3 INTERVIEWING KEY INFORMANTS
Cancer occurs in the
absence of growth factors
Direction:
allowing a cell to divide
Go to the nearby health center around your school or your home
continuously at very high
and gather information by interviewing health workers about
density at the expense of
cancer.
other normal cells.
Your interview should include the following key questions:
1. What is cancer?
Cancer cells can have a
number of problems:
2. How does cancer affect a person?
they might not be able to
3. What should be done to prevent cancer?
communicate with healthy
4. How can cancer patients be treated?
cells;
they may not be able to
carry out normal cells;
4.2 The Cell division
they may not securely
Objectives
anchor themselves like
other cells do, which can
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
make them more likely
recognize the causes of cell division and
to travel somewhere and
explain the importance of cell division
spread to other parts of the
body.
In grade 9, you have learned that a cell is the basic structural and
functional unit of life. It is their ability to reproduce that distinguishes
living organisms from non-living organisms. This ability has a cellular
basis. There must be at least a single cell to have an organism, such
Imagine scraping your
as the unicellular organism amoeba. There are also multicellular
elbow. In addition to
organisms with a huge number of cells, which initially start with
being uncomfortable, you
will lose bunch of skin
a single cell or few cells and become multicellular by repeated cell
cells. How does your body
division. As it is stated in cell theory, new cells arise from pre-existing
make new cells to replace
cells by cell division. This fundamental principle, known as the cell
cells that are damaged or
doctrine, was originally postulated by Rudolf Virchow in 1858, and it
lost as a result of injury
provides the basis for the continuity of life.
or accident?
Cell division is a basic process in all living things where a parent
or mother cell, divides into two daughter cells. An ordered series
of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two
new daughter cells are termed the cell cycle. Cells on the path to cell
division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully
regulated stages of growth, DNA replication, and nuclear and
cytoplasmic division that ultimately produces two identical (clone)
cells.
As the cell grows the volume of cytoplasm relative to the cell
membrane will be small that it will have .low surface area to volume
84
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
ratio. As a result material transport across the cell membrane by
simple diffusion will be inadequate for the cell to survive. Moreover,
as the size of the cell increases the controlling power of the nucleus
is highly minimized. Thus to solve these problems cell employs a
mechanism called cell division by which one cell become two or
What causes a cell to
more.
divide?
You already know the cause of cell division, but it should also be
What is the importance of
noted that the cell is increasing its number as it divides repeatedly.
cell division to organisms ?
The increase in cell number in turn is important for many reasons.
In unicellular organisms, cell division is a means of reproduction or
getting new offspring. For instance, Amoeba is unicellular. When
a single cell Amoeba divides, it has increased its population, i.e.
ACTIVITY 4.4: PEER
DISCUSSION
Number of Amoebae (offspring). In multicellular organisms, cell
division is a means of increasing cell number either for growth
Direction:
or to replace damaged/dead cells and repair the body. In sexually
Carefully read the questions
reproducing organisms it occurs around reproductive organs as a
asked below. Think about
means of getting gametes or sex cells.
cell division taking place in
human body. Discuss with
From your previous lesson on cell cycle (Refer to Figure 4.1) cell
a friend sitting next to you.
division continues after G2 stage of the interphase. Cell division
Compare your answers with
consists of two sub divisions
your classmates.
i) Nuclear division (Karyokinesis) - results in the separation and
Where does cell division
distribution of duplicated genetic materials of mother cell (dividing
occurs mainly for tissue
cell) to daughter cells by mitosis or meiosis.
renewal rather than
growth - Is it in a child or
ii) Cytokinesis (cytoplasmic division) - is the separation of the
in adult human body?
cytoplasmic components into the daughter cells.
Mention our body
Hereafter, you will learn the pattern of arrangement and redistribution
part where cells are
of the duplicated genetic material during mitosis and meiosis.
undergoing continuous
replacement. Why is this
so?
4.2.1 Mitosis
Objectives
What is mitosis?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
outline the pattern of mitotic cell division,
tell how mitosis produces daughter cells as an exact copy of
mother cell and point out the importance of mitosis
Mitosis is a type of nuclear division where duplicated chromosomes
of a single mother cell are distributed between two identical daughter
cells, having the same number and kind of hereditary materials
(chromosomes) as the parent nucleus. As a result, a diploid (2n)
mother cell gives rise to two diploid (2n) identical daughter cells.
Grade 10 Biology
85
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
How does a cell divide by mitosis?
As illustrated in Figure 4.2, apart from cytokinesis (cytoplasmic
division), mitosis as nuclear division (Karyokinesis) is divided into
a series of phases namely; prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and
telophase.
Prophase
Metaphse
Anaphase
Telophase
Cytokinesis
X
Mother Cell
Figure 4.2 Illustration of cell division by mitosis
What happens in the different phases while a cell undergoes
mitosis?
Attention
Detailed description of what actually happens at different phases of
The term mitosis was
mitosis is presented as follows:
first coined by Walther
Flemming in 1882
1. Prophase (the "first phase"): During this phase
when he discovered
that chromosomes
each duplicated chromosome, composed of two sister chromatids
during cell division
and, containing identical genetic material pairs up.
split longitudinally to
the nuclear membrane breaks down, the nucleolus disappears.
distribute themselves
chromosomes shorten, thicken and become visible.
equally between two
daughter cells.
the centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the cell, and
spindle fibres emerge from the centrosomes (two in numbers and
The end result of
located outside the nucleus) - Figure 4.2
mitosis is growth of the
eukaryotic organism
Mitotic spindle
microtubules
and replacement of
damaged or dead cells
Centromenic
region
After fertilization (union
of sperm cell and egg
cell), the growth of the
zygote occurs by cell
Kinetochore
division through mitosis
into the 2 - cell stage,
then 4 - cell stage, 8 -
cell stage, 16 - cell stage,
Sister chromatids
and so. This is called
Cleavage.
Figure 4.3 Sister chromatids: Mitotic spindle emerging from the
centrosomes
86
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
2. Metaphase (arrangement phase)
What is the significance
During this phase
of cell division through
mitotic spindles are fully developed with centrosomes at the
mitosis?
opposite poles.
chromosomes line up ( arrange themselves ) end-to-end along
the centre or metaphase plate ( equatorial plane) of the cell.
each sister chromatids are attached to a spindle fibre originating
from opposite poles.
3. Anaphase (migrating phase)
During this phase cohesion proteins binding the sister chromatids
together known as centromere, breakdown.
separated sister chromatids are pulled apart by the mitotic
spindle which drags one chromatid to one pole and the other
chromatid to the opposite pole. This will ensure daughter cells
receive chromosomes that are the same in number and kind.
4. Telophase (a reverse of prophase)
This phase is also known as a reversed prophase because what has
disappeared during the interphase will reappear during the telophase
and vice versa. Accordingly,
nuclear membrane reappears and surrounds each set of
chromosomes to create two new nuclei arriving at opposite
poles.
The mitotic spindle breaks down and disappears.
Cytokinesis, also known as cytoplasmic division, will take place after
the four stages of mitosis (nuclear division) are completed. However,
its completion in animal cell is different from plant cell. As animal
cell is surrounded only by cell membrane, cytokinesis enables the
cytoplasm of the mother cell to pinch or constrict in the middle. As
a result the two daughter cells entirely separate. However, as plant
cell is surround by hard cell wall in addition to the cell membrane ,
the cytoplasm cannot simply pinch off and fully separate; instead a
new wall will be laid down between the two daughter cells, Thus,
the two adjacent cells remained joined together by the middle wall
- called middle lamella.
The redistribution of duplicated chromosomes through mitosis is
important to get two daughter cells from single diploid mother
cell that are identical in quality and quantity of chromosomes.. The
process of mitosis is important to increase cell number, which in
turn is essential for growth. We, human beings, after the union of
Grade 10 Biology
87
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
haploid (n) sperm and haploid (n) egg started as a zygote, which
is diploid (2n). Then the zygote by repeated cell division through
mitosis develops into multicellular organism. This is how we human
beings are made up of million cells.
Cells have a finite life span; they wear out or become damaged; so
they need to be replaced continuously. The process of growth, repair
and replacement of dead cells all rely on cell division through mitosis.
Unicellular organisms like Amoeba also use cell division through
mitosis to increase their number or population.
http://www.differencebetween.
Key terms
net/science/difference-between-
homologous-chromosomes-and-
Spindle fiber - is long protein fiber extending from structures
sister-chromatids/#ixzz72kDLiFk2
called centrioles. It starts from the pole of the cell and extends up to
the centre, where it is linked to duplicated chromosomes arranged
for distribution. It is necessary to pull chromosomes separated
towards the pole during the anaphase stage of cell division.
Homologous chromosomes - are couples of one maternal and
one paternal chromosome paired up during fertilization. They are
paired chromosomes, each of which represents a parent for a unit
character such as height, body colour, sex etc. The best analogy for
homologus chromosomes, is paired shoe with the same number
Every person like the unit character has same number, say shoe
size 41, two in number and fit to the right and left feet of Mr/Mrs
"X" or "Y". Likewise, in humans each diploid (2n) body (somatic)
cell has 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes, giving a total of 46
(2X23) chromosomes.
Sister chromatids: Two copies of one maternal or paternal
chromosome linked together by cohesive protein on the centromere.
ACTIVITY 4.5 GROUP WORK
Direction:
A
The figure below shows different phases
of mitosis in onion cells as seen under
B
the microscope
E
Form a small group and carefully look
at the figure, and based on your lesson
about mitosis, identify the phases repre-
sented by letters "A" to "E". Compare
your answer with other groups and de-
fend yourself if there is any difference.
c
D
88
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
4.2.2 Meiosis
Objectives
What is meiosis? How
does it differ from
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
mitosis?
outline the pattern of cell division by meiosis,
tell the importance of meiosis and
point out the difference between mitosis and meiosis
The process of meiosis is a characteristic feature of organisms that
reproduce sexually. It occurs in reproductive organs such as ovaries
of female animals, testes of male animals, anther and ovules of
flowering plants. Meiosis involves two fissions of the nucleus giving
rise to four gametes or sex cells, each possessing half the number
of chromosomes (n) present in the mother cell. Meiosis is called
reduction division, as the final daughter cells are haploid (n) as
compared to the diploid ( 2n) mother division.
What would happen if the human gametes (sperm cell and egg cell),
had 46 chromosomes like the other body cells? The answer is simple
that there will be 92 chromosomes in the zygote, which will not be
normal. Thus, during gametogenesis (gamete formation) in human
ovaries and testes, the 46 chromosomes in the initial mother will be
reduced by half to 23 chromosomes by meiosis. As a result, the sperm
or egg cells nuclei will have 23 chromosomes (haploid, abbreviated
as n). So, when sperm and egg join together at fertilization, a zygote
that contains the normal number of 46 chromosomes (23 pairs,
Why is meiosis so
Diploid abbreviated as 2n) will be formed.
important?
Figure 4.4 depicts the different phases of meiosis I and II. A short
description of each phase is presented in Table 4.1
Meiosis I
Mother cell
(Diploid= 2n)
Interphase
Prophase I
Metaphase I
Anaphase I
Telophase I
Cytokinesis I
Synapsis and
Two Diploid
Centrosomes
Sister
Nucleolus
Crossing Over
Spindle Fiber
Chromatids
Daughter Cells
Cell
Membrane
XX
Chromosome
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
Nuclear
Membrane
Tetrad
Centromere
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Meiosis II
Prophase II
Metaphase II
Anaphase II
Telophase II
Cytokinesis II
Sister
Four Haploid
Chromatids
Daughter Cells
Diploid
XX
11
Daughter
Cells from
Meiosis I
Figure 4.4 Illustration of
meiosis I and Meiosis II
Grade 10 Biology
89
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Table 4.1 Description of the different stages of Meiosis I and Meiosis II
Stage
Description
Prophase I
Each chromosome appears shortened and thickened form two chromatids
Homologous chromosomes pair up
Metaphase I
Chromosomes align on spindle fiber; lining up in the middle or metaphase plate
The centromere joining sister chromatids do not separate
The pair of chromatids from each homologous pair moves to the end (pole) of the
Anaphase I
cell.
Reduction to haploid (n) will take place because homologous chromosomes of male
and female parents separate
The nuclear membrane reforms and the cells begin to divide.
Telophase I
In some cells, the cell continues to full cytokinesis while in other cells there may be
prolonged interphase but with no further DNA duplication
Prophase II
New spindles are formed and the chromosome, still made up of paired chromatids
moves toward the middle of the cell.
Metaphase
The chromosomes line up in the metaphase plate , with the spindle attached to the
II
sister chromatids of each chromosome coming from the opposite poles.
Anaphase II
The centromeres divide and sister chromatids separate and pulled to the opposite
ends of each cell
Nuclear membrane reappears, the chromosomes return to the interphase state
Telophase II
Cytokinesis follows giving four daughter cells each with half the chromosome num-
ber of the initial parent ( mother) cell
ACTIVITY 4.6 DEMONSTRATION
Direction
With your small group (two pairs of neighbouring students) discuss and attempt the following
questions/task.
Is it Meiosis I or Meiosis II that is similar to mitosis? Why so?
What are the basic similarities between Mitosis and meiosis)?
Prepare a table of comparison that shows difference between Mitosis and meiosis
Let students bring threads with different colours (red and green). Show them how they start with
homologus chromosomes (paternal and maternal chromosomes represented by red and green
threads). Demonstrate the different stages of nuclear division with small pieces of the colour
threads and show the result of chromosomal duplication and redistribution that occur first in
mitosis and then in meiosis.
Ask students to repeat what has been demonstrated and identify the difference in mitosis and
meiosis
90
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
4.3 Renowned Ethiopian Geneticist
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
appreciate the work of a renowned geneticist and
look for more Ethiopian Geneticist who contributed a lot to
their field
Dr. Melaku Worede
Dr. Melaku Worede, a geneticist and agronomist, is renowned for
employing science to benefit poor farmers and saving Africa's seeds
from extinction. He was awarded the "Right livelihood Award" in
1989" for preserving Ethiopia's genetic wealth by building one of the
finest seed conservation centres in the world." He played key role
in the establishment of the Plant Genetic Resource centre in Addis
Ababa, where he became Director in 1979 and served for more than
14 years - until retirement
After retirement, Dr. Melaku developed his pioneer work on a
framing based native seed (landrace) conservation, enhancement
and utilization. He was able to develop and grow locally adapted
native seeds (e.g., durum wheat) without commercial fertilizers or
other chemicals. He was able to show that his native seeds exceeded
their high in put counterparts on the average by 10 - 15% and the
original farmers' cultivars by 20 - 25% in yield.
ACTIVITY 4.6 PEER DISCUSSION
Direction
Carefully read the work of Dr. Melaku and share your
impression with a friend sitting with you.
Form a group of four students and look for more renowned
Ethiopian Geneticists from books and /or the Internet. Organize a
report to share with your classmates.
Grade 10 Biology
91
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Unit Summary
A cell cycle is a sequence of events that takes place in the parent cell as a means of distributing
genetic materials thereby forming daughter cells. There are two main divisions of the cell
cycle: Interphase and Cell division.
Interphase is the stage of preparation where a cell exhibits growth and DNA (genetic material
synthesis)
Cell division is nuclear division either by mitosis or meiosis followed by cytoplasmic division
(cytokinesis).
Cell division is a basic process in all living things where a parent or mother cell, divides into
two cells, called daughter cells.
Cell division is a means of growth and replacing damaged or dead cells in multicellular
organisms. It is equivalent to reproduction in unicellular organisms.
Mitosis is a division of the somatic (body) cells to form identical daughter cells. It has four
stages namely prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.
Meiosis is a division of reproductive cells, resulting in daughter cells sex cells (gametes) with
half of the chromosomes in the initial or mother cell.
In meiosis a cell divides twice, Meiosis I and Meiosis II, resulting in four daughter cells.
In meiosis I, homologous chromosomes separate and move to opposite cells. This is a
reduction by half, going from diploid (2n) to haploid (n).
In meiosis II, sister chromatids separate and move to opposite poles of the cell.
Meiosis occurs only in reproductive organs such as testes and ovaries while mitosis occurs in
body (somatic) cells.
92
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Review Questions
True - False items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise book.
1. It is meiosis I that resembles mitosis.
2. Homologus chromosomes are duplicated one parent chromosomes.
3. Meiosis results in four haploid daughter cells.
4. DNA duplication is the longest phase of the interphase.
5. Prokaryotic organisms like Bacteria do not divide by mitosis.
Matching items: Match the descriptions under "Column A" with the terms under "Column B"
Column A
Column B
1. known as cytoplasmic division
A) Anaphase
2. paired maternal and paternal chromosomes
B) Cytokinesis
3. pull chromosomes to opposite ends of a cell
C) Homologous chromosomes
4. arrangement of chromosomes at the equatorial plane
D) Interphase
5. separation of sister chromatids
E) Metaphase
6. duplicated one parent chromosmes
F) Sister chromatids
G) Spindle fiber
H) Telophase
Short answers
1. What is the importance of meiosis to sexually reproducing organisms?
2. Mention at least two important features of cancer cells.
3. What is the difference between interphase and prophase?
4. What would happen if there is no cytoplasmic division at the end of telophase?
5. If a cell is having 2n=40 divide by meiosis
A. How many cells are formed at the end of meiosis i? Meiosis ii?
B. How many chromosomes are there in each daughter cells at the end of meiosis i? Meiosis
ii?
C .How many set of chromosome(s)/is/ are there at the end of meiosis i? Meiosis ii?
6. If a species A has 2n=28 chromosome and species B has 2n=32 chromosomes and allowed to
interbreed together to produce another organism(species C). What would be the number of
chromosomes in species C?
7. What is the difference between haploid and diploid cells? Are your skin cells haploid or
diploid? What about germ cells? Gametes?
Grade 10 Biology
93
