Unit 1: Sub-fields of Biology
Contents
Learning competencies
1.1. Sub-fields of biology
list the Sub-fields of biology
1.2. Pure and applied fields of biology
classify the different Sub-fields of Biology into pure
1.3. Major discoveries in Biology
and applied
1.4. The contributions of biological discoveries
discuss at least five major discoveries that revolu-
to society and the environment (e.g. micro-
tionized Biology
scope, penicillin, inheritance, etc.)
appreciate the contribution of biological discover-
1.5. Major discoveries by Ethiopian Biologists
ies to society/environment e.g. microscope, peni-
(e.g. Aklilu Lemma, Gabissa Ejeta)
cillin, inheritance, etc.
appreciate Ethiopian scientists and their discover-
ies
1.1 Sub-fields of Biology
Objectives
Recall
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
You have defined the term
'biology' in grade nine unit
Define the sub-fields of biology
1, and briefly discussed what
List the sub-fields of biology
biology studies about. In
this unit, you will study the
different sub-field of biology.
Which sub-fields of biology do you know?
The scope of biology is so broad that it contains many branches and
sub-disciplines. In this unit, thus, you will study the sub-fields of
biology. Based on the type of organism it studies, biology is subdivided
into three: Zoology, Botany, and Microbiology. In addition to these
Zoology
Botany
Microgy
three sub-fields, there is a huge array of sub-disciplines or fields of
biology. Many have been around for hundreds of years whilst others
are far newer and are often developing very rapidly. The three major
Biology
sub-divisions and their area of concern are described in the next page.
Grade 10 Biology
1
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.1: THINK-PAIR-SHARE
Make a group of three students and write down the names of
organisms you know that would be categorized under the three
major divisions of biology. Share with other groups what you have
written and compare with yours.
Zoology
Animal biology, also known as zoology, is the study of animals and
includes disciplines such as herpetology (reptiles), ichthyology (fish),
mammalogy (mammals), ornithology (birds), and entomology
(insects). Zoology is concerned with all aspects of animal life, such
as embryonic development to mature adulthood; behaviour, such as
interactions with other animals or food finding; and genetics. Figure
1.1 shows one of the endemic wild animals of Ethiopia.
Figure 1.1 Capra walie
(Waliya ibex) (in Simien
Botany
Mountains of Ethiopia)
Botany is a field of biology that studies about plants. It deals with plants'
structure, properties, and biochemical processes. It also studies about
classification and diseases of plants and their interactions with the
environment. The principles and findings of botany have provided
the base for such applied sciences as agriculture, horticulture, and
forestry.
Plants have long been used as a source of food, shelter, clothing,
medicine, ornament, and tools. Green plants are now known to be
essential to all life on earth. In addition to their practical and economic
values, through the process of photosynthesis, plants convert energy
from the Sun into the chemical energy of food, which allows all
Figure 1.2 Ruta chalepensis L.
(Tena Adam)
life to exist. The formation and release of oxygen as a by-product
of photosynthesis is the second unique and important capability of
green plants. Ruta chalepensis L. ("Tena Adam' in Amharic), a known
traditional herbal medicine of Ethiopia, is shown as an example (see
Fig 1.2).
bacteria
Microbiology
viruses
Microbiology is the study of microscopic organisms or microbes
Microor-
that cannot be seen by unaided eye. It includes bacteria, archaea,
fungi
ganism or
protists, viruses, microscopic algae and fungi. This branch of biology
microbes
is further subdivided into sub-disciplines, which are frequently
algae
defined by specific microbes. Bacteriology, for example, is the study
protozoa
of bacteria, whereas mycology is the study of fungi. The majority of
bacteria and other microbial species have yet to be identified due to
archea
the difficulty of isolating a single microscopic species. Microbiology
Figure 1.3. The microorganisms
is a rapidly expanding field of study; however, new technology and
2
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
developments in the field are constantly assisting in the identification
of new species. Activity 1.2 below will help you study the different
types of micro-organisms independently.
Activity 1.2 The Microorganisms
Microorganisms of different types are given in this activity. Work in
a pair and do the following activities:
1. Define bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae, microscopic protozoa
and archaea.
2. Draw typical bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae, microscopic
protozoa and archaea.
Table 1.1 shows how various branches of biology are related to the
structure we are studying. Anatomy, for example, is a branch of
biology that studies the physical structures and parts of organisms,
whereas morphology is a branch of biology that studies the form
Do you know how
and structure (internal and external) of organisms and their specific
different branches of
structural features. Table 1.1 shows the various fields of biology based
biology are related to
on the structure they study.
the structure we study?
Table 1.1 Different fields of biology based on the structure
studied
Sub-branch of
Definition
Example of the structures studied
biology
Morphology
Study of external form and structure
Shape, the texture of leaves,
stem, etc
Anatomy
Study of the bodily structure of animals, and
Stomach, liver, heart, etc
other living organisms, especially as revealed by
dissection and the separation of parts
Histology
Study of the details of tissue structure
Parenchyma, connective tissue
Cytology
Study of cells
A plant cell, a nerve cell
Cell biology
Study of the structure, function, and various
Mitochondrion, ribosome,
aspects of cell and its components
nucleus, etc
Molecular
Study of structure and function of informational
DNA, RNA
Biology
molecules
Many other branches of biology are concerned with the various life
processes, such as how an organism multiplies or forms identical
What other branches of
copies of itself, its evolution over millions of years, and its relationship
biology do you know?
with the environment. Table 1.2 lists some of these fields with the
environment.
Grade 10 Biology
3
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Table 1.2 Subjects studied in various branches of Biology
Branch of
Subject Studies
Examples
biology
Physiology
The normal functions of living organisms
Photosynthesis, digestion, etc
and their parts
Embryology
The embryo, from a single-celled zygote
Structure and development of ova, sperm,
(fertilized ovum) to the formation of form
blastula (an embryo at early stage of
and shape
development consisting of a hollow ball of cells),
gastrula(the stage in embryonic development
after blastula during which the embryo develops
two layers), etc.
Ecology
Interaction of organisms with their living
Food chain, biomass, biosphere, etc
environment
Taxonomy
Identification, nomenclature, and
The biological name of a human is Homo sapiens
classification of organisms
and it was placed in the animal kingdom
Paleontology
Origin, growth, and structure of
Fossils of organisms
organisms of the past
Evolution
The change in the characteristics of a
The beaks of Darwin's finches
species over several generations that relies
on the process of natural selection
Genetics
Heredity and variation
Gene concept, Mendel's laws
Exobiology
The origin, evolution, distribution, and
Life on Moon, life on Mars
future of life in the Universe
Do you have any idea
Biology is related to other sciences that study life as an energy
about the relationship
state of all living things, their interrelationships, and links to their
between biology and
surroundings. Table 1.3 shows some of the interrelationships.
other sciences?
Table1 1.3 Knowledge taken from other subjects that help to explain biological phenomenon
Structure/
Example
Related
Knowledge of other sciences is
mechanism studied
Science
required because
Cell membrane
Structure of lipids and proteins
Chemistry
Living organisms are made of inorganic
and organic compounds
Transportation of
Formation of Oxyhaemoglobin
Chemistry
All metabolic pathways involve chemi-
Oxygen (O₂) in the
(haemoglobin with oxygen)
cal change
body
Excretory system
Absorption and elimination of
Chemistry
Homeostasis involves acid-base equi-
salts
librium to maintain the pH of living
organisms
Absorption of food/
Absorption of sugars, amino
Chemistry
During diffusion and osmosis mole-
water
acids, fatty acids, water, or salts
cules move into and out of the cell
Transportation of
Conduction of water from root
Physics
Liquids have certain properties like
water in plants
to leaves
cohesion and adhesion to result in sur-
face tension and capillary action which
helps in certain processes
Release of energy
Electron transport chain
Chemistry
Energy transfer and transport from
during respiration
(transfer electrons from
electron donor to electron accepter
electron donors to electron
acceptors via redox reactions)
4
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.3: Group Discussion
Which other relationships of biology with other disciplines do you
know?
Discuss the relationships of biology with other disciplines.
1.2 Pure and applied fields of biology
Objectives
Recall
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
The previous section de-
Classify the different sub-fields of Biology into pure and applied
scribed and briefly addressed
various sub-fields of biology.
Define each sub-field of biology
Now, you will learn the cat-
egory of biology as pure and
applied sub-fields.
What do we mean by pure and applied fields of biology?
Pure biology is the study of how life functions in nature (behavior,
internal and external structure, reproduction, etc.) whereas applied
biology refers to using what you have learned in biology for (gardening,
nursery work, agriculture, plant disease, forestry, poultry, etc.).
Therefore, applied biology is the use of your knowledge of biology to
manage life. The relationship is similar to anatomy and surgery.
Activity 1.4: Categorizing pure and applied fields of biology
Select pure and applied fields of biology from the list given in the columns on the left side in the
table below and categorize them in their appropriate column on the right side (columns A & B).
Table 1.4 Pure and Applied fields of Biology
Fields of Biology
Pure Biology (A)
Applied Biology (B)
Agriculture
Biotechnology
Morphology
Molecular Biology
Taxonomy
Evolution
Horticulture Cytology
Pathology
Embryology
Physiology
Histology
Forestry
Poultry
Pharmacognosy
Agroforestry
Pisciculture
Apiculture
Paleontology
Animal Husbandry
Bacteriology
Entomology
Sericulture
Grade 10 Biology
5
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.5: THINK-PAIR-
In some branches of science, biology has become very important
SHARE
in this millennium. With the above idea, let us discuss some of the
In the previous parts of this
biological importance of the branches of biology in other branches
unit, you have studied the
of sciences.
different branches of biology.
Now, in pair, take at least 3
1) Biotechnology: is the use of living organisms or their products for
fields of biology and think
the welfare of humanity. It involves the technical manipulation
of their importance in other
of a living organism's genetic makeup (Genetic Engineering). A
branches of science. Finally,
genetically modified and improved variety of crops and animals
share your ideas with each
have been produced by biotechnology.
other.
2) Bioinformatics: is concerned with the acquisition, storage, analysis,
and dissemination of biological data, most often DNA and amino
acid sequences. Bioinformatics uses computer programs for a
variety of applications, including determining gene and protein
functions, establishing evolutionary relationships, and predicting
the three-dimensional shapes of proteins.
3) Genetic Engineering: is a means of extracting selected genes from
an organism or synthesizing selected genes and these genes are
inserted into another organism; as a result, an organism develops
with a new combination of genes, and this process is called genetic
engineering.
4) Biomedical Engineering: is the application of the principles
and problem-solving techniques of engineering to biology and
medicine. Biomedical engineering focuses on the advances that
improve human health and health care at all levels
5) Environment Management: deals with environmental observation
and finding out the solution to maintain the balance of nature.
6) Forensic Science: is the application of the knowledge of biological
science (DNA fingerprints (unique patterns in DNA molecule),
blood typing) to criminal and civil laws.
1.3 Major discoveries that revolutionized biology
Activity 1.6 Group
discussion
Objectives
In a group of 4 -5 students,
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discuss at least five
Discuss at least five major discoveries that revolutionized
major discoveries that
biology
revolutionized biology.
Let your group's secretary
present your findings to the
Biology is a fascinating and diverse subject area. If you're thinking of
whole class.
studying Biology, here are the twelve famous discoveries to inspire
you.
6
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
1. Aristotle (384-322 BC)
Despite the fact that his name is rarely mentioned when discussing
important biological discoveries, the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle
was responsible for a breakthrough classification system for living things.
Aristotle's classification system was known as the 'Ladder of Life' until the
nineteenth century. For the first time, he established species relationships
and grouped them correctly. He classified organisms based on their
Figure 1.3 Aristotle
ability to move from one place to another and with their characteristics
as herbs, shrubs, and trees.
2. Galen (129-161 AD)
Galen's efforts transformed medical science. Galen had a significant
impact on the advancement of numerous medical specialties, including
Anatomy, Pathology, Physiology, and Neurology. Among his important
findings were the distinctions between veins and arteries, as well as
the recognition that the larynx produces voice. Although many of his
concepts contained scientific mistakes, his contribution to medical
Figure 1.4 Galen
science is undeniable
3. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723)
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek is well renowned for his contributions to
microscopy and how he applied it to the field of biology. He invented a
method for making strong lenses that, according to some, could magnify
up to 500 times. Leeuwenhoek employed microscopes to learn more
about the biological world; among his findings were bacteria and the
Figure 1.5 Antonie van
vacuole of the cell.
Leeuwenhoek
4. Carl Linnaeus (1707-1775)
Carl Linnaeus, a botanist, physician, and naturalist, devised the method
for naming, ordering, and classifying creatures that we still use today.
His extensive collection of plant, animal, and shell specimens inspired
him to devise a system for classifying and naming species. He separated
items into three categories - animals, plants, and minerals - and further
organized living things into classes, orders, genera, and species. In Homo
Figure 1.6 Carl Linnaeus
sapiens, for example - 'homo' is the genus and 'sapiens' is the species.
5. Charles Darwin (1809-1882)
Probably the most famous naturalist of all time, Charles Darwin's
contribution to biology and society is immense. He established that all
species of life descended over time from common ancestors, with species
continuing to exist through the process of natural selection. His theory
of evolution was published in On the Origin of Species in 1859 and
it caused quite the stir - he was disputing the long-held belief that all
species had been created by God at the beginning of the world. Evolution
Figure 1.7 Charles Darwin
by natural selection combined with Mendelian genetics is now accepted
Grade 10 Biology
7
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
as the modern evolutionary synthesis and forms the foundations of
much biological scientific endeavour.
6. Gregor Mendel (1822-1884)
Gregor Mendel's extraordinary contribution didn't get the
recognition it deserved until long after the friar's death. He used peas
to discover and demonstrate the laws of genetic inheritance, coining
the terms 'dominant' and 'recessive' genes in the process. The laws
were rediscovered at the turn of the 20th century and provided the
mechanism for Darwin's theory of natural selection to occur. The
two theories combine to form our current understanding of the
Figure 1.8 Gregor Mendel
evolutionary process.
7. Louis Pasteur (1822-1895)
Louis Pasteur is regarded as the father of medical microbiology.
His contributions to science, technology, and medicine are nearly
unparalleled in history. He pioneered molecular asymmetry
research, demonstrated that bacteria cause fermentation and disease,
introduced pasteurization, rescued France's beer, wine, and silk
Figure 1.9. Louis Pasteur
industries, and developed anthrax and rabies vaccines.
8. Robert Koch (1843-1910)
Robert Koch was a well-known German physician who pioneered
microbiology. As the father of modern bacteriology, he is credited
with pinpointing the precise causal agents of tuberculosis, cholera,
and anthrax, as well as providing experimental support for the
Figure 1.10 Robert Koch
concept of infectious disease.
9. Jane Goodall (1934)
Our knowledge of wildlife and conservation has been transformed
by Jane Goodall, the UK ethologist. Best known for her career-long
studies of chimpanzees, she discovered the animals are omnivores
and tool users. She's a global leader in animal rights and was awarded
a Ph.D. degree from the University of Cambridge without holding a
Figure 1.11 Jane Goodall
bachelor's degree.
10) Barbara McClintock (1902-1992)
American geneticist Barbara McClintock spent her career analyzing
maize, where she developed a technique for identifying and examining
chromosomes individually. Despite it not being immediately
recognized, her work made it possible for us to map human genomes.
She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1983 for her discovery of
transposition and how genes could turn their physical characteristics
on and off.
Figure 1.12 Barbara McClintock
8
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
11. Watson (1928-) and Crick (1916-2004)
James Watson and Francis Crick were shot to fame in 1962 for their
discovery of the structure of DNA, winning the medical Nobel Prize
in the process. Their model of DNA (double helix) explains how
DNA replicates, and hereditary information is coded and passed
on to descendants. The discovery of DNA structure has led to a
Figure 1.13 Watson and Crick
much more developed understanding of function - used in disease
diagnosis and treatment, forensics, and more.
12. Wilmut (1944) and Campbell (1954-2012)
In 1996 Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell cloned a mammal, famously
named Dolly the Sheep. The pair cloned Dolly using a single adult
sheep cell and a process of nuclear transfer. Dolly died after six years
but cloning continues, although still not perfect, and certainly not
ready for human application.
Figure 1.14 Wilmut and
Campbell
Activity 1.7 Group and individual work
1. Mention at least ten more biological findings and explore their
central issues in pairs. Finally, present them to the entire class.
2. What do you feel about biological discoveries? Do you have
any possible issue in mind that can be discovered? Share with
your friends.
1.4 The contributions of biological discoveries
to society and the environment
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Appreciate the contribution of biological discoveries to society/
environment
The invention of devices such as microscopes and curative medications
such as penicillin has transformed human life. The biological
discoveries aided humans in developing abilities required for the
use of living systems or influencing natural processes to produce
products, systems, or settings that aid in human development. Some
biological discoveries and their impact on human society and the
natural environment are described further in this sub-section.
1. The Microscope
The microscope is a device that magnifies objects or organisms
that are too small to be seen with the naked eye. A milestone in the
science world, the microscope has had an enormous influence on
Figure 1.15 The Microscope
Grade 10 Biology
9
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Recall
the development of modern medical, forensics, and environmental
sciences. The invention of the microscope has revolutionized the
Mention and discuss types of
science industry while developing other fields.
microscopes with the highest
magnification and resolution
Medical field
power (refer back to grade
The use of microscopes in medicine began in the 1860s when
9 textbook on the micro-
Louis Pasteur reported that the microscopic organisms he saw
scopes).
in the microscope caused certain diseases. Until that time, people
thought diseases came from evil spirits or God. Pasteur's germ theory
revolutionized the process of identifying, treating, and preventing
infectious diseases. Today, hospital laboratories use microscopes to
identify which microbe is causing an infection so physicians can
prescribe the proper medicine. They are also used to diagnose cancer
and other diseases.
Ecosystem study
The microscope is used to study the health of an ecosystem. Field
biologists utilize microscopes to observe a specific habitat, such
as a marine environment, by identifying the types and numbers
of microscopic organisms found in ecosystem samples. This
helps scientists in defining the ecosystem, detecting threats to an
ecosystem, and determining the relationship of the organisms with
their environments.
Forensic Science
The microscope has greatly affected the field of forensic science.
Forensics is a field of science used to gather and analyze evidence
to establish facts that are used in a legal scenario. The microscope
is used to examine pieces of evidence collected at a crime scene that
may have information not visible to the human eye, For example,
striations in bullets can be examined under a microscope to see if
they match bullets shot from a particular gun.
Atomic Study
The invention of the powerful atomic force (electron) microscope
Activity 1.8 Answer to the
question
has enabled scientists to study cells at an atomic level. This enables
scientists to scrutinize viruses at their atomic level and influence them
In your previous classes,
for the delivery of innovative treatments. The electron microscope
you may have studied about
discoveries in medicine. Can
also enables scientists to study and understand the types of viruses
you mention some of them?
and understand how they infect the body.
Tell at least two of such dis-
coveries and their importance
Genetic Study
to human wellbeing and
The microscope has had a significant impact on genetics research.
proceed working on the next
A microscope is used by scientists to examine certain genetic
activity.
makeup. This also allows scientists to evaluate genetic abnormalities,
regeneration, and tissue death. The science of genetics is used to
10
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
examine infected tissue. Histologists will be able to explore future
therapies and preventive drugs as a result of this research.
Tissue Analysis
It is common for histologists to study cells and tissues using a
microscope. For example, if a section of tissue is taken for analysis,
histologists can use a microscope in combination with other tools to
determine if the sample is cancerous.
2. Discoveries in Medicine
Science has never moved at such a rapid rate as it is happening now.
As each discovery brings with it countless more developments,
it stands to reason that our scientific understanding has upgraded
with time. So great are many of these developments in fact, and they
have impacted our daily life styles so much; it's sometimes almost
impossible to imagine a world before many of these breakthroughs.
This is particularly true of medical discoveries, and while we might
complain of long hospital waiting lists or the poor bedside manner
of some of the nurses, we shouldn't forget that only a few generations
ago, how "irritating it was' to amputate a limb without anaesthesia.
Activity 1.9: Fill in the space with benefits of the discoveries
Discoveries in medicine and their relevance: To honour these advances and put things into perspective,
let us take a look at the eleven most important medical discoveries, as well as how they have impacted
us today. This activity in table 1.5 outlines the type of discovery and the person who made it. You are
required to explain its benefits to people.
Table 1.5 Types of discoveries
Type of discovery
Who discovered and year of discovery
Benefits
The Circulatory
1242 by the physician Ibn al-Nafis, and first brought to
System
prominence in 1628 by William Harvey
Vaccination
Jenner' France, 1799
Cell theory
Theodor Schwann and Matthias schleiden, 1838
Germ Theory
Louis Pasteur, 1861
X-Ray
Conrad Rontgen, 1895
Vitamins
Frederick Hopkins, 1900s
Insulin
Frederick Banting, 1920
Penicillin
Alexander Fleming, 1928
DNA
Swiss chemist Friedrich Miescher, 1860/70s
Anesthetics
Sigmund Freud and Karl Koller 1st clinical use in 1884;
Albert Niemann extracted from leaves of Coca in 1860
HIV
Robert Gallo and Luc Montagnier, 1980s
Grade 10 Biology
11
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
3. Inheritance (Application of Genetics)
Activity 1.10: Application of
Genetics
Before 1900, the history of genetics was related to cytology. This owes
Write about the application
to "Robert Hooke", who elaborated various smaller things in a thinly
of genetic discoveries in:
sliced cork section from a mature tree. In 1831, Brown discovered
a consistent structure present in a regular way, called "nucleus".
1. agriculture
Then Schleiden and Schwann presented "cell theory" (1836-1840)
2. medicine
to depict various structures present in the cell and their nature. It
3. biological diversity
was a great contribution to understanding cell structure. After other
4. immunity
contributions, in 1884-1885, four scientists (Hertwig, Kolliker,
5. inheritance
Weismann (all zoologists), and Strasburger (botanist) derived that
heredity matter existed in the nucleus in that material which makes
up chromosomes.
After the discovery of Mendel's work and his laws, Genetics took a
progressive turn and revolutionized. Working on this subject is still
moving. Genetics is providing numerous services to humanity in
almost every field of life. Thus, its prominent role never is neglected
in the welfare and betterment of human lives, in one way or the other.
To study more about the role of genetics for a human, do activity
1.10.
1.5 Ethiopian biologists and their contributions
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
appreciate major discoveries contributed by Ethiopian Scientists
discuss the importance of discoveries contributed by Ethiopian
scientists to human beings
Do you know some of the major discoveries of Ethiopian
biologists? Mention at least 3 of them and explain their
contributions.
Three of the Ethiopian scientists and their discoveries are given
below.
1. Professor Yalemtsehay Mekonnen
Prof. Yalemtsehay is a biologist and an academic member of staff at the
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Addis Ababa University.
She has worked in this department for the last 30 years. She received
her Ph.D., specializing in human physiology, from the University of
Heidelberg in Germany. One of her research areas is the assessment
of the impact of chemical pesticide hazards on humans.
12
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
This research covers almost all government farms including the
Upper Awash agricultural farms and some private horticultural farms
in the Rift Valley region. The other area of her research is in the use of
plants as medicine against human and animal diseases.
Professor Yalemtsehay has published over 100 scientific papers in
reputable journals in the areas of plants of medicinal and nutritional
value in vivo and in vitro physiological tests of useful plant
extracts, assessment of health hazards to humans, animals and the
environment, advocacy and collaborative work for the promotion of
safe and sustainable use of natural resources, to name but few. She
has done notable research on medicinal plants especially on Moringa
Figure 1.16 Prof. Yalemtsehay
Stenopetala (shiferaw/Alekko Shekatta).
Mekonnen
2. Dr. Aklilu Lemma
Schistosomiasis(Bilharzia) is a common parasitic disease. It affects
200-300 million people in Africa (including Ethiopia), South
America, Asia, and parts of the Caribbean. It is caused by parasitic
flatworms which spend part of their lifecycle in freshwater snails and
part in humans. Anyone washing, working, or playing in shallow
freshwater is at risk.
Once inside a person, the parasites mature and produce eggs which
are passed out in the urine and feces. They also infest the blood
vessels, liver, kidneys, bladder, and other organs. The body sets up
an immune reaction and an infected person can become weakened
and ill for many years. Some of the most important work in finding
a way of controlling this parasite, which is effective but does not cost
too much, was carried out by Dr. Aklilu Lemma, one of Ethiopia's
Figure 1.17 Dr. Aklilu
most renowned biologists.
Lemma
Dr. Aklilu began his work in 1964 when he was investigating the
freshwater snails that carry the Schistosomiasis parasite around
Adwa in northern Ethiopia. He saw women washing clothes in the
water and he noticed that downstream of the washing party there
were more dead snails than anywhere else he had collected. The
women were using the soapberry, 'Endod' in Amharic (Phytolacca
dodecane Dr.a), to make washing suds. Dr. Aklilu collected some live
snails from above the washing party and asked one of the women to
give him some of her Endod suds. Not long after the suds were put
in the snail container, all the snails died. This was the start of years
of work for Dr. Aklilu. Back in the laboratory, he showed that if the
Endod berries were dried, crushed, and diluted in water they would
kill snails at very low concentrations.
Other scientists carried out similar investigations and got the
Grade 10 Biology
13
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
same results. If the freshwater snails can be controlled, the spread of
schistosomiasis can be greatly reduced. The World Health Organization
recommended a chemical molluscicide (i.e. a compound that kills
mollusks including snails) but it was extremely expensive. Endod
works well, it is cheap and well known by local people who are likely to
use it and it is environment friendly as it breaks down naturally within
about two days. Dr. Aklilu Lemma worked for many years to convince
scientists all around the world that his ideas would work. Trials using
locally collected Endod showed that using the molluscicide worked.
Before the water was treated, 50% of children 1-6 years old were
infected. After treatment, only 7% were infected by the flatworm.
Dr. Aklilu's results were published in journals around the world. He
found the best species of the soapberry plant and developed programs
for local communities to treat their water. Eventually, people were
convinced and the use of Endod-based molluscicides is spreading
throughout Africa and beyond. He has been honored and recognized
in many different ways both in Ethiopia and around the world for his
work.
3. Professor Gebissa Ejeta
When Prof. Gebissa Ejeta was born in a small rural village his mother
was determined her son would receive a good education. He walked 20
miles to school every sun day evening, returning home on Friday after
a week of studying. It all paid off as he joined Jimma Agricultural and
Technical School and then Alemaya College.
He specializes in plant breeding and genetics. Prof. Gebissa Ejeta did
his research on sorghum He got his Ph.D. from Purdue University in
the USA where he still holds a professorship. He has helped to develop
Africa's first commercial hybrid strain of sorghum. This sorghum
variety not only needs less water and so is resistant to drought, but it
also yields more grain than traditional varieties.
Figure 1.18 Prof. Gebissa
Ejeta
Prof. Gebissa Ejeta developed other varieties of sorghum that are also
resistant to the parasitic Striga weed, which can destroy a big percentage
of a crop. Prof. Gebissa's work has made a very big difference to the food
availability in many areas of Ethiopia and other African countries. His
varieties yield up to ten times more than others. In 2009, Prof. Gebissa
Ejeta was awarded the World Food Prize, which is the most prestigious
agricultural prize in the world. He has also been awarded the National
Hero award of Ethiopia for his work in science and technology. These
are just some of the many renowned Ethiopian biologists who have
carried out work of great value both in Ethiopia and across the world.
You will have the opportunity to find out more about some of the other
scientists with your teacher in activity 1.11.
14
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.11 Fill in the column with contributions
In section 1.5 of this unit, you have learned about the contributions of three Ethiopian scientists. In the
table below, you are given the names of other known biologists who have contributed to the development
of Ethiopian biological science and scientific research. Write the date and type of their contributions in
the right hand column of the table below.
Ethiopian Biologist
Contribution to the development of biological education and re-
search
Prof. Beyene Petros
Dr. Brihane Asfaw
Prof. Ensermu Kelbesa
Prof. Legesse Negash
Dr. Melaku Wolde
Prof. Mogessoe Ashenafi
Dr. Tewoldebrihan G/Egziabiher
Prof. Tilahun Yilma
Dr. Tsehaynesh Asfaw
Dr. Zeresenay Alemseged
Unit Summary
Zoology, Botany, and Microbiology are the three major branches of biology.
Some sub-fields of biology have existed for hundreds of years, while others are much newer and
often developing rapidly.
Anatomy, physiology, bacteriology, mycology, genetics, cytology, histology, embryology, taxono-
my and evolution, are some of the subfields of biology.
Every scientific discovery is remarkable, and some are truly life-changing.
There have been numerous great discoveries throughout the lengthy history of biology.
Almost all scientific discoveries help us learn a little bit more about this magnificent world we live
in, and some discoveries help us discover more.
Some scientific breakthroughs allowed biologists to see even deeper into life, the world, and ev-
erything: the microscope (Antonie van Leeuwenhoek), the law of inheritance (Gregor Mendel),
are some examples.
The biological discoveries aided people in developing abilities required for using living systems
or influencing natural processes to produce products, systems, or environments that aid in hu-
man development.
Some biological discoveries that have had an impact on human civilization and the natural envi-
ronment include: microscopes, medications, and laws of heredity, germ theory, blood circulation
in human, etc.
Discoveries of Ethiopian biologists have made significant contributions to society and develop-
ment.
Dr. Aklilu Lemma's discovery of soapberry 'Endod' against bilharzia (Schistosomiasis), a preva-
lent parasitic ailment, and Prof. Gebissa Ejeta's series of study findings on Sorghum varieties and
productivity are only a few examples of contributions of Ethiopian biologists.
Grade 10 Biology
15
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Review Questions
I. True False
Write "True" for correct statements and "False" for the incorrect once on the space provided.
1. X-ray was discovered by Frederick Bating in 1895.
2. Biochemistry deals with the chemical reactions that take place in living organisms.
3. Microscope was discovered by Theodor Schwann in 1838.
4. Genetics is the study of heredity and variation.
5. The scientific contribution of Prof. Gebissa Ejeta is on the application of Endod to control
Bilharzia.
II. Matching
Match the description of field of study given under Column A with the field of study given under
column B, and write the letter of your answer on the space provided.
Column "A"
Column "B"
1 The study of insects
A. Cytology
2 Embryological development of the fetus
B. Agroforestry
3 The study of tissue
C. Histology
4 The study of mixed agriculture
D. Entomology
5 The study of cells
E. Embryology
III. Multiple Choice
Choose the best answer from the given alternatives (A, B, C & D).
1. The evolutionary history of an organism is known as
A. Anatomy
B. Ancestry
C. Palaeontology
D. Phylogeny
2. Who discovered the circulation of blood?
A. Ibn al-Nafis
B. McCollum
C. Scottish Naval
D. Edward Mellanby
3. The study of the internal structure of an organism is
A. Morphology
B. Anatomy
C. Histology
D. Systematic
4. Anatomy is the study of
A. Life
B. Body structure
C. Animals
D. Ocean
5. Who is regarded as the father of genetics?
A. Gregor Mendel
B. Gebissa Ejeta
C. Aristotle
D. Edward Mellanby
6. Who first discovered the germ theory of disease?
A. Louis Pasteur B. Alexander Flaming
C. Frederick Banting D. August Weismann
7. Who discovered vitamins?
A. Anton Van Leeuwenhoek
B. Frederick Hopkins C. James Watt D. All of the above
8. Bilharzia is caused by
A. Snails
B. Bacteria
C. Parasitic flatworms
D. Viruses
IV. Short answer
1. How biology and chemistry are interrelated in biochemistry?
2. Discuss the role of genetic discoveries in agricultural development.
3. How biological studies help human to keep healthy life?
4. What are the major discoveries of Louis Pasteur?
16
Grade 10 Biology
