Unit 2: Plants
Contents
Learning competencies
2.1. Characteristics of plants
explain the characteristics of plants
2.2. Non-flowering and flowering
differentiate between flowering and non-flowering plants
plants
draw and label the internal and external structure of
2.3. Structure and function of plant
angiosperms
parts
draw and label the floral parts
2.4. Reproduction in plants
list different types of agents of pollination
2.4.1. Non-flowering
draw and label the reproductive cycles of flowering and non-
2.4.2. Flowering
flowering plants using typical examples
2.4.3. Pollination
infer seed dispersal mechanisms by looking at the nature of
2.5. Seeds (monocots, dicots)
seeds
2.6. Seed Dispersal and Germination
discuss the process and mechanisms of photosynthesis
2.7. Photosynthesis
conduct experiment on germination of dicot and monocot
2.8. Transport in plants
seeds
2.9. Response in plants
discuss the mechanism of water, mineral, and organic
2.10. Medicinal plants
molecules transport in plants and its implication on
2.11. Renowned Botanists in Ethiopia
agricultural productivity
conduct experiments to demonstrate plant responses
(geotropism, hydrotropism, phototropism)
investigate medicinal plants used by the local people to treat
different ailments
appreciate the works of Ethiopian Botanists
2.1. Characteristics of plants
Objectives
Recall
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list the characteristics of plants
Revise what you learned
distinguish unique features of plants
in Grade 9: Unit 2 about
Definition of life
Characteristics of
What are the common characteristics of all living things?
living things
What are the characteristics of plants?
The word plant includes a range of living organism which share many
characteristics in common. Some of their characteristics are common
with other living things, while they have unique characteristics that
belong to plants. You are expected to distinguish characteristics plants
share with other living things from those features which are unique
Grade 10 Biology
17
Unit Two: Plants
to plants as listed hereunder.
ACTIVITY 2.1 THINK- PAIR-
SHARE
Plants are living things. Like other living things plants grow,
Direction:
reproduce and respond to changes in the environment.
Pair with a friend sitting next
Plants are multicellular. They are made up of many eukaryotic
to you and share what you
cells. These cells have well-defined nuclei and membrane-bound
think of the following key
organelles. In addition to the cell membrane, plant cells have a
issues. Write down points
rigid cell wall made primarily of cellulose.
you discussed to share to
your classmate.
Plants are autotrophic (self-feeding). Plant cells contain the green
Would there be life in the
pigment chlorophyll which enables them to absorb sunlight and
absence of plants? Give
produce their own food. Thus, they are also named Producers.
justification to your answer.
What is your reaction to a
Plants are sessile. They cannot move by themselves. They remain
person who is using nail
fixed at one place, firmly anchored to the soil by their root. However,
to fix notice board or
the leaves of plants can turn towards light and some respond to
plate on a tree or firmly
touch. The roots of plants can also orient towards water or moist
tying metal wire or plastic
soil.
wire around the stem of
growing plants to hang wet
Plants practice asexual and sexual reproduction patterns. In
clothes for sun drying ?
lower plants such as mosses and liverworts, asexual reproduction
List down your reasons to
through spores is the dominant form. On the other hand, in higher
convince the person.
and seed-bearing plants such as gymnosperms and angiosperms,
sexual reproduction which involves the union of gametes or sex
cells is the dominant and visible form.
2.2 Flowering and non - flowering plants
Recall
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Revise what you learned in
Grade 9: Unit 2 about
differentiate between flowering and non - flowering plants,
The five kingdom
use plant reproductive structure for classifying plants and
classification
realize floral structure as a strong marker for classification
Indeed, the concept "plant" is widely associated with those that have
What do you know about
flowers, root, stem and leaves having transporting vessels (vascular
flowers and flowering
bundles). However, as shown in Figure 2.1 there is a huge number of
plants?
lower plants, such as mosses and liverworts which are non - vascular,
How do plants reproduce
i.e., do not have transporting system or conducting vessels, essential
without flowers?
to transport water, nutrient and food needed for the plant. The non -
vascular plants, are generally small with limited height and restricted
What comes to your mind
to moist and shaded areas. These lower plants are seedless and do
when you think about
not have flowers and fruits.
plants?
There are still large numbers of plants known as gymnosperms with
well-developed root stem and leaves but have no flowers. Their
18
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
reproductive organ is cone, instead of flowers. Moreover, the seeds
produced in their cone are without cover (naked seeds).
Flowering plants, commonly known as Angiosperms, are also vascular
with well-developed root, stem and leaves. But unlike gymnosperms,
they have flowers and produce seeds within a fruit.
Plants
Non vascular
Vascular
(Bryophytes)
Non Seed
Bearing
Seed Bearing
Mosses
(pteridophytes)
Naked Seed
Covered Seed
Liverworts
(Gymnosperms)
(Angiosperms)
Ferns
Pine tree with Cone
Flowering plant
Figure 2.1 Major groups of plants
ACTIVITY 2.2 COOPERATIVE LEARNING
Direction:
Form a group of four students (two neighboring pairs). Critically
look at Figure 2.1 and answer the following questions. Then
compare your answers with other groups of your classmates
Which plant groups would be included under non - flowering
plants?
Why is flower important marker of classification? (This may
need library work or browsing on the Internet to collect more
information.)
Construct a table that shows similarities and differences
between gymnosperms and angiosperms?
Grade 10 Biology
19
Unit Two: Plants
2.3 Structure and function of plant parts
Think of flowering
Objectives
plant, which is found
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
around your home or
school campus. List
draw the external and internal structure of angiosperms,
major structures and
label the external and internal structure of angiosperms and
describe their functions
relate the structure of plants with the function they perform
before you learn about
structures of a plant in
class.
Like any organism, plants have different structures which perform
a vital function essential for the plant life. In this sub-topic, we will
focus on the external and internal structure of a flowering plant
(angiosperm).
As illustrated in Figure 2. 2, the external structure of a typical
angiosperm has two major systems.
The shoot system: This is the plant part usually found above the
ground and includes the organs such as stem, branches, leaves, buds,
flowers and fruits. The last two organs may be missing depending on
the reproductive stage of the plant.
ACTIVITY 2.3 FIELD
WORK
The root system: This is the part of the plant that usually grows
downward into the ground. It includes the primary or tap root, lateral
Material needed: A typical
or branch roots, root hairs and root cap. Roots are distinguished from
plant having complete
organs of a flowering plant
an underground stem in that, they don't bear either leaves or buds.
as illustrated in Figure 2.2
Direction
Reproductive shoot (flower)
Apical bud
Form a group of three to
four students and
Node
Internode
Collect a plant from your
school campus or locality
Apical
that resembles Figure 2.2
bud
Shoot
Look at the plant collected
system
Vegetative
and identify the shoot
shoot
system, buds (apical
Blade
Leaf
Petiole
and axillary bud), leaves,
Axillary
flower and root system
bud
(tap root and lateral root)
Stem
Prepare a properly labeled
Taproot
diagram of your life
specimen (Real plant)
Lateral
Root
showing all the parts that
(branch)
system
you have identified
roots
Discuss how you
differentiate underground
stems from root.
Figure 2.2 External structure of a typical angiosperm (flowering plant)
20
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Figure 2.3 shows the external structure of leaf and the types of root.
The external structure of a typical leaf consists of the petiole (leaf
How do you relate the
stalk), lamina (blade - broadest part), midrib, margin, base and tips
structures of leaf and
(Figure 2.3 a). The lamina is the broadest part, which is flat, wide
roots to their function?
and commonly thin. It provides large surface area, which enables leaf
to collect light. Its thinness creates short distance for gas exchange
through the stomata (tiny pores). The midrib is harder and contains
the vein (transporting vessels) of the leaf as well as supportive tissues
with hard cell wall. Leaves of different plants show difference in
absence or presence of petiole, leaf shape (variation in leaf margin,
base and tips) and arrangement of veins.
With regard to root, there are basically two types of roots (Figure
2.3b), namely tap-roots and fibrous roots
A tap-root consists of one large, primary vertical root. It has very
few lateral roots that develop and grow from this main root. By
penetrating deep into the soil, tap roots provide stability (anchorage)
and absorb water located deep in the ground. Tap root system is a
feature of dicot plants.
A fibrous root is usually formed by thin, moderately branching
roots growing from stems. They are more or less similar size and
length. In grasses they develop as consists of fine hair - like root that.
Spread out from the base of the stem. Fibrous root is very efficient for
absorbing water and minerals close to soil surface. It creates a thick
network of roots that are good at holding soil together and protect
soil from erosion. Fibrous roots are features of monocot plants.
Apex
Tap root
Fibrous root
Margin
Midrib
Leaf
Blade
Veins
Base
Petiole
A
B
Figure 2.3 External structure of a typical leaf (A) and Types of roots
(B)
Grade 10 Biology
21
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.4 PEER DISCUSSION
Material needed: A typical leaf and roots as shown in Figure 2.3
Direction: Form a group of four students (two neighboring pairs) and
Collect a leaf and roots from your school campus or locality that resembles Figure 2.3.
Identify the different parts of a leaf (petiole, leaf base, margin, apex and midrib). Draw and prepare
a properly labeled diagram of the leaf in your exercise book.
Describe and show how leaves of different plants differ in their morphology.
Use a hand lens and examine the leaf veins and distributions of tiny pores. What is the function of
these structures?
Use the real root you collected and label the different parts of the tap root of Figure 2.3B.
Examine the root hairs with a hand lens and note why root hairs are best suited for absorption.
2.3.1 The internal structure of a leaf
In this section, you will explore the internal structure or tissues of a
green leaf that made it best suited for food synthesis. Figure 2.4 shows
components of the two internal layers of a leaf, namely; Outer layer
and middle (inner) layer.
A) Outer layer
This is also known as the epidermis, a single layer of tightly packed
cells that covers the upper and lower surface of the leaf. The upper
epidermis is usually covered by a waxy cuticle, which transmits
sunlight for photosynthesis but restricts water loss by evaporation
from the leaf tissue. The lower epidermis usually contains bean-
shaped guard cells that leave open spaces known as stomata (singular
stoma). Stomata are "little mouths" or " little noses", which regulate
O₂ release, CO₂ intake and water loss. In most leaves, stomata are
more abundant in the lower epidermis, reducing water loss due to
direct sunlight.
B) Middle layer
This is known as the mesophyll ("middle leaf") layer. It lies between
the upper and lower epidermis. It includes tissues that are directly or
indirectly involved in photosynthesis. There are two regions in the
mesophyll layer.
The palisade layer is composed of regularly arranged and closely
packed columnar (vertically elongated) cells. The cells contain the
largest number of chloroplasts per cell. As the layer is immediately
beneath the upper epidermis, it is in the best position to capture
most of the sunlight and this enables it to carry out most of the
photosynthesis. The slight but precise separation of the columnar
cells maximizes the diffusion of CO₂ and capillary movement of
H₂0.
22
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
The spongy layer lies below the palisade cells. Spongy cells are
irregularly shaped with fewer chloroplasts. They are very loosely
arranged with numerous airspaces. These air spaces, which are very
close to the stomata allow the diffusion of O₂, water vapour and CO2.
cuticle
upper epidermis
chloroplast
vacuole
nucleus
palisade
cell wall
cytoplasm
mesophyll
spongy
lower epidermis
cuticle
guard cell
stoma
Figure 2.4 Internal structure of a leaf
2.3.2 The internal structure of a stem
Figure 2.5 shows the internal structure of a typical dicot stem of a
flowering plant. Accordingly, the detailed internal structure includes
the following fundamental tissue systems.
The epidermis is the outermost layer of the stem. The outer walls
are greatly thickened with cuticles, which minimizes the rate of
transpiration. Moreover, the cells are compactly arranged, which
in turn protect the underlying tissues from mechanical injury and
prevent the entry of harmful organisms.
Epidermal Hair
Cuticle
Epidermis
Collenchyma
Epidermal Hair
Chlorenchyma
Epidermis
Parenchyma
Hypodermis
Cortex
Endodermis
Endodermis
phloem
Combium
Vascular Bundle
Xylem
Pith
Pith
Figure 2.5 Internal structure of a typical dicot stem (A = Ground plan; B = Transverse section)
Grade 10 Biology
23
Unit Two: Plants
Hypodermis lies below the epidermis. It is mainly composed of
collencyma cells that are specially thickened at the corners due to the
deposition of thick cellulose. This enables the layer to give mechanical
strength to the stem.
Cortex consists of few layers of thin-walled, large, round, or oval
cells, having intercellular space and serving for storage of food.
Endodermis is the innermost layer of the cortex that separates the
cortex from the vascular bundles. The cells are compactly arranged
and usually contain starch grains. Thus, the endodermis serves as a
food reserve and may be termed as a starch sheath.
Vascular bundles are longitudinal strands of conducting tissues or
transporting vessels, consisting essentially of xylem and phloem
arranged in a ring around the central pith. Each bundle has a
patch of xylem towards the pith and a patch of phloem towards the
endodermis and a strip of actively dividing young cells (cambium) in
between them. Xylem transports water and dissolved minerals to the
photosynthetic tissues, mainly to the leaf while phloem transports
https://pediaa.com/
synthesized food to different tissues, either for utilization or storage.
what-is-the-difference-
between-monocot-stem-
Pith - occupies the central portion of the stem, composed of thin-
and-dicot-stem
walled cells, which are rounded or polygonal, with or without
intercellular space. It stores food and helps in the internal translocation
of water.
ACTIVITY 2.5 LIBRARY WORK
Note: Angiosperms have their seeds enclosed inside fruits. They can be classified as "Monocots" and
"Dicots", having one and two cotyledon (s) respectively. Typical examples include maize (a monocot)
and bean (a dicot).
Direction:
Using illustration (Figure 2.5), you can learn the internal structure of a dicot stem. For a contrast,
you need to know the internal structure of a monocot stem.
Refer to biology books available in your library or download pictures showing the internal structure
of monocot stem from the Internet. Then draw and label the picture in your exercise book.
Complete the following table of comparison to show the differences between the internal structure
of the dicot and monocot stem. The column under dicot is filled to you for references.
Dicot stem
Monocot stem
Contains distinct regions known as cortex, vascular bundles and pith
( stele)
Has few number (4 to 8) of set of vascular bundles
Vascular bundles are arranged regularly in the form of one or two rings
Pith is present and well developed
24
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.3.3 The internal structure of a root
As illustrated in Figure 2.6 below, the transverse section of the dicot
Root Hair
root shows the following plan of arrangement of tissues from the
Piliferous layer
periphery to the centre.
Cortex
Peliferous layer is the outermost layer made up of single-layer cells.
The cuticle is absent. It consists the single-celled root hairs.
Endodermis
Phloem
Cortex is a multi-layered large zone made of thin-walled oval or
Pericycle
rounded loosely arranged cells with intercellular spaces. It stores
Xylem
food and water.
Casparina strip
Endodermis is the innermost layer of the cortex, made of barrel-
shaped closely packed cells. The layer helps the movement of water
and dissolved nutrients from the cortex into the xylem.
Pericycle is a single layer inner to endodermis. It is the site of origin
Root Hair
Piliferous layer
of lateral roots.
Cortex
Phloem
Vascular bundles consist of xylem and phloem with meristematic
Xylem
(cambium) or actively dividing cells between them
Pith is present in young roots while absent in old roots.
Figure 2.6 Internal structure of
a typical dicot root
ACTIVITY 2.6: COMPARATIVE TABLE
Self Test
Direction:
In Grade 9, you have
learned that one of the
Follow the direction stated in activity 2.6, but this time you will
unifying principles in
draw and label the internal structure of monocot root in your
Biology is complimentary
exercise book.
of structure and function i.
e, a particular structure is
Complete the following table of comparison to show the
best suited for a particular
differences between the internal structure of dicot and monocot
function. Explain how leaf
root. The column under dicot is filled to you for reference
and root of a plant can be
described with this unifying
Dicot root
Monocot
principle.
root
The cortex area is narrow
Vascular bundles limited in number between
2 6
www
Pith is either extremely small or absent
https://www.visiblebody.
Show secondary growth due to the presence of
com/learn/biology/
cambium
monocot-dicot/roots
Grade 10 Biology
25
Unit Two: Plants
2.4 Reproduction in plants
Objectives
How do non - flowering
and flowering plants
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
reproduce?
draw and label floral parts,
outline the reproductive cycle /pattern of non - flowering and
Think of a fruit bearing
flowering plants,
plants like "Avocado"
or "Papaya". Collect
list different types of pollinating agents and
information about these
appreciate the diversity in floral colour to attract pollinators
fruits and point out
the stages of their life
cycle starting from the
2.4.1 Reproductive structure and life cycle of non-flowering
matured plant.
plants
In this section, you will learn the reproductive structure and life cycle
of higher seed-bearing non-flowering plants known as gymnosperms.
Figure 2.7 shows common gymnosperm trees in Ethiopia and
reproductive structure, male and female cones, of pine tree. These
higher plants belong to a group of gymnosperms known as conifers.
Figure 2.7 Common gymnosperms and reproductive cones
ACTIVITY 2.7 : FIELD VISIT
Arrange a field visit with small groups (3 to 4 students) to a park or recreational places or street gardens
during your weekend. Look for gymnosperm trees, particularly indigenous trees such as Podocarpus
falcatus ("Zigba ") and Juniperus procera ("Tid"). You can also look for gymnosperm shrub, which is
used as a hedge grown in a row and used for partition in gardens.
If you have a smart phone, take picture of the gymnosperm tree to share with your classmates.
Take note on the external structure of the gymnosperm tree you encountered with special attention on
the nature of leaf and the cones (if there are any). Collect some leaf and the cones and bring them to class
as specimen for class discussion.
Ask your elders or parents about the reproduction and economic importance of gymnosperm trees and
prepare a report to submit to your teacher for whole class discussion.
After the field visit and preparation of the field report, you are now
able to distinguish and describe gymnosperms. In this lesson, you
will learn the life cycle of gymnosperm, using the pine tree as a
typical representative of conifers as well as gymnosperms in general.
26
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
As shown in Figure 2.8 the pine tree has male and female cones on one
ACTIVITY 2.8
plant. Initially, pollen is transferred from the male cone to the female
COOPERATIVE
cone. The process is called pollination and occurs with the help of
LEARNING
wind. Following pollination, the pollen will undergo germination
Carefully read the
with the formation of pollen tube The pollen tube develops slowly
description on the
and the generative cell of the pollen grain divides into two sperm
reproductive cycle of a
cells as it approaches the female cone.
pine tree. Share ideas
with a friend sitting next
The female cone contains two ovules per scale. Each ovule undergoes
to you and list distinct
meiosis ( gamete or sex cells formation by cell division) and
developmental stages in pine
produces four cells. Three of the four cells breakdown leaving only
tree to show major stages of
a single surviving cell, , which develops into a gametophyte having
gymnosperms' life cycle in
archogonium. An archegonium is a reproductive structure that
general.
contains a single large egg. It is this large egg that fuses (unites)
with one of the sperm cells and form a zygote. This process is known
as fertilization.
A zygote develops into a seed embryo inside the female cone. After
the seed is matured, it is liberated upon drying and opening of the
female cone. Then the seed will be dispersed or scattered away from
Have you ever thought
the parent plant and germinates into a seedling (young pine plant)
that removing a
flower is depriving its
upon getting favourable conditions. Finally, the young plant grows
opportunity to reproduce
and develops in to mature plant with female and male cones and the
or substitute itself? What
reproductive cycle of the pine tree is complete.
does this mean for plants
with solitary (single
flower)?.
Female cones grow in the
upper branches where they
may be fertilized by pollen
blown on the wind
from the male cones.
Attention
Male cones grow in the
lower branches.
Most conifers have narrow,
needle shaped leaves with
Sporophyte (2n)
thick cuticle, which enable
(mature tree)
them to live in extremely
cold and hot environments.
Pollen
Pollen
Ovule
They are evergreen and
Seeds (2n)
grain
tube
do not shade their leaves
both in winter and summer,
Scale
a feature which makes
Megaspore
them to be ornamental
(1n)
Generative (sperm)
Tube
plants decorating parks,
nuclei (1n)
nucleus
recreational areas and streets
in town and big cities.
Figure 2.8 Life cycle of a pine tree representing gymnosperms
Grade 10 Biology
27
Unit Two: Plants
What is flower? What
2.4.2 Reproductive structure and life cycle of flowering plants
are the major floral
A flower is the reproductive organ of angiosperms, plants with seeds
parts and their role in
covered by or contained in a fruit. Figure 2.9 illustrates a typical
reproduction ?
flower has four floral parts, namely Sepals, Petals, Stamen, and Pisti.
Sepals (calyx) - usually green leaf-like structure protecting the
Self Test
lower part of female and male parts
An imperfect flower is
Petals (corolla) - mostly brightly coloured and attract pollinating
incomplete flower, but an
agents like insects
incomplete flower may or
may not be an imperfect
Stamen (Androecium) - is the male part, consisting of the filament
flower. Explain how this is
and bilobed anther
so?
Pistil (Gynoecium or carpel) - is the female part, consisting of the
ovary with ovules, style and stigma.
Attention
Petals (all petals = corolla)
A complete flower has the
four floral parts. It is called
incomplete flower if it does
not have any one of the
floral parts.
A perfect flower has both
Female parts
Male parts
stamen and pistil. If a flower
Anther
Stigma
(covered with pollen)
does not have either stamen
Pistil
Style
Filament
or pistil, it is known as
(carpel)
Ovary
Ovule
imperfect flower. It is either
Egg
pistilated (has pisitil and no
stamen), or staminated (has
Receptacle
Sepals (all sepals = calyx)
stamen but no pistil) flower.
Peduncle
Figure 2.9: Structure of typical flower
ACTIVITY 2.9 COOPERATIVE LEARNING
Let one group of five students from each class bring one complete flower and another group of five
students incomplete flower, without harming the plant from your school campus or your locality. Put
your flowers in a plastic bag and bring them to your class for your group work
In the class room students should carefully examine the complete flower. They should identify the
different floral parts by comparing the real flowers to Figure 2.9. Then students draw and label the
parts, focus in on the male part (stamen) and female part (pistil) in your exercise book.
Let students look at the incomplete flower and identify the part (s) missed. Ask students if the flower
is incomplete and imperfect? Why did they say so?
During collection, students will observe that some flowers are bright in colour while the others are
not. Which floral part is so bright with colour and how does this be related to pollinating agents?
28
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.4.3 Pollination
This is the transfer of pollen grains from the anther of a stamen to
What is pollination ?
the stigma of the pistil. The transfer can be between stamen and pistil
on one flower or between flowers on one plant (Self Pollination)
or between two flowers on different plants (cross-pollination).
Pollination requires pollinating agents such as insects or wind. There
is a strong relationship between the nature of the flower and the
ACTIVITY 2.10 LIBRARY
pollinating agents. Following pollination, a flowering plant passes
SEARCH
through distinct stages described as follows and illustrated in Figure
Refer to books or browse
2.10.
on the Internet and
prepare a table of summary
Pollen tube formation: Pollen grains landing on the stigma will form
that shows the difference
pollen tubes that grow down in the style and form the male gamete as
between insect-pollinated
it approaches the ovule.
flowers and wind-
pollinated flowers.
Fertilization: This is the union of the male gamete and the female
Show your table of
gamete, occurring in the ovule within the ovary. As a result, a zygote
summary to your teacher
that develops into a seed embryo will be formed. In flowering plants,
for comment.
there is second fertilization, which forms the endosperm (reserve food
storing structure). Thus, angiosperms exhibit double fertilization.
Seed and fruit formation: Following fertilization and formation of seed embryo, the ovule matures
into seed while the ovary matures into a fruit. Thus seed is a matured ovule while the fruit is a matured
ovary.
Seed dispersal: This is a mechanism of scattering seeds around or away from the parent plant. Seed
dispersal like pollination requires agents such as animals or wind.
Seed dormancy /Seed germination: The fate of a seed landing at a certain place will be either
dormancy or germination. A dormant seed is inactive and waiting for the favourable condition to start
germination. If there is enough water and nutrients the seed will break dormancy and the seed embryo
starts to develop into a seedling (Young and new plant). This process is called seed germination.
Germinated pollen grain on
Figure 2.10 Life cycle of typical
stigma of carpel
flowering plant (angiosperm)
Anther at tip of stamen
Mature sporophyte
Pollentube
plant with flowers
Ovary
Ovule
Fertilization
Embryo sac
Zygote
Egg
Sperm
Sporophyte seedling
Seed
Embryo
(Sporophyte)
Simple fruit (Develops
Germinating seed
Seed(Develops from
ovule)
from ovary)
Grade 10 Biology
29
Unit Two: Plants
2.5 Seeds
Objectives
What makes seeds of
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
flowering plants to be
different from those of
describe the structure of seed and embryo and
gymnosperms ?
list down the difference between dicot and monocot seed
The seed (fertilized ovule) contains three parts: the seed embryo,
cotyledon/endosperm (reserve food) and seed coat. In Angiosperms,
the seed is additionally covered by the fruit. Thus it is called covered
seed as opposed to the naked seed of gymnosperm. A naked seed has
nothing on except its own seed coat.
The seed embryo, in turn, consists of the radicle (future root), epicotyl,
hypocotyl and the plumule (future shoot) (Fig. 2.11). Cotyledon and
endosperm are food storing tissues, essential for the seed embryo
(future plant) until it forms leaf and starts manufacturing its own
food. A seed of angiosperm may have one cotyledon (monocot) or
two cotyledons (dicot).
Endosperm
Epicotyl
Hypocotyl
Radicle
Embryo
Embryo
Cotyledons
Seed Coat
Figure 2.11 Section of a dicot (Bean) and monocot (Corn/Maize) seed
and the associated structures.
Table 2.1 Differences between dicot and monocot seeds
Dicot seed
Monocot seed
Two cotyledons are present in the
Only one cotyledon present
embryo
Cotyledons are fleshy and store
Cotyledon is very thin and lacks
food materials
food materials
Endosperm is absent
Endosperm is large and well
developed
Primary root produced from the
Primary root formed from
radicle bears many lateral roots.
radicle is replaced by
adventitious fibrous roots
30
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.6 Seed dispersal and germination
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Is seed alive or dead?
-
How can you know this?
relate nature of seeds with the mechanism of dispersal,
explain the process of seed germination and
What is the importance
of seed dispersal ?
conduct experiment that demonstrates the germination of seed
2.6.1 Seed dispersal
At the beginning of unit 2, under section 2.1, you have learned that
plants are sessile or fixed at one place. However, plants at their seed
stage display long-distance mobility and they do so with the help
of seed dispersal agents. Seed dispersal is an adaptive mechanism
of plants that ensures seed will be separated from the parent plants
distributed over a large area to safeguard the germination and survival
of the seeds to adult plants, thereby minimizing overcrowding at one
place.
Seeds can be dispersed by animals, wind or water. For instance,
fleshy fruits that have seeds in them can be ingested by birds and due
to hard seed coats, the seeds escape digestion and are dropped at a
distance upon defecation. Seeds that have additional hairy or winged
structures can be dispersed by wind or float in water and taken away
to a new habitat.
ACTIVITY 2.10 LIBRARY WORK
Attempt the following activity with a friend sitting next to you.
Carefully read the description on the nature of the seed or look at the picture of seeds included in
the next table and infer the mechanism of dispersal.
Finally, write the conclusion that you can arrive with regard to the nature of seed and mechanism of
dispersal
Nature of seed
Mechanism of dispersal
Seeds that stick or cling to fur or clothes
Seeds within fruits act as kites or propellers
Grade 10 Biology
31
Unit Two: Plants
2.6.2 Germination of seed
The life of a flowering plant starts with a tiny seed embryo that stays
What are the essential
dormant until the essential conditions for active growth are fulfilled.
conditions for seed
The resumption of active growth of the embryo after a period
germination?
of dormancy is known as germination. There are three essential
conditions for seed germination.
Water (moisture)
Water is important for the germinating seed because the hydration
of the seed coat increases its permeability to O2. Water is essential
for the enzymatic hydrolysis of organic food and acts as an agent of
transport in the translocation of soluble substances.
Oxygen ( Aeration)
Oxygen is necessary for aerobic respiration by which the seeds get
energy for the growth of the embryo.
Temperature (warmth)
Seeds require optimum temperature for germination.
How do we demonstrate that moisture, air and warmth are required
for seed germination? The following experimental activity will
answer this question.
ACTIVITY 2.12: GROUP ACTIVITY
Materials required: dicot seed (e.g., Bean) or monocot seed (e.g., Maize), oil, cotton, water, beakers,
short wooden bar, glue ( to fix seeds on the wooden bar)
Direction:
Carefully look at the experiment designed to show what is required for seed germination. You may do
the experiment individually at home to confirm the results indicated
Note that the beakers should be placed where they get sunlight (light and heat). The seeds are allowed
to germinate, waiting up to 2-3 days.
Discuss the results with your
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
small group and answer the
Beaker A
Beaker B
Beaker A
Beaker B
following questions.
Germinated
Oil layer
Germinated!
Identify the experiment that
Non
seeds
seeds
germinate
Non
shows the need for optimum
seeds
germinated
Dry cotton
Wet cotton
seeds
Boil Water
Wet cotton
moisture (water), temperature
wool
wool
wool
(warmth) and air (oxygen)
respectively.
Experiment 3
Three Bean seeds Experiment
What is the importance of the
Beaker A
Beaker B
cotton wool, oil layer, and ice cube
-
seed above
Germinated
the water
in experiment 1, 2, 3 respectively?
Non
seeds
seed partially
germinated
in the water
seeds
What does the three-bean seeds
Ice cube
Wet cotton
Seed in the
wool
water
experiment demonstrate?
32
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
As depicted in Figure 2.12, seed germination covers all the processes
Attention
that occur from the time that seed embryo starts growth up to the
formation of young independent plant with photosynthetic leaves.
It is the position and
Optimum moisture, air and warmth activate the embryo to start
fate of cotyledon which
growth. With more and more nourishment from the food stored
differentiate hypogeal
in cotyledon and endosperm, the tiny embryo grows more. The
germination from epi-
outward sign of growth is a radicle that develops from the hypocotyl.
geal germination
It is the first to come out of the seed and grow down to the soil as the
primary root. The root is essential for anchorage and access to water
In epigeal germina-
and nutrients from the soil. Meanwhile, the shoot that develops from
tion, the cotyledon is
the plumule grows upward towards sunlight. Soon, a young plant
pushed up to become
(seedling) with photosynthetic leaf start manufacturing its own food
the photosynthetic sur-
face of the seedling by
the elongation of a re-
Epigeal
gion of the embryo.
Eplcotyl
In hypogeal germina-
Cotyledon
tion, the cotyledon re-
Hypocotyl
mains under the soil
Hypocotyl
Hypogeal
Cotyledon
Eplcotyl
Hypocotyl
Figure 2.12. Epigeal and Hypogeal germination
Self Test
Which type of germination commonly occurs in a dicot seed and
monocot seed?
Grade 10 Biology
33
Unit Two: Plants
2.7 Photosynthesis
Objectives
It is amazing that plants
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
that are fixed at one
place make their own
identify inputs and outputs of photosynthesis,
food, while animals
outline the process or mechanism by which food is synthesized
that move from place to
in green plants,
place cannot synthesize
recognize the importance of photosynthesis to life and
food and depend on
appreciate leaves of green plants in their function as food
plants. Why is this so?
factories
What do plants provide
Do you know that the leaves of green plants are the largest food factories
to animals other than
food?
on Earth? The product of leaves together with the photosynthetic
productivity of algae provides food that supports nearly all life on
What do animals give to
earth. Plants can prepare their own food by photosynthesis. Thus
plants?
they are called producers or autotrophs (self-feeding). The food
plants produce is more than what they need, and the excess food
they produce is used by the vast consumers known as heterotrophs
(feeding on plants and on one another).
The basic source of energy that sustains life begins with sunlight.
In turn, sunlight is absorbed by a green pigment known as
chlorophyll. Thus, it occurs in organisms bearing chlorophyll
such as green algae and higher plants, which enables them to trap
solar energy and transform it into chemical energy. This process is
known as photosynthesis. In this section, you will learn more about
photosynthetic apparatus - Chloroplast
2.7.1 The photosynthetic apparatus
You have learned, in sub-topic 2.3.1 of this unit, that the mesophyll
Where does
layer of the leaf contains the largest number of chloroplasts and is
photosynthesis take
place?
in the best position to trap the maximum amount of solar energy.
Figure 2.13 illustrates the internal structure of the chloroplast, which
is termed as photosynthetic apparatus.
Accordingly, there are two distinct parts in chloroplasts: Granum
and Stroma.
i) Granum: consists of stacks of flattened sacks, each of which is called
thylakoid. The granum contains the chlorophyll, enzymes and co-
factors that participate in the light trapping phase of photosynthesis.
It is here that the light reaction takes place.
ii) Stroma: is a gel-like colourless matrix, which is a site for sugar
(carbohydrate) synthesis through carbon fixation. It is from the sugar
produced in the stroma that is directly or indirectly converted to all
organic compounds (including amino acids, proteins and lipids)
virtually found in all organisms.
34
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Intermembrane
Inner
membrane
Outer
space
Stroma
How is the structure of
membrane
(aqueous fluid)
chloroplast best suited
for its function?
Granum
(stack of thylakoids)
Lumen
(inside of thylakoid)
Thylakoid
Lamella
Figure 2.13: Chloroplast - the photosynthetic apparatus
2.7.2 The light absorbing system in chloroplast
In this sub section you will learn the role of light absorbing
pigments, mainly chlorophyll and sunlight absorbed serves as agent
of photochemical reaction in food synthesis (photosynthesis).
The chloroplast contains chlorophyll (particularly chlorophyll a and
b) and other light absorbing accessory pigments capable of absorbing
light at different wavelengths. As shown in Figure 2.14, the light
absorbing pigments of chloroplasts absorb most of the visible light,
ranging from 400 - 700 nm. Maximum light absorption occurs at
wavelengths from 400 - 500 nm and 600 - 700 nm, blue and red light
respectively. Light ranging from 500 to 600nm that includes green
light is not absorbed, it is rather reflected. This is the reason why
leaves look green.
Chlorophyll a
Amount of light absorbed by pigments
Chlorophyll b
Carotenoids
400
500
600
700
Wave length of light (nm)
Figure 2.14 The action spectrum for different wavelengths
Grade 10 Biology
35
Unit Two: Plants
2.7.3. Mechanism of photosynthesis
ACTIVITY 2.13: PEER DIS-
CUSSION
Photosynthesis consists of a number of photochemical and enzymatic
reaction. It is the sum total of the following two sub reaction
Direction:
Discuss on the sub reactions
1. Light reaction this is also known as the light dependent stage, It
and over all equation of
takes place in the granum, where the light absorbing system - mainly
photosynthesis with a
chlorophyll occurs. Here, the granum is organized as Photosystems
friend sitting next to you.
and Electron Transporting System. The photosystem consists of
Then, answer the questions
chlorophyll that absorbs sunlight maximally at blue and red range of
written hereunder. Compare
light spectrum. The light absorbed by the chlorophyll will
your answers to your
classmates' answer
split of water molecules (H₂O) into H+ and O₂. This is known
What is the source of
as photolysis. The O₂ is released to the atmosphere through leaf
oxygen?
stomata.
What are the inputs
(reactants) and
excite some electrons in the chlorophyll molecule to higher
outputs (products) of
energy level which pass down the ETS and generate high energy
photosynthesis?
ATP molecule. The ATP and H+ harvested during light reaction
Point out the importance
will be used as an input in the Stroma where conversion of CO2
of water with regard to
to carbohydrate takes place.
food that we eat and air
we breathe
2. Dark reaction this is also known as light - independent stage,
because it can occur in the absence of light as long as there is sufficient
amount of H+ and ATP supplied from the light reaction. The dark
reaction and enzymatic reaction H+ indirectly combines with CO2, in
the stroma of chloroplast. The process is known as carbon fixation.
Glucose (carbohydrate) is the immediate result of the dark reaction.
The overall chemical reaction of photosynthesis can be summed up
in the following equation
Chlorophyll
6CO₂ + 6H₂0
C₆H₁₂O₆ + 60₂
Sunlight
2.7.4. Testing a leaf for starch
A simple way of demonstrating food synthesis in leaves is testing a
leaf for starch. You can easily see the effect of iodine on starch, if
you put iodine solution on powdered starch, piece of bread or potato
slice a blue-black colour will develop confirming the presence of
starch. However, the cuticle of the leaf is impermeable to iodine.
Moreover, the leaf has green pigment chlorophyll that interferes with
the colouring effect of iodine. The next experiment will enable what
you should do to solve these two problems before testing the leaf for
starch.
36
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.14: TESTING LEAF FOR STARCH
Materials required: fresh green leaf, beaker, heat source ( Bunsen burner or electric stove), test tube,
alcohol, iodine solution
Procedure
Depending on the availability of the materials required, you can perform the experiment in a group
or follow your teacher when the experiment is demonstrated in class.
Follow the experimental design illustrated hereunder and write the purpose of each step (Steps 1 - 4).
For the sake of safety use forceps to put the leaf into or take it out from beakers with boiling water
and hot alcohol.
What is the danger that can possibly happen in step 2 if you do not first turn off the Bunsen burner?
Leaf in boiling
Leaf in alcohol
Leaf in Cold
Leaf in iodine
water
(Turn off
water
solution
(Turn on
bunsen burner)
bunsen burner)
Why is the leaf boiled in water? Why is it treated with alcohol? Why did you put it in beaker
containing cold water.
2.8 Transport in plant
Objectives
How are different
materials, such as
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
water, mineral and food
identify routes of water, mineral, and organic matter transport
transported to and from
in plants,
different parts of the
discuss the mechanism of transport in plants,
plant such as root, stem
tell the importance of transport in plants and
and leaf?
demonstrate water transport in plants using simple experiments
What are the routes of
material transport in
2.8.1 Transporting systems in plants
plants?
You know that higher plants have a green leaf that is capable of
photosynthesis. But, do you know the route through which the raw
materials, water and minerals, move from roots to leaves and how
food manufactured from the leaves reach the rest of the plant? This
will be clear after you learn about the transporting vessels of higher
plants commonly called vascular bundles.
Figure 2.15 illustrates the arrangement of the two transporting
vessels, xylem and phloem in the root. They are collectively known
as vascular bundles. Water and minerals are transported from the
Grade 10 Biology
37
Unit Two: Plants
root to the leaf via the stem through conducting vessel known as
xylem, which consists of elongated dead cells, joined end to end to
form continuous vessels. On the other hand, organic matter (food)
manufactured in the leaf is transported to the rest of the plant parts by
conducting vessels known as phloem. As opposed to xylem, phloem
consists of living cells arranged end to end and allows transport of
food (sucrose and amino acids) up and down the plant. This is called
translocation. In general, it happens between where these substances
are made (Sources) and where they are used or stored (the sinks).
phloem
xylem
Figure 2.15 Root vascular bundles
Do you know why the stem of sugar cane or stem tuber of sweet
potato is so sweet? Sugars synthesized in the leaf is converted to
starch and accumulated in the storage organs of plants, such as root
and stem tubers, leaves, seeds and fruits of a plant. We, human beings
take advantage of food in these storage organs. Starch from plants is
a good source of energy that we need in our diet.
ACTIVITY 2.15: GROUP WORK
Hint
Water is a raw material for photosynthesis. Water is badly required at
the seedling stage as it gives strength to the plant. A young seedling
is delicate and easily wilts if there is a scarcity of water or loss of
water by evaporation.
Direction
Discuss with your small group how drought affects agricultural
productivity or food production.
Why are rainy months the best time for agriculture? Why is
irrigation needed, particularly during drought or in dry areas?
38
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.8.2 Mechanism of transport in plant
i. Uptake of water and minerals
Water from the soil first enters the root through root hairs. These
are elongated single cells that provide a large surface area allowing
more water to enter into the root. Minerals also enter the root
together with the water. This process is known as absorption. Water
entering the root passes from cell to cell either by osmosis across
the cell membrane and cytoplasm or freely flow by diffusion along
the porous cell wall. Thus, water passes passively (without spending
additional energy from the cell) across the root cells and reaches the
root xylem (Figure 2.16).
Water in the root xylem is pulled upward passively by transpiration
pull. This is pulling force caused by transpiration ; it is the main
force responsible for the water passing all the way from the root to
the leaves through the xylem vessel. During transpiration water that
evaporates from the leaves serve as a mechanism to pull or drag water
from the root.
H2O
Evaporation from leaves pulls
water upwardfrom the roots
H2O
through water conducting cells.
H2O
Adhesion of water to the cell wal
by hydrogen bonds help resist
the downward pull of gravity.
Two types of water
conducting cells
Direction
of water
movement
Cohesion due to hydrogen
bonds between water molecules
helps hold together the column
of water within the cells.
H2O
H2O
Figure 2.16 Transport of water and minerals from root to the leaf via
the stem
Minerals enter the root in the ionic (charged) form either passively
or actively. They are taken actively (cell spends energy) when
concentration is higher in plant cell than outside the cell and,
therefore accumulation of salts or their ions occur as a result of active
transport against a concentration gradient.
Grade 10 Biology
39
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.16: COLOURED CELERY EXPERIMENT
Have you ever wondered how water rises upward in the stem towards the leaf? You can see how this
happens in the following home experiment. You can do it alone or with your pair in class.
All you should do is to repeat the classic dyed celery experiment that shows water rises up in the
stem and how transpiration helps to suck up water. The celery plant is a leafy small plant with a
transparent stalk or stem. You can use any other plant with a similar feature as long as it is available
in your locality.
Cut your celery stem diagonally to provide a large surface area for the colored water to pass
through (like as it is done to put the fresh flower into a vase).
Take photographs or make observational drawings of the celery appearance initially.
Put Beaker "A" in dark place (fully sheltered), Beaker "B" in partially sheltered place and Beaker "C"
where there is a bright sunlight. Leave the beakers for some time (4 to 6 hours).
Again take photographs or make observational drawings and compare the initial and final result
Write a short report on dyed celery experiment and what has been demonstrated. Prepare yourself
for class presentation as you may be randomly invited by your teacher for class presentation.
A
B
c
ii. Translocation of organic matter (food)
How can we demonstrate
Translocation in plants is a shift or transport of food from the site
that food transport
of synthesis (source), which is the leaf, to the site of utilization or
occurs through phloem ?
storage (sink), which can be either the stem or the root. Translocation
occurs through the phloem, which is made up of living cells. It is an
active transport, where the living phloem cells use energy obtained
by metabolic process.
The ringing or girdling experiment as designed in Figure 2.17 helps
to identify the food conducting vessels. The experiment involves
removing the ring of bark with the phloem and the plant is placed in
a beaker of water. Xylem will be the only vessel in the girdled area,
Ring of bark
Swollen
removed
which connects the upper and lower part of the plant. After few days,
tissue
Xylem
a swelling will be observed in the upper girdle. This is due to the
accumulation of food materials, mainly sugar which was translocated
Water
from the photosynthesizing leaf towards the root. The sugar can be
sucked with syringe or using aphids and can be confirmed with food
Figure 2.17 Ringing /Girdling
test. Aphids are soft - bodied insects that use piercing and sucking
experiment
mouth parts to feed on phloem sap.
40
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Ringing will ultimately kill the plant, because of disruption of food
transport through the phloem. The root dies first, because supply of
food to the root will be discontinued. As the root dies, the upper part
and finally the whole plant, which depends on root for water and
minerals, will die.
2.9 Response in plants
Objectives
If you have potted plant
placed near the window
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
of your room, to which
recognize that plants are capable of giving response
direction does the plant
explain some common responses in plant
turn its shoot? Why is
this so?
tell the importance response in plants and
demonstrate response in plants using simple experiments
If you add water to one
side of your potted plant,
what do you think will
2.9.1 Tropism as growth response
happen to the root?
In section 2.1 of this unit, you learned that plants like other living things
share basic characteristics. One of their important characteristics is
to respond to stimuli, that is, changes in the environment. In this
section, you will learn mainly tropism, how plants respond to light
(phototropism), water (hydrotropism) and gravity (geotropism).
Thus, we will deal with these three common and useful tropisms.
Tropism is bending towards (positive response) or opposite (negative
response) to the direction of the stimulus. The cause of the response
is a unilateral stimulus (coming from one side only), which causes
unequal production or distribution of growth hormone resulting
in unequal growth. This means one side grows more or less than
the other side and these results in bending towards or away from
the stimulus. Tropism is exhibited by the shoot and root of a plant
due to unequal concentration of growth hormone, commonly auxin,
resulting in unequal growth.
Auxin, particularly Indole Acetic Acid (IAA), is plant growth
hormone. It is produced at the tips of shoot and root. It is transported
to the region of active growth and affects cell elongation, Shoot and
roots respond differently to different auxin concentration. Figure
2.18 helps to know how shoots and roots respond differently to
unilateral ( one sided) stimulus The graph ( Figure 2.18) shows that
auxin concentration that promotes shoot growth ( 10 -2 to 10¹ ppm)
inhibits root growth It also shows that root requires minimum auxin
How does auxin affect
shoot and root growth?
concentration, which is about 10 -4 ppm and such concentration has
no effect on the shoot growth.
Grade 10 Biology
41
Unit Two: Plants
200
What is the response of
the shoot to unilateral
Stimulation
percentage
50
(one - sided) light ?
00
Growth response
50
Roots
0
Shoots
Figure 2.18 Effects of auxin
Inhibition
percentage
50
100
concentrations on the growth
10⁻⁶
10-⁴
10⁻²
1
10²
10⁴
of shoots and roots
Concentration of auxins (ppm, parts per million)
How shoot and root respond to unilateral light is well demonstrated
by Figure 2.19. As a result of unilateral light, auxin move from
illuminated side to shaded side of shoot and root. In shoot higher
auxin concentration on the shaded side causes more growth by cell
elongation than the illuminated side. As a result, the shoot bends
towards light. In the mean time, more auxin on the shaded part of
the root inhibits cell elongation as compared to the illuminated side.
Thus, root bends away from light.
Shoot
unilateral light
cells on the
cells on the
shaded side
illuminated side
cells on the
cells on the
Figure 2.19 How unilateral light
shaded side
illuminated side
affects shoot and root response
shaded side
illuminated side
Root
Phototropism
Plants need sunlight for photosynthesis. Phototropism is a plant
response to light, mainly exhibited by the shoot. The tips of the plant
shoot bend towards the side where there is sunlight. Thus shoot is
positively phototropic. The earliest experiment on phototropism was
conducted by Charles Darwin, "father of evolution", (Figure 2.20). He
noticed that if the light is shone on a coleoptile (shoot tip of young
seedling) from one side, the shoot bends or curves (grows) toward
the light (Seedling '1' and partially seedling '4'). The bending did not
occur in the tip itself but in the elongating part just below.
When the tip is removed (Seedling '2') or covered with opaque foil
42
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
(Seedling '3'), the shoot could no longer bend toward the light.
Moreover, covering the lower shoot part (Seedling '5') did not
ACTIVITY 2.17: Experiment
on phototropism
affect the response to light at all. Based on his experiment, Darwin
concluded that "some influence is transmitted from the tip to the
Materials required
more basal regions of the shoot thereby regulating growth and
Two pots, soil, bean seeds,
inducing curvature or bending". At present, it is well known that it is
dark cloth, hard paper box
a growth hormone known as auxin that will be distributed more on
(cartoon)
the tip side opposite to light. This causes more growth on the shaded
Procedure
side and curving will occur toward the light.
Germinate some bean
seeds in two different pots
Prepare a hard box and
Sun Light
cover it with light proof
Tip Covered by
Tip Covered by
dark cloth and make a
opaque cap
Transparent cap
Control
Base Covered
small round hole on one
by opaque cap
Tip Removed
side
When the shoots are about
6cm, put one pot in the
1
2
3
4
5
dark box, and the other
pot open (without the
box).
Leave both pots in a well
illuminated (with light)
place
Figure 2.20 Darwin's experiment on phototropism
After 2-3 days observe
what has happened to the
Hydrotropism
seedlings in the two pots
The survival of terrestrial plants depends upon the capacity of roots
Write your conclusion and
to obtain water and nutrients from the soil. Roots search for and grow
prepare a short report on
toward water because it is needed for photosynthesis and to support
the experiment
cell structure (make them turgid and strong). Thus, hydrotropism
exhibited by root is biologically important and vital for the survival
What is the effect of
of plants.
water on root growth ?
ACTIVITY 2.18: Demonstration of hydrotropism
Procedure
A
Take two beakers - "A" and "B". Follow the picture below and add moist soil
and SOW the seed in Beaker "A". In beaker "B" add dry soil in half part and
Root Grows
moist soil in another part and SOW the seeds. Keep both beakers for 2-3 days
Straight
for germination to take place.
Moist Soil
Moist Soil
Questions
1. How do you explain what you observed in Beaker "A" and "B"?
B
2. If you had filled the whole beaker with dry soil and put wet cotton or wet
sponge on the top of the soil at one side, how would the root have grown?
Root Grows to
ward water
Downward (toward gravity) or upward (against gravity)? Is the root
response stronger, for water or gravity? [ You need to do the experiment in
Dry Soil
Moist Soil
order to answer these questions ]
Grade 10 Biology
43
Unit Two: Plants
Shoot
Geotropism
What is the effect of gravity on shoot and root growth at
seedling stage?
Root
You have learned that the seed embryo that develops into a seedling
will form root from the radicle and shoot from the plumule. The
Figure 2.21 Seed embryo
developing into a seedling in an
most fascinating phenomena are how the seedling (young plant)
upright position
stands erect (Figure 2.21). This is the result of a response to gravity,
known as geotropism. The root progressively bends downward while
the shoot bends upward until root-shoot system orient itself in an
upright (standing position), when there is a uniform effect of gravity.
As shown in Figure 2.22, a horizontally placed seedling responds
Shoot Negatively
to gravity in that its root is positively geotropic (grow downward or
Geotropic
towards gravity) and shoot is negatively geotropic (grow upward or
against gravity).
ACTIVITY 2.19: GROUP WORK
Root Positively
Materials required
Geotropic
Bean seeds, Blotting /soft paper, Petridish
Figure 2.22 Plant responses to
Procedure
gravity
Germinate some bean seeds placed on wet blotting paper in a
petridish.
When the radicles and plumules emerged, arrange the seedling
in to two different position. Place some seedlings in a horizontal
position and others vertically with the radicle facing upwards.
Leave the set up for 2 to 3 days in the dark to eliminate the effect
of light.
Observe what happens to the direction of growth of the radicles
and plumules.
Make careful drawing. Note what the experiment verified as to the
effect of gravity on shoot and root growth.
Figure 2.23 Effect of clinostat on
How can we overcome the effect of gravity on root and shoot
gravity (geotropism)
growth of a seedling?
Self Test
The effect of gravity in a horizontally placed seedling can be
overcome by a clinostat, which is a rotating instrument. A seedling
What will happen to a
fixed horizontally in a rotating clinostat grows straight (Figure 2.23),
plant if it does not exhibit
because the rotation overcome (gravity acts equally for all sides) the
phototropism, hydrotropism
effect of gravity. You can see the effect of rotation by using another
and geotropism?
seedling fixed to the clinostat but not rotated as a control.
44
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.10 Medicinal plants
Objectives
What are medicinal
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
plants? What is their
tell the importance of medicinal plants and
importance to local
list down locally available medicinal plants
people?
From sub-topic 2.7 of this unit, you learned that plants synthesize
a variety of organic products that have food value. But, plants also
produce other organic products that have ornamental, commercial
Self Test
and medicinal values. Here, we will focus on the medicinal plants
that play a vital role in treating diseases and fighting infections.
What is the contribution
Globally, more than 60 % of the total world population depends on
of medicinal plants
and traditional healers
traditional or locally available plant medicines for their health care.
(herbalists) to modern
(According to World Health Organization (WHO), nearly 3.5 billion
medicine?
people in developing countries including Ethiopia believe in the
efficiency of plant medicines and widely use them to overcome their
health problems. The list of some Ethiopian medicinal plants, parts
used, mode of administration and some examples of human diseases
treated are presented in table 2.3.
Table 2.2 List of medicinal plants and disease treated
No.
Scientific name
Local name
Habit
Plant part used
Route of ad-
Disease treated
( Amharic)
ministration
1.
Ruta chalepensis
Teenadem
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Abdominal pain
2.
Zingiber officinalis
Jinjibil
Herb
Rhizome (under-
Oral
Tonsilitis , abdominal pain,
ground stem)
cough
3.
Hagenia abysinica
Ye-kosso Zaf
Tree
Female flower
Oral
Tapeworm
(Seed)
4.
Artemesia absin-
Aritii
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Unexplained stomach ache
thium
(Megagna)
5.
Niglella sativa
Tikur Azmud
Herb
Seed
Oral
Intestinal parasites
6.
Ocimum lamifolium
Damakesse
Shrub
Leaf
Nasal
Headache, General body
illness ( Mich)
7.
Rosmarinus offici-
Rosmery
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Bronchial asthma.
nalis
Prostate disorder
inflammatory diseases
8.
Cymbopogen ciratus
Tejsar
Herb/
Leaf
Oral
Used for stomach complaint
Grass
9.
Alium sativum
Nechshinkurt
Herb
bulb
Oral
Abdominal pain, toothache,
tonsillitis, common cold
10.
Eucalyptus golbulus
Nech-Bahir-
Tree
Leaf
Nasal
Common cold, fever with
zaf
headache
11.
Curcurbita pepo
Dubba
Herb
Seed
Oral
Tapeworm
12.
Trigonella
Abish
Herb
Seed
Oral
Mixed with garlic to treat
foenumgraecum
asthma, used to treat gas-
tritis
13.
Ocimum basilicum
Besobilla
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Abdominal pain
14.
Lepidium sativum
Feto
Herb
Seed
Oral
Treatment of diarrhea
Grade 10 Biology
45
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.20: Group work
Procedure
Divide the following local medicinal plants among your small group.
Lippia adoensis ("Kosseret")
Thymus schimperi ("Tossign")
Echinos kebericho ("Kebericho")
Taverniera abyssinica ("Dingetegna")
Moringa stenopetala ("Shiferaw" or "Aleko")
Ask your parents or elders in your locality about parts of the medicinal plant used, mode of
administration and some examples of human diseases treated.
Prepare summary as it is done for the 14 medicinal plants indicated in the previous table.
Submit your summary table to your teacher for comment and presentation to your classmates.
Remark :
While collecting medicinal plants student need to use hand gloves (some students can be allergic to
the plants), not taste and ingest them or inhale if they have volatile substance. It will be safe to wash
hands after handling the plants.
Students in the pastoralist areas can form a group to collect key information and the medicinal plants
used for livestock. They should ask their teacher for guidance and finally present their result in class
as summarized in table 2.2.
2.11 Renowned Ethiopian Botanist
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
appreciate the work of a renowned botanist and
look for more Ethiopian Botanists who contributed a lot to plant
science
Sebsebe Demissew is a professor of Plant systematics and
Biodiversity at Addis Ababa University and Executive Director of
the Gullele Botanic Garden in Addis Ababa. He was awarded the
Kew international medal in 2016. Professor Sebsebe Demissew, a
leading Ethiopian botanical scientist, has been elected as a Foreign
Member of the Royal Society in London in 2018 for his lifelong work
on promoting Ethiopian biodiversity. He is the first Sub - Saharan
African scientist to be elected in the Society's 357 - year history.
In 2021, Professor Sebsebe was awarded the "Cuatrcases Medal" for
Excellence in Tropical Botany by the Smitheonian National Museum
of Natural History ", USA, for his lifetime works in conserving and
recording the very diverse Ethiopian flora with many endemic species
and leadership of the Ethiopian flora project and the Ethiopian
National Herbarium at Addis Ababa University.
46
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.21 LIBRARY SEARCH
Direction: Carefully read the work of Prof. Sebsebe and share your impression to a friend sitting with
you.
Form a group of four students and perform team work to look for more renowned Ethiopian Botanists
from books and /or internet. Organize a report to share to your classmates.
Unit Summary
Plants are living things that are multicellular, autotrophic, and sessile and exhibit both asexual and
sexual reproduction pattern.
Higher plants are vascular with well - developed root, stem and leaf, Based on their reproductive
system, they can be categorized as non- flowering and flowering plants
The non - flowering, known as gymnosperms have no flowers. Instead, their reproductive organ is
cone. Moreover, the seeds produced in their cone are without cover (naked seeds).
Flowering plants, commonly known as Angiosperms, are also vascular with well-developed root,
stem and leaves. But unlike gymnosperms, they have flowers and produce seeds within a fruit.
A typical angiosperm has shoot and root system in its external structure. The shoot system grows
above the ground and includes the organs such as stem, branches, leaves, buds and flower
The root system usually grows down ward into the ground. It includes the primary or tap root, lateral
or branch roots and root hairs.
The internal structure of a leaf consists two layers, namely the outer layer (upper and lower epider-
mis) and the inner or middle layer. The epidermis contains cuticle and stomata, to minimize water
loss and allow gas exchange respectively.
The middle layer consists of the palisade and mesophyll cells that are contain chlorophyll to absorb
sunlight. They also contain vascular bundles to transport water, minerals and food.
The internal structure of a stem consists of different layers including epidermis, hypodermis, cortex,
endodermis and pith.
A cross-section of a root shows different layers, namely epiblema, cortex, endodermis, pericycle,
vascular bundles and pith.
The sexual reproduction of an angiosperm starts with pollination, followed by the fusion of gametes,
which results in a zygote. The zygote develops into a seed embryo within a seed (matured ovule).
Then seed will be dispersed away from the parent plant by animals, wind and water.
Seed undergoes germination if it gets optimum moisture, warmth and nutrients.
The ultimate source of energy that sustains life comes from the sun. Chlorophyll bearing algae and
higher plants trap solar energy and transform it into chemical energy.
The process of photosynthesis is the result of light absorbed by chlorophyll and other accessory
pigments resulting in the release of oxygen from water and in the formation of reduced carbon com-
pounds (e.g carbohydrates) from carbon dioxide.
Transport in plants occurs through vascular bundles, xylem and phloem. Water and minerals are
transported through the xylem while food (organic matter) is translocated through the phloem.
Passive transport of water occurs as a result of diffusion, osmosis and transpiration pull, while miner-
als are transported as ions passively or actively. Food transport in phloem occurs by the expenditure
of energy (actively).
Tropism is a common response displayed by plants. It is response unidirectional or unilateral (one-sided)
stimulus by bending towards (positive tropism) or away (negative tropism).
Phototropism, hydrotropism and geotropism are a response to light, water and gravity respectively.
The root is positively hydrotropic and geotropic, while the shoot is positively phototropic but negatively
hydrotropic.
Medicinal plants play a vital role in treating diseases and fighting infections.
Grade 10 Biology
47
Unit Two: Plants
Review Questions
True - False items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise book.
1. Cone is reproductive structure of fruit bearing plants.
2. CO2 is used in the stroma of the chloroplast.
3. A root hair is single cell.
4. Self pollination is possible in imperfect flower.
Multiple choice items: Choose the correct answer from A- D and write on your exercise book.
1. Which structure transports water to the leaf of a plant?
A) Guard cell
B) Phloem
C) Stomata
D) Xylem
2. Clinostat is used in the study of
A) Osmosis
B) Growth movements
C) Leaf transpiration
D) Photosynthesis
3. Which leaf part or layer contains the largest number of chloroplasts?
A) Epidermis B) Palisade
C) Cortex
D) Spongy
4. One of the following is not major characteristics of plants
A) Plants are composed of many eukaryotic cells
B) Plants are sessile or do not show mobility
C) Plants are hetrotrophic in their feeding habit
D) Plants show both sexual and asexual reproduction
5. The two products of photosynthesis include
A) Carbondioxide and Oxygen
C) Carbon dioxide and water
B) Water and carbohydrate
D) Oxygen and Carbohydrate
6. Given the following
1= Pollination;
2 = Seed dispersal;
3 = Pollen grains germination;
4 = Flowering;
5 = Seed germination
The correct order of steps in the reproduction of a mature plant is
A) 1, 3, 2, 4, 5
c) 4, 2, 5, 1, 3
B) 2, 5, 4, 1,3
d) 4, 1, 3, 2,5
48
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Matching Items I: Match the description under "Column A" with the terms under "Column B".
Column A
Column B
1. May be termed as starch sheath
A) Cone
2. Cells that leave an open space in leaf epidermis
B) Endodermis
3. Give mechanical strength to the stem
C) Flower
4. Single cells best suited for absorption +
D) Guard cells
5. Is the site of origin of lateral roots
E) Hypodermis
6. Reproductive structure of angiopserms
F) Pericycle
G) Root hair
H) Stomata
Short Answer Items
1. How do you distinguish a root from an underground stem?
2. What is the difference between an incomplete flower and an imperfect flower?
3. What is the importance of rainfall to agriculture?
4. Write the type of tropism illustrated by the pictures below.
5. Carefully look at a flower diagram given below and label parts of the flower denoted by letters
A-E.
A
B
H
C
F
G
D
Grade 10 Biology
49
