Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Contents
Learning Competency
6.1. Trophic levels
outline with examples the trophic levels in an
6.1.1. Food chains & Food webs
ecosystem
6.1.2. Flow energy and matter through ecosystems
elaborate food chain and food web with
6.2. Cycling of materials in the ecosystem
examples
6.2.1. Water cycle
show the flow of energy and matter in an
6.2.2. Carbon cycle
ecosystem
6.2.3. Nitrogen cycle
discuss ecological pyramid
6.2.4. Phosphorus cycle
draw and label the water, carbon, nitrogen and
phosphorus cycles
relate the carbon cycle with global warming
associate nitrogen cycle with soil fertility and
agriculture
appreciate the role of soil organisms in soil
fertility
investigate why farmers in their locality use
crop rotation in cultivation
6.1 Trophic Levels
Objectives
A cat always hunts a
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
rat. You know what
Define trophic level, food chain, and food web,
will happen if a hyena
construct food chain and food web-based on observed
and dog come together.
feeding relationship among common organisms in their
What does this remind
locality and
you about feeding
outline the flow of energy from the sun to plants than to a
relationship in your
higher trophic level.
environment?
6.1.1 Food chain and food web
What is the ultimate source of energy in life? How is energy
transferred from organism to organism?
Have you observed solar panels used to collect energy from the
sun, which transform solar energy to electrical energy for different
purposes? Your answer might be yes, however, the best way to trap
and store energy from sunlight is to grow plants and use the food they
synthesize. This stored energy is transferred to other living organisms
that eat plants and themselves have been eaten by another organism.
Thus, the ultimate source of energy in living organisms is the sun.
Grade 10 Biology
153
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
In this lesson, you will learn how energy is transferred from plants
through a series of organisms. Plants are the first to trap energy
and produce their food. They are called producers, also known
as autotrophs (self - feeding). Animals feed on either plants or
other animals as a source of energy. They are known as consumers
or heterotrophs, feeding on plants (herbivores) or other animals
How does energy flow in
(carnivores) or feed on both plants and animals (omnivores). Thus,
food chain?
energy is transferred from plants through a chain of organisms,
employing the "to eat or to be eaten process. This process is known as
the food chain or food web.
The following are characteristic features of a food chain
There is repeated process of "to eat or to be eaten", so the food chain
represent nutritive interaction among biotic component of the
ecosystem.
Plants (producers) are at the base or beginning of the food chain.
There is the unidirectional flow of energy from the sun to the
producers and then to series of consumers.
Omnivorous (animals that feed both on plants and other animals)
Is it the unidirectional
occupy more than one position in the food chain.
flow of energy that is
commonly observed in an
You daily observe that one organism does not eat one organism
ecosystem?
only. Every organism eats different organisms and it can be eaten
by other different organisms. Therefore, ecosystems normally exhibit
multidirectional energy flow, which is more than a direct chain of
who - eats - what. What is occurring in the ecosystem is a complex
web structure, called the food web. A food web is an interconnected
food chain that makes interwoven or web-like structures. As shown
in Figure 6.1 food chain follows a single path whereas the food web
follows multiple paths.
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
H
H
H
H
H
H
P
P
P
P
P
P
Food Chain
Food Web
Figure 6.1 Schematic illustrations of the food chain and food web
(P = producer, H= Herbivore, C1= Primary carnivore, C2 = Secondary
carnivore).
154
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
ACTIVITY 6.1 Think — Pair - Share
Direction:
Think of a possible feeding relationship of organisms commonly
observed in your locality.
Share your ideas with your classmates. Discuss whether it is a food
chain or food web that is observed on the ground and anticipate why
this is so.
Based on the food web illustrated below, construct different short
food chains and share your work with other groups.
Grasshopper
Lizard
Grass
Rabbit
hawk
What is a trophic level?
How is it different from
Rat
feeding level?
Snake
Each organism occupies a specific position in the food chain, called
trophic level. Basically, a trophic level indicates the position of the
ACTIVITY 6.2 Field Visit
organism in an order of receiving energy and usually ranges from 1 to
3 or 4 trophic levels. Plants, which are the first to trap solar energy,
Your teacher will arrange
stand at the first trophic level; herbivores that eat plants stand at the
a short visit to your school
second trophic level and carnivores that eat herbivores stand at the
garden or corner with
third trophic level (Figure 6.2).
grass for you to observe
feeding relationship among
The feeding level is the order of consuming or eating one another.
organisms.
Herbivores are at the first feeding level consuming plants also known
You may encounter insects
as primary consumers. Carnivores that eat herbivores stand at the
like grasshopper. Observe
second feeding level and so on.
what these insects feed on
and which organisms are
Trophic level
Feeding level
hunting grasshoppers. Take
field note on the different
Third Trophic
feeding relationships that
Secondary Consumer
you observed.
level
Frog
(carnivore)
After coming to class,
discuss with your small
group on what you
Second Trophic
Primary Consumer
observed and construct a
level
(Herbivore)
food chain and /or food
Grasshopper
web to show feeding
relationship among
First Trophic
Self Feeding
organisms.
level
(Producer )
Prepare a report and
Grass
submit it to your teacher
as an input for class
discussion.
Figure 6.2 Illustration of Trophic level
Grade 10 Biology
155
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.1. 2 Flow of energy and matter through ecosystem
How does energy flow in an ecosystem during a nutrient
recycle?
You already know that the ultimate source of energy in life is the sun.
You have also learned that it is solar energy trapped by the producer
during photosynthesis that flows through a series of organisms by a
food chain or food web. As shown in Figure 6.3, the energy from the
sun flows through organisms, but this energy cannot go back to the
sun. This is why we say energy cannot be recycled - it flows through
the ecosystem. However, nutrients in food (organic matter) recycle
within an ecosystem and are reused over and over again. This is the
result of composition (synthesis) and decomposition (breakdown),
which take place in the ecosystem.
Plants synthesize food (organic matter) from simple inorganic matter.
When producers or consumers die, fungi and other decomposers
obtain energy by breaking down the organic matter and in the process;
they return key nutrients like nitrogen to the soil so that producers
can use them as raw materials for photosynthesis.
Sun-light
Eagle
Snake
Frog
Grasshopper
Decomposers
Producers
Figure 6.3 Flow of energy and matter (inorganic and organic) in an
ecosystem
As energy flows from one trophic level to the next it successively
What happens to energy
declines in amount. Fig 6.4 demonstrates how energy contained in
as it is transferred from
the grass is not fully transferred to a cow that feeds on the grass. It
one trophic level to the
is only about 10% of the energy in grass that will turn to biomass
next trophic level?
(living organic mass) in the body of the cow. The rest (90% of the
total energy) is lost as heat or used for different activities of the cow
156
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
or removed from the cow's digestive system as an undigested and
indigestible food item.
30% is lost as energy for heat and
to do work
10% is assimilated
as biomass
60% not digested or egested
as extract
Figure 6.4 Energy transfer
from grass (producer) to cow
(herbivore)
The flow of energy at each trophic level in a particular ecosystem can
be shown using an ecological pyramid (Figure 6.5). It is constructed
What is an ecological
using horizontal bars, where each bar represents organisms of specific
pyramid ? How is it
trophic levels and their order, which is based on who eats whom.
constructed ?
The ecological pyramid primarily represents the flow of energy with
the producers (first trophic level) at the very bottom, followed by
the primary consumers (Herbivores), then secondary consumers
(carnivores), and so on, with the highest trophic level being on the
top of the pyramid.
The ecological pyramid can also be constructed to represent the
biomass or number of organisms at each trophic level. Accordingly,
there are three types of ecological pyramids namely: the pyramid
of energy, the pyramid of number and the pyramid of biomass. The
pyramid of energy is always upright and narrowing sharply from the
base to the top-level carnivore because there is commonly 90% energy
loss at each trophic level (Figure 6. 5).
Figure 6.5 An Idealized
pyramid of energy.
Tertiary Consumers
10
Heat energy in
Secondary Consumers
100 J
atmosphere
Primary Consumers
1,000 J
Producers
10,000 J
1,000,000 J sunlight
Grade 10 Biology
157
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
transfer of energy for each link in the food chain. Notice that the
Key terms
producer - Grass, is capable of converting only 1% of solar energy by
Biomass. is the weight of liv-
photosynthesis.
ing organic matter contained
or assimilated to the body
ACTIVITY 6.3 Think — Pair — Share
of an organism per unit time
Direction:
Ecological pyramid. This
is a graphical representation
Discuss with a friend sitting next to you and answer the following
of the feeding relationship
questions
of a group of organisms in
the form of a pyramid. A
Why is trophic level usually limited to 3 or 4? Why not more?
horizontal bar is construct-
ed to represent the different
What is the trophic level of a human being? Explain
trophic level or feeding lev-
el. The bars at the base of
the pyramid always repre-
As opposed to pyramid of energy, pyramids of biomass or number can
sent plants (producers). The
be upright (with the long bar at the base and shorter bar at the apex)
length of the bar shows the
amount of energy (pyramid
or inverted depending on the type of ecosystem and the particular
of energy), biomass (pyra-
food chain (Figure 6.6)
mid of biomass) or number
of organisms (pyramid of
number) present at each tro-
A
B
phic level.
Tilapia
(fish)
Tilapia
(fish)
Daphnia
(zooplankton)
Daphnia
Chlorella
(zooplankton)
(green algae)
Chlorella
(green algae)
Figure 6.6 Illustration of the pyramid of number (A) and pyramid of
biomass (B) in the aquatic food chain
Self Test
ACTIVITY 6.4 Homework
What is the advantage of
being vegetarian (feeding on
Direction: Critically observe figure 6.6, and construct similar
plants and plant products)?
pyramid of number and pyramid of biomass based on the following
food chain. Tree -bird-bird flea
1. Compare your pyramid with Figure 6.6 and comment on the
difference.
2. What do you conclude about the pyramid of number and
pyramid of biomass?
158
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2 Cycling of Materials in an Ecosystem
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
draw and label the water, carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorous cycle,
relate the carbon cycle with global warming,
associate nitrogen with soil fertility and agriculture,
appreciate the role of soil organisms in soil fertility and
identify why crop rotation is important to farmers
What is meant by cycling of materials in an ecosystem?
An ecosystem refers to the complex of living organisms (biotic
component), their physical and chemical environment (abiotic
component), and all their interaction and interrelationship in a
particular unit of space. As materials in an ecosystem are found in a
Attention
limited amount, it is essential that the same nutrients materials should
continuously be reused, over and over again. The cycling occurs
Decomposers are bacteria
between the biotic (living) and the abiotic (non-living) components
and fungi, commonly found
in soil. They play key role
of the ecosystem. The biotic component consists of plants, animals,
in returning nutrient to the
and microorganisms while the abiotic comprises the atmosphere (air),
ecosystem.
hydrosphere (Aquatic/water), and lithosphere (soil). Materials always
Unlike ingesters, animals
move around within an ecosystem when organisms feed, breathe,
that swallow food (organic
respire, and excrete. Nutrients are released when the waste product
matter) and digest inside
or dead bodies are decomposed. What is a waste product to one
their gut, digestion in
organism becomes a vital nutrient to another. For example, animal
decomposers takes place
excreta (a waste product) will be broken down by decomposers,
outside the living body in
release nitrogen and phosphorous (vital nutrients) which will be used
the soil, or wherever the
dead matter happens to be.
for plant growth, thereby increasing agricultural yield. Note that the
waste product, instead of polluting the environment, can be a rich
Decomposers exhibit
source of organic fertilizer.
extracellular digestion by
releasing enzymes on to the
dead matter, digesting the
What are the important materials that cycle through the
complex organic matter into
ecosystem?
simpler and smaller ones
and absorb these products
of decomposition. Since
ACTIVITY 6.5 Peer discussion
the products released are
accumulated in the external
Direction: In pairs, discuss and answer the following questions
environment (soil), they
Why is the cycling of materials in an ecosystem so important?
serve as "nutrient pool" and
What will happen to organisms or life if decomposers are absent
increase soil fertility as well
from the ecosystem?
as plant productivity.
Grade 10 Biology
159
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
In addition to water, there are 4 elements (nutrients) that cycle
through the ecosystem: oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous.
These elements take the path from the non - living environment to
living organisms, such as trees, and then back to the non - living
environment. The paths that include biological, geological, and
chemical processes form cycles, known as the bio-geochemical cycle.
In this, subsection you will learn about the aforementioned major
cycles in detail, discuss and share ideas in class.
6.2.1 Water cycle
What happens during the water cycle?
Water on earth does not stay still. It is always on move. Rain that falls
at a particular place can be the result of evaporation that occurred at
a distant ocean days before. Likewise, water in a river may have been
rainfall somewhere at a distance or melting ice or snow from the top
of high mountains. It is the water cycle that is responsible for water
movement in the ocean, on the land, and in the atmosphere.
The earth has a limited amount of water. When examining the water
on Earth, 97.5 percent of it is non-potable saltwater. Of the remaining
water, 99 percent is locked underground as ground water or as icecap
in the polar areas. Thus, less than 1 percent of freshwater is easily
accessible from lakes and rivers. This water keeps going around
and around in what we call the water cycle or the hydrologic cycle.
Water continuously cycles between the oceans, atmosphere, land,
and organisms, as illustrated in Figure 6.7. A change in temperature,
heating, and cooling, is the main driving force in the water cycle,
causing a change in the state of water as water vapour (gas), ice or
snow (solid), and liquid water. Among the many processes involved in
the water cycle, the most important are: evaporation, transpiration,
condensation, precipitation, and runoff.
The water cycle is sun driven process. It is solar heating that helps the
cycle to start with evaporation. Evaporation of water from the earth
and surface of the leaf by transpiration rises in the atmosphere in the
form of water vapor. Then, the water vapor cools and condenses in
the atmosphere into rain or snow, and falls again to the earth's surface
as precipitation (Rainfall or snowfall). The water falling on earth
through surface run off collects in rivers, lakes, soil, and soft rocks,
where some water is taken up by plant roots and much of it flows into
oceans and also infiltrate the soil and accumulated as ground water.
The surface water by evaporation and evapotranspiration will restart
the cycle.
160
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Water accumulated in the ground can come to the surface as a
spring or stream. Groundwater can also be pumped out for different
purposes such as drinking and irrigation and join the water cycle by
surface evaporation.
PRECIPITATION
VAPOR TRANSPORT
PRECIPITATION
EVAPORATION
EVAPORATION
RUNOFF
PERCOLATION
GROUNDWATER
Figure 6.7 Water cycle
Activity 6.6. Group Work
Title: How does the water cycle work?
Materials Needed: Large glass beaker (100ml), Smaller glass beaker (50ml), Water, Plastic cover, string
or Large rubber-band
Procedure:
Place the small glass beaker at the centre of the larger glass beaker.
Fill the large glass beaker with water about 2/3rd of the way up the small beaker (do not put water
inside the small beaker).
Cover the large glass beaker with a plastic cover and either tie it with string or put a large rubber
band around it to secure the plastic cover.
Place the set up outside in a sunny area for a few hours.
After a few hours observe what happens to the plastic cover and look if there is water inside the small
beaker.
Key questions:
1. What did you observe on the plastic cover?
2. What is the process that enabled water particles to move up towards the plastic cover?
3. What process is demonstrated when the water drops are getting too heavy and falling back to small
glass beaker?
4. Why do we say the water cycle is sun-driven process?
Grade 10 Biology
161
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2.2 Carbon cycle
The air around us is composed of many different gases including
What happens during
oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and inert gases. Oxygen and
carbon cycle?
carbon dioxide, in particular are important for the survival of living
organisms. The amount of these gases is maintained in the atmosphere
by photosynthesis and cellular respiration.
As depicted in Figure 6.8, the amount of carbon in the atmosphere is
maintained by process that continuously takes it from the atmosphere
and various processes that release it back to the atmosphere. When
green plants undergo the process of photosynthesis to make their food
they absorb carbon dioxide from the air. The carbon element stored
in the plant is transferred to animals that eat the plant. When plants
and animals die their dead bodies are decomposed and release carbon
dioxide back to the air due to the action of bacteria and fungi in the
soil. In addition all living organisms including plants and animals
release carbon dioxide through respiration in their entire life time.
Over a period of long time dead bodies of organisms become fossil
fuel which can be used by factories, power stations and vehicles. The
combustion or burning of fossil fuel also releases carbon dioxide into
the air.
Carbon dioxide CO2
Atmosphere
Photosynthesis
Combustion
Respiration
Respiration
LLL
Plants
Animals
Respiration
Factories
power stations
vehicle emissions
Decay
decomposers
Figure 6.8. The carbon cycle
How do you link
Though CO2 is a natural part of Earth's atmosphere, humans produce
carbondioxide to climate
more of it every year, and that's changing our climate. Its atmospheric
change?
concentrations has significantly increased since the Industrial
Revolution (late 18th century). Burning of the fossil fuels (coal, oil,
162
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
natural gas) and wood for energy are the major sources. Atmospheric
CO2 acts like a heat-trapping blanket, absorbing the heat and holding
it in, causing global warming. Global warming is a rise in the overall
temperature of the earth's surface. There are also other heat-trapping
gases (Greenhouse gases) in the atmosphere (methane and nitrous
oxide), but CO2 is the most important one. Thus, adition of excessive
CO2 in to the atmosphere due to human activity is the root cause of
climate change.
Attention
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are the major processes that
maintain the balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
If sunlight and chlorophyll are left out, the reactant for photosynthesis
is the product of respiration and vice versa as shown below.
Photosynthesis
CO₂ + H₂O
C₆H₁₂ O₆ + O2
(Food)
Respiration
While photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast of the leaf cell,
aerobic cellular respiration takes place in the mitochondrion of a cell
of aerobic organisms.
ACTIVITY 6.7 Group Discussion
Direction
In a group of four students (two pairs of neighbouring students) discuss and attempt the question
below.
How do illegal logging (cutting trees)
Ways to reduce the interference to the
and forest burning interferes in the
carbon and oxygen cycles
carbon-oxygen cycle? How can this
be related to climate change such as
Making tougher laws
Plant more trees
global warming?
onmental
Law
In small group , carefully look at the
summary chart below Discuss the
ways suggested to human interference
Ban illegal logging
Stop burning fields
with the carbon - oxygen cycle. Select
and forests
at least two ways mentioned in the
chart , elaborate and write a short
group report to present in class.
Avoid excessive use
Prevent excessive release
of pesticides
of smoke from vehicles
Grade 10 Biology
163
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2.3 Nitrogen cycle
What is nitrogen cycle?
You have learned that proteins are made up of the elements C, H, O,
N and S. You also know that the immediate result of photosynthesis
is carbohydrate (glucose), which consists of C, H, and O which is
transformed to protein upon the addition of nitrogen. Nitrogen is
available to the plant from the soil through the nitrogen cycle.
Nitrogen In the Atmosphere (N2)
DENITRIFICATION
NITROGEN
FIXATION
Animals
Plants
Denitrifying
Bacteria
ASSIMILATION
NITROGEN
FIXATION
Bacteria in
Roots
Nitrogen-containinig
Nitrates
organic compounds
(NO3-)
Decomposers
Nitrifying
Bacteria
AMMONIFICATION
NITRIFICATION
Soil Bacteria
Ammonia(NH3)/
Nitraites (NO2-)
Ammonium(NH4+)
Figure 6.9. The Nitrogen cycle
As shown in Figure 6.9 the nitrogen cycle is a repeating pathway of
processes during which nitrogen in different forms moves through both
biotic ( plants, animals, bacteria and fungi) and abiotic ( atmosphere,
soil, water ) components of the ecosystem. The major processes
involved in cycling nitrogen are: nitrogen fixation, ammonification,
nitrification, assimilation and denitrification. A brief description of
these processes is given hereafter
1. Nitrogen fixation
Nitrogen accounts for about 78% of the atmosphere. Most living or-
ganisms are unable to incorporate atmospheric nitrogen, N₂, into
their systems. To be usable, the N₂ should be fixed into usable forms
such as ammonia or nitrate. Nitrogen fixation is the conversion of N₂
into ammonia either biologically (mediated by bacteria) or non-bio-
logically (atmospheric fixation by lightning and industrial fixation in
the laboratory). In this lesson, we will focus on the biological fixation
of nitrogen.
Based on the group of bacteria involved, the biological N₂ fixation
may be categorized into two:
i) Symbiotic nitrogen fixation and
ii) Non - symbiotic fixation
164
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
i. Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation
This form of biological nitrogen fixation is carried out in the root
nodules of leguminous plants (such as peas, beans, and peanuts) by the
group of soil bacteria known as rhizobia. Rhizobia form a symbiotic
association with leguminous plants and form the root nodules where
N₂ is reduced into ammonia (Figure 6.10). The nitrogen fixation
reaction (conversion of N2) is catalyzed by an enzyme known as
nitrogenase.
How are rhizobia linked
The ammonium ions produced by this process are passed to the
to global climate?
legume plant (assimilated) and used to synthesize amino acids-
building units of protein.
N₂ + 8e + 8H + 16ATP
2NH₃+H₂+16ADP+16Pi
Figure 6.10. Root nodules of legume plant
It is well known that concentrations of carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have increased since the
beginning of the industrial era due to human activities. Among these
gases is nitrous oxide (N₂O), an intermediate product of microbial
denitrification in the nitrogen cycle. The emission of N₂O is one risk
to global climate change because of its global warming potential (over
300 times than carbon dioxide) and long atmospheric residence time.
Excessive use of synthetic N fertilizer in the agricultural system is the
major source of N₂O emissions. Biological N₂ fixation by rhizobia
could be an alternative source of fixed N to synthetic N fertilizer to
improve or sustain agricultural productivity and at the same time
mitigate emission of N2O to the atmosphere.
ii. Non - symbiotic nitrogen fixation
This form of biological nitrogen fixation is carried out by free living
soil bacteria (belonging to the genera Azotobacter and Klebsiella).
These bacteria reduce nitrogen gas into ammonium ions, which can
Grade 10 Biology
165
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
either be used by plants or oxidized immediately into nitrates by ni-
trifying bacteria.
2. Nitrification
This is a microbial process by which ammonia is sequentially oxi-
dized - converted first to nitrite and then to nitrate.
In the first step of nitrification, ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (belong-
ing mainly to the genus Nitrosomonas) oxidize ammonia to nitrite
according to the following equation:
NH₃ +02
NO₂ + 3H+ + 2 e⁻
In the second step of nitrification, nitrite-oxidizing bacteria (mainly
belonging to the genus Nitrobacter) oxidize nitrite to nitrate accord-
ing to the following equation
NO₂ +02
NO₃ + 2H+ + 2 e⁻
3. Assimilation of ammonium and nitrate by plant
Plants commonly absorb nitrogen in inorganic forms either as nitrate
(NO₃) or as ammonium (NH₄⁺). Plants preferentially take up the re-
duced ammonium (NH₄⁺) rather than the oxidized nitrate (NO₃), be-
cause the energy expenditure for the NH₄⁺ assimilation is much lower
than for NO₃:
The mechanism of absorption of ionic forms of nitrogen is essentially
similar to the mechanism involved in the uptake of other ions. Like
other nutrients, they can be absorbed by the root actively or passively,
reach the root xylem and then transported to the stem and leaves of
the plant. Both ammonium and nitrate assimilated by plants are used
in the synthesis of several amino acids which in turn are polymerized
into different proteins.
4. Ammonification
This is an essential step that converts reduced organic matter having
amine group (of general formula R - NH₂) present in the soil to re-
duced inorganic nitrogen (NH₄⁺) through the action of microorgan-
isms. Ammonification is the last step of the nitrogen cycle involving
an organic compound and is an intermediary step between depolym-
erization of large organic molecules and the nitrification process as
presented hereunder.
Dead organic matter
Depolymerization
Ammonification
Nitrification
(Protein, Chitin,
Amino acid, Urea,
Ammonium
Nitrate
Peptidoglycan,
Amino sugar and
(NH₄⁺)
(NO₃⁻)
and Nucleic acid)
Nucleotide
166
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
5. Denitrification
The flow of atmospheric nitrogen (N₂) and its various forms through
soil, microorganism, plants and animals should involve a process of
returning nitrogen (N₂) to the atmosphere to maintain balance. This
process, called denitrification, converts nitrate to nitrogen gas (N₂),
thus removing bioavailable nitrogen and returning it to the atmosphere.
Unlike nitrification, denitrification is an anaerobic process, occurring
mostly in waterlogged soils that are anoxic (without oxygen), layers of
sediments in lakes and oceans.
NO3
NO2
NO + N2O
N₂
It is important to know that the biological processes of the nitrogen
cycle is largely mediated by different microorganisms, mainly
bacteria. This is summarized in the following table.
Biological process
Microorganisms involved
1. Nitrogen Fixation
Nitrogen fixing bacteria living in legume
root nodule ( Rhizobium)
Nitrogen fixing bacteria living in soil
(Azotobacter and Klebsella)
2. .Nitrification
Nitrifying bacteria ( Nirtrosomonas, Ni-
trobacter)
3.Ammonification
Ammonifying bacteria ( Aerobic and an-
aerobic bacteria, fungi)
4. .Denitrification
Denitrifying bacteria ( Pseudomonas,
Thiobacillus, Micrococcus)
Self Test
THE NITROGEN CYCLE
After studying the brief description of major
steps in the nitrogen cycle as illustrated with
in which
Figure 6.9, complete the following mental map
and label the processes represented by letters
NITROGEN
IN THE
(A to E).
ATMOSPHERE
goes through
D
A
to be
converted into
B
produce
Ammonium
to
ions
goes back to the atmosphere through
protein
the
caled
C
in
Plants
remains its organicrgo
goes through
E
to
Aa Pagrosqe
Nitrates
and is is converted
Grade 10 Biology
167
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Nitrogen is the most important component in an organism in the
Why is cycling nitrogen
form of DNA, RNA and proteins. You know that DNA contains a
important?
unique genetic code to guide all activities in living organisms. Like a
recipe book, it holds the instruction for making all the proteins, both
structural and functional, in our bodies.
Key terms
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is an organic compound of complex
structure that is found in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. DNA
codes genetic information for the transmission of inherited traits.
DNA is key to life because it determines how a cell replicates and
performs its various activities.
A DNA molecule is composed of a long chain of monomers,
the nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of a five carbon sugar
(deoxyribose) to which is attached a phosphate group and a
nitrogenous base ( contains nitrogen)
Functional proteins perform different functions that play key role
to life. These key roles can be : catalytic (E.g. enzymes), Storage (
E.g. albumin in egg, casein in milk) transport ( E.g. haemoglobin
transport oxygen), protective ( E.g. antibodies, blood clotting factors
etc.
ACTIVITY 6.8 Think-Pair-
Structural protein, unlike functional proteins, are involved in
Share
producing structures such as bones and muscles as well as cell
Direction: With a friend
membrane and skin that covers the cell and the external body
sitting next to you
respectively.
anticipate and point out
what will happen to life
How do you relate nitrogen cycle, soil bacteria and soil
or living things if there
fertility?
was no nitrogen in the
atmosphere; and
You already know that atmospheric nitrogen (N₂) cannot be directly
discuss the importance
used by both plants and animals. Plants use nitrogen in the inorganic
of soil bacteria in cycling
form as ammonium and nitrate and convert it to organic forms such
nitrogen and comment
as amino acids and proteins. It is, thereafter, animals that feed on
on the misconception that
plants get the organic form and transform, use and store the organic
bacteria are commonly
taken as harmful and
form of nitrogen in their body. Here, the different soil bacteria, like
dangerous to human
the nitrogen bacteria and nitrifying bacteria are absolutely essential
beings.
to providing plants with ammonium and nitrate. Moreover, the
ammonifying bacteria, decomposing dead organic matter, liberate
ammonium. Thus, soil bacteria that plays a key role in cycling
nitrogen increase soil fertility, which in turn results in increased plant
growth and agricultural productivity. For instance, the nitrogen-
fixing bacteria can be used as biofertilizers due to their big capacity
for fixing a huge amount of nitrogen increasing soil fertility without
causing any harmful effect on aerial and soil environment. They help
improve soil structure and serve as a continuous source of natural
fertilizer without being leached easily.
168
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Earthworms are soil organisms that are visible to the naked eye
(Figure 6.11). They are one of the major decomposers of organic
matter. The mutual action of earthworms and microbes brings faster
decomposition of organic matter, and enhance cycling of nutrients
thereby facilitating plant growth and crop productivity. Having an
abundance of earthworm is a good indicator of fertile soil and ensure
higher agricultural yield As a result, earthworms are nicknamed as
"Friends of farmers".
When earthworms move through the soil, they form tubular channel
or burrows. These burrows improves soil structure, particularly soil
What is the role of larger
soil organisms such as
porosity which increases the amount of air and water holding capacity.
earthworms ?
From your lesson on seed germination, you have learned that air and
water are essential for seed to break dormancy (resting stage) and
start growth and development of seedling.
Key terms
Bio-fertilizers are microbial preparations containing living cells of
different microorganisms which have the ability to mobilize essen-
tial plant nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus in soil from
unusable to usable form through biological processes.
Bio-fertilizers, being cost effective, non-toxic, and eco-friendly,
serve as good substitute for expensive and harmful chemical fertil-
izers. They increase crop yield, ensure food security and sustainable
agriculture.
Vermicompost or worm compost is organic fertilizer obtained by
using worms. These are commonly earthworms that decompose
food scraps, dungs, other wastes and dead organic matter and fa-
cilitate nutrient recycling.
Farmers that use organic fertilizers (Organic farmers) usually grow
legumes such as peas and beans for dual purpose. First, they harvest
the legumes as a crop as these plants are freely supplied with nitro-
gen fertilizer due to the nitrogen fixing bacteria in their root nod-
ules. After harvesting yield, the organic farmers grow a non-legume
crops to take an advantage of all nitrogen fixed and accumulated in
the soil and root of the legumes: none is lost in a crop.
Grade 10 Biology
169
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2.4. Phosphorus cycle
ACTIVITY 6.9 Homework
Direction
How is phosphorus recycled?
Collect information from
books about crop rotation.
Phosphorus, like nitrogen, is needed by organisms to build proteins.
Then, prepare brief note
Moreover, it is an essential component of the nucleotides of DNA,
and show why farmers use
which is key for life. Phosphorous is also needed in the synthesis of
crop rotation and how they
ATP, known as the energy currency of a cell. Phosphorus is usually
practice it.
present in the form of phosphate ions in soil and rock.
As illustrated in Figure 6.12 cycling of phosphorus can be summarized
as follows
phosphate ions present in soil or water are taken up by plants and
aquatic algae are converted to organic phosphate
organic phosphate synthesized by the producers is passed along
food chains to various consumers or feeders.
dead bodies of plants and animals are decomposed by bacteria and
fungi and phosphate ions are released from different compounds
like phospholipids, ATP, DNA and returned to the soil and water
bodies. Phosphate is also excreted from animals and aquatic
organisms.
phosphate will enter the soil in the form of fertilizers obtained
by mining phosphate rocks and applying them in agricultural
lands to boost crop yield. Phosphate fertilizer from farmlands can
be leached by rainfall, reach the nearby water bodies and cause
eutrophication.
Figure 6.12. Phosphorus cycle
Cellular respiration
phosphate excreted
Feeding
Phospherous taken
Fertilizer
as phosphate ions by
Fish
plants and fixed as
organic phosphate in
plant body
Agriculture
Mining phosphate
Algae
rock
Leaching
Sedimentation
Phosphate in soil
Phosphate dissolved in
Millions of years
(Formation of
water
phosphate rock)
170
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
ACTIVITY 6.10 Group work
Direction
Discuss in a small group and prepare a short report on the danger of
agrochemicals (fertilizers and pesticides) released from farmlands
to the nearby water body, such as lakes or reservoirs.
Key terms
ATP, abbreviation for Adenosine, is the immediate source of energy
(instantly liberates energy) needed for various activities of a cell.
Energy released during cellular respiration is harvested and stored as
ATP.
Eutrophication is undesirable excessive growth of aquatic plants
(hydrophytes or macrophysics) and massive growth of algae (algal
bloom). It is induced by leaching of fertilizers (rich in nitrogen and
phosphorus from nearby farmlands or water loaded.
Biofertilizers, being cost effective, non toxic , and eco - friendly
, serve as good substitute for expensive and harmful chemical
fertilizers. They increase crop yield , ensure food security and
sustainable agriculture.
Unit Summary
The Earth obtains energy which is trapped by plants for
photosynthesis and transferred to animals that feed on them.
A food chain is a unidirectional energy flow from the sun to
producer and then to a series of consumers.
Food web is interconnected food chains that make interwoven
or web-like structures where energy flows in different directions
(multidirectional) from producers to different consumers.
The order of receiving solar energy is known as trophic level
in that plants (producers) are at the First trophic level and
animals that feed on plants will be at the Second trophic level
or First feeding level and so on.
The flow of energy at each trophic level in a particular
ecosystem can be shown using an ecological pyramid.
The ecological pyramid can be a pyramid of energy, number
and biomass.
As energy is successively decreasing as it is transferred from one
level to another level the pyramid of energy is always upright.
As a result, the number of trophic where energy transferred is
sufficient to sustain life will be limited from 4 to 5.
Grade 10 Biology
171
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Ecological pyramid of number and biomass, depending on the particular ecosystem and
food chain, pyramid of number and biomass can be upright or inverted.
Materials in an ecosystem are found in a limited amount and the same nutrients are
continuously re-used, over and over again. This is what we call the cycle of materials.
The most important cycle of materials in an ecosystem include: water, carbon -oxygen
cycle, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles.
Water (hydrologic) cycle is a change in the state of water as water vapour (gas), ice or snow
(solid) and liquid water is driven by solar heating and mainly due to change in temperature.
Among the many processes involved in the water cycle, the most important are: evaporation,
transpiration, condensation, precipitation and runoff.
The carbon cycle maintains the amount of carbon in the atmosphere by process (es) that
continuously take it from the atmosphere and release it back to the atmosphere.
In cycling carbon, atmospheric carbon dioxide is continuously taken by plants as raw material
for photosynthesis and the uptake is balanced by respiration, decomposition and combustion,
all of which release carbon dioxide back to the atmosphere.
As opposed to the carbon cycle, in the oxygen cycle, where oxygen is continuously taken
from the atmosphere by processes like respiration, decomposition, combustion and rusting is
balanced by photosynthesis which releases it back to the air
The nitrogen cycle is a repeating pathway of processes during which nitrogen in different
forms moves through both biotic (plants, animals, bacteria and fungi) and abiotic (atmosphere,
soil, water) components of the ecosystem.
The major processes involved in cycling nitrogen are nitrogen fixation, ammonification,
nitrification, assimilation, denitrification.
The phosphorus cycle is mainly the transfer of phosphate ions from the soil, water and rock
to plants and aquatic algae, first converted to organic phosphate in the producers and transferred
to consumers through the food chain. Phosphate ions are released from consumers through their
excreta and as their dead bodies are decomposed by soil bacteria and fungi.
172
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Review Questions
I. True - False items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise
book.
1. There is more energy at the third trophic level than at the second trophic level.
2. Ammonium is more preferred by plants than nitrate
3. Plants can release as well as take carbon to and from the atmosphere
4. Denitrifying bacteria are aerobic
5. It is food web, not food chain that actually exists in ecosystem
II. Multiple-choice items: Choose the correct answer from A - D and write on you exercise
book.
1. In the food chain: Grass - rat - snake - Eagle, the position of Snake is at
feeding
level and
trophic level
A) 3, 2
B) 3, 4
C) 4, 3
D) 2, 3
2. If the producers in the ecological pyramid have a total of 70, 000 Kcal of energy, which of the
following will be true
A) The secondary consumers would have a total of 7 Kcal energy
B) The primary consumers would have a total of 7000 Kcal energy
C) The secondary consumers would have a total of 70 Kcal energy
D) The tertiary consumers would have a total of 700 Kcal energy
3. The biomass of an ecosystem is
A) The total energy of living and non - living organisms in an ecosystem
B) The total mass of living organisms in an ecosystem
C) The total energy of living organisms in an ecosystem
D) The total mass of living and non - living matter in an ecosystem
4. In nitrogen fixation, nitrogen combines with
A) Carbon B) Hydrogen C) Oxygen D) Water
5. What is the correct term for rising water vapour meeting colder air and turning back in to
water droplets?
A) Condensation B) Dehydration C) Evaporation D) Precipitation
Grade 10 Biology
173
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
III. Match the description under "Column A" with the terms under "Column B".
Column A
Column B
1. Is the process by which the protein in the waste matter, dead
A) Ammonification
plants or animals is converted to ammonia
2. Carbon dioxide is the by-product of this biological process
B) Condensation
3. The position of an organism in an order of receiving solar energy
C) Denitrification
4. This process converts atmospheric nitrogen into usable form.
D) Evaporation
5. The position of an organism in an order of who eats whom
E) Feeding level
6. This contributes to the return of vapor to the atmosphere
F) Nitrogen fixation
G) Photosynthesis
H) Respiration
I) Trophic level
IV. Short Answer Items
1. Why is it unusual for a large number of organisms to be present at the top of an ecological
pyramid?
2. How do plants get nitrogen?
3. List down the advantages of organic fertilizers such as dead bodies and waste products of
animals as compared to chemical fertilizers.
4. What is the difference between forest clearing (cutting trees) and forest burning in terms of:
a) carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere
b) effect on global warming
174
Grade 10 Biology