Unit 5: Human Biology
Content
Learning competencies
5.1. Digestive system
Discuss the structure and function of the digestive system (alimentary
5.2. Circulatory and
canal and accessory organs).
Lymphatic system
Classify the types of digestion along the alimentary canal
5.2.1. Blood donation
List the end products of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats after complete
5.2.2. Diseases of
digestion
the circulatory and
Express the site of absorption of digested food, minerals, vitamins, and
lymphatic systems
water
(leukemia, varicose
Explore structural adaptations of the small intestine for the absorption
vein, elephantiasis,
Differentiate the absorption routs of different end products of digestion
cardiovascular diseases)
(hint: lacteals, capillaries)
5.3. Breathing system
Group enzymes of the digestive system based on their roles and pH
5.4. The excretory system
Demonstrate the structure of the heart using a heart model/ diagram
5.5. The immune system
Differentiate between pulmonary and systemic circulations.
5.6. Renowned Physicians
Compare and contrast arteries and veins based on their structures and
in Ethiopia
functions
Debate on the importance of blood donation and its health implications
on the donors and recipients.
Discuss the key functions and components of the lymphatic system.
Define the immune system
Discuss the types of immunity (innate and acquired).
Relate the lymphatic system with the immune system
Discuss the diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems (leukemia,
varicose vein, elephantiasis, cardiovascular diseases)
Draw and label the human breathing and excretory systems
Show the link between the human breathing system and the circulatory
system
Demonstrate the mechanism of breathing using locally available
materials
Design a model of one of the systems (excretory, circulatory, digestive
systems) using locally available materials
Examine the effects of smoking and cannabis on the normal functioning
of the breathing systems.
94
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.1 The Digestive System
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discuss the structure and function of the digestive system (alimentary canal and accessory
organs),
classify the types of digestion along the alimentary canal,
list the end products of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats after complete digestion,
express the site of absorption of digested food, minerals, vitamins, and water,
explore structural adaptations of the small intestine for the absorption,
differentiate the absorption routs of different end products of digestion (hint: lacteals,
capillaries), and
group enzymes of the digestive system based on their roles and pH.
Activity 5.1 THINK-PAIR-
What do you know about the digestive system?
SHARE
In your previous grades,
All living organisms need nutrients to survive, plants can obtain
you have studied about the
nutrients from their roots and the energy molecules required for
digestive system of human
cellular function through the process of photosynthesis. Animals,
beings. Now, be in groups
of 2-3 students on the same
however, obtain their nutrients through the consumption of other
desk and discuss what you
organisms. At the cellular level, the biological molecules necessary
know about the digestive
for animal function are amino acids, lipid molecules, nucleotides,
system and the process that
and simple sugars. However, the food consumed consists of protein,
takes place beginning from
fat, and complex carbohydrates. Animals must convert these
the mouth to the anus and
macromolecules into the simple molecules required for maintaining
let one of you share it to the
whole class.
cellular function. The conversion of the food consumed to the
nutrients required is a multi-step process involving digestion and
absorption. During digestion, food particles are broken down into
smaller components, which are later absorbed by the body. This
happens by both physical means, such as chewing and by chemical
means, via enzyme-catalysed reactions. These processes take place in
the human digestive system step-wise.
The human digestive system is composed of four digestive processes:
1. Ingestion - the taking in of nutrients, in the mouth,
What are the components
and processes of the
2. Digestion - the breakdown of complex organic molecules into
digestive system?
smaller components by enzymes step-wise, physical, and chemical
processes that begins in the oral cavity and extends to the small
intestine,
3. Absorption - the transport of digested nutrients from the small
intestine to the cells of the body though finger like projection called
villi in the small intestine, and
Grade 10 Biology
95
Unit 5: Human Biology
4. Egesting - the removal of food waste from the body. The distinction
between excretion and egestion is based on the type of wastes excreted
by an organism. Undigested food that remains after digestion is
expelled in animals during the egestion process. Excretion is the
process through which metabolic wastes are expelled in both plants
and animals.
The digestive tract of adult humans is normally 6.5 m to 9m long. It
stores and breaks down organic molecules into simpler components.
Physical (mechanical) digestion begins in the mouth, where food
is chewed and formed a bolus (the Greek word for the ball) by the
tongue. Physical digestion breaks food into smaller pieces, increasing
the surface area for chemical digestion.
Activity 5.2 Group work
Where in the alimentary canal does the chemical digestion
begin?
Form a group of 3-4 students
and:
The chemical digestion of carbohydrate (starch) starts in the oral
1. discuss the structure and
cavity by an enzyme called salivary amylase or ptyalin. The food is
functions of the digestive
then swallowed and enters the esophagus a long tube that connects
system;
the mouth to the stomach. Using peristalsis, wave-like smooth-
2. draw, label and study the
muscle contractions, the muscles of the esophagus push the food
route of the alimentary
toward the stomach. The stomach contents are extremely acidic, with
canal and the types of
digestion (mechanical
a pH between 1.5 and 2.5. This acidity kills micro-organisms, breaks
and chemical) along the
down food tissues, and activates digestive enzymes. The chemical
alimentary canal;
digestion of protein starts in the stomach by the enzyme pepsin.
3. discuss digestion end
Further breakdown of food takes place in the small intestine where
products; and
bile is produced by the liver, and enzymes produced by the small
4. support your activity
intestine and the pancreas, continue the process of digestion. The
using virtual lab (digestive
smaller molecules are absorbed into the bloodstream through the
system animation)
using Internet and other
epithelial cells lining the walls of the small intestine. The waste
resources.
material travels onto the large intestine where water is absorbed and
the drier waste material is compacted into feces; it is stored in the
rectum until it is excreted through the anus.
The Oral Cavity
What is the process of digestion that takes place in the mouth?
In the oral cavity, both physical and chemical digestion begins. It is
the point of entry (ingestion) of food into the digestive system. The
process that takes place in the mouth includes the following.
If one ingests glucose
1. The food is broken into smaller particles by mastication, the
where will it be digested?
chewing action of the teeth.
2. Saliva, the watery fluid produced by the salivary glands contains
96
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
amylase enzyme, and breaks down starches into simpler molecules.
Activity 5.3 Individual
work
3. Saliva dissolves food particles and makes it possible to taste what is
being eaten.
Dry your tongue and
distribute a small amount of
4. Saliva lubricates the food so that it can be swallowed.
salt on it to dissolve in saliva.
5. We detect the flavour when food particles dissolved in saliva
What do you feel? Have you
detected any test? Why?
penetrate the cells of the taste buds located on the tongue and
cheeks.
6. The tongue, positions and mixes food and forms a ball of food
called bolus ready to be swallowed.
The teeth
-
What is the importance of teeth in digestion? Can you mention
the different types of teeth?
The teeth are important structures for physical digestion (Figure 5.1).
There are 4 types of teeth:
Activity 5.4 Group work
In group of 2-3 students,
Incisors: are eight chisel-shaped teeth at the front of your mouth
answer the following
specialized for cutting.
questions.
Canine: teeth that are sharp, dagger-shaped specialized for tearing.
Draw and label parts of a
single teeth.
Premolar: teeth that are broad flattened specialized for grinding.
Classify your teeth
Molars: teeth tend to be even broader and have cusps that are even
according to their
functions.
more flattened. They are designed for crushing and grinding food.
The last set of molars is the wisdom teeth, so-called because they
What are the reasons for
usually do not emerge until we reach about 16 to 20 years of age. Each
the teeth decay?
tooth is covered with enamel, which is the hardest substance in the
human body.
Enamel
Lips
Gingiva (gums)
Dentin
Hard palate
Pulp
FOODS
Crown
Soft palate
Gums
Uvula
Palatine tonsil
Papillae of tongue
Bone
Molars
Root
Premolar
Root
Canal
Canine
Tongue
Nerves and
blood vessels
Incisor
A. Types of teeth
B. The Structure of Teeth
Figure 5.1 The structure and types of teeth
Grade 10 Biology
97
Unit 5: Human Biology
External and internal structures of teeth
The teeth are the hardest substances in the human body. Besides
being essential for chewing, the teeth play an important role in
speech. Parts of the teeth include:
Enamel: the hardest, white outer part of the tooth. Enamel is mostly
made of calcium phosphate, a rock-hard mineral.
Dentin: a layer underlying the enamel. It is a hard tissue that contains
microscopic tubes. When the enamel is damaged, heat or cold can
enter the tooth through these paths and cause sensitivity or pain.
Pulp: the softer, living inner structure of teeth. Blood vessels and
nerves run through the pulp of the teeth.
Periodontal ligament- tissue that helps to hold the teeth tightly
against the jaw.
Roots- is the part of the tooth that extends into the bone and holds
the tooth in place. It makes up approximately two-thirds of the tooth
Gums. Gums, also called gingiva, are the fleshy, pink connective
tissue that's attached to the neck of the tooth and the cementum.
Crown: the crown of a tooth is the top portion of the tooth that is
visible.
Human dentition
The conventional way of expressing the total number of teeth in the
human beings are represented: incisor(I), canines(C), molars(M)
and premolars(P). It gives a set like I:C:P:M. For example, if it is
given 2:1:2:3 for upper teeth then, it indicates 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2
premolars and 3 molars of the upper mouth on one side. Include the
dental formula
The dental formula of human beings (adults):
(2123 / 2123) X 2 = 32 (2123 / 2123) X 2 = 32
There are 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2 premolars and 3 molars. In adults,
dentition pertains to all types of teeth development. In a normal
adult there are 32 teeth. There are two types of dentition: temporary
and permanent. There are 20 teeth in the temporary dentition and
32 teeth in the permanent dentition. In a child, there are 20 teeth
present which are called milk teeth or deciduous teeth. These teeth
grow at the age of 6 years.
i.e. (2102 / 2102) X 2 = 20 (2102 / 2102) X 2 = 20. These are two
incisors, 1 canine and 2 molars.
In order to represent the total number of the teeth in the jaw or
98
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
mouth, the whole formula is multiplied by two as the formula for one
side of the mouth. Both monkeys and human beings have the same
set of teeth and the same dental formula.
Keeping teeth health
Adult teeth should last you all through your life. However, this
doesn't always happen, because your teeth can be affected by bacteria
What are the
recommended measures
that cause dental caries. There are many different bacteria that are
for healthy tools
found naturally in your mouth. These bacteria, combined with
development?
food and saliva, form a thin film known as plaque on your teeth. If
these bacteria are given a sugar-rich diet (in other words, if you eat
a lot of sweet, sugary food) they produce a lot of acid waste. This
acid attacks and dissolves the tough enamel coating of your teeth.
Once through the enamel, the acid also dissolves away some of the
dentine and then the bacteria can get into the inside of your tooth.
The bacteria will then reproduce and feed, eating away at your tooth
until they reach the nerves of the pulp cavity causing toothache. The
same bacteria can affect your gums, causing periodontal disease.
The symptoms include tender gums, bleeding when you clean your
teeth and eventually the possible loss of all your teeth, not from tooth
decay but from gum disease. Taking in lots of acidic food and drink,
such as fruits and cola, can also weaken the enamel on your teeth.
This is particularly the case if you clean your teeth straight after an
acidic drink such as fruit juice or cola, when the softening effect on
the enamel is strongest and brushing your teeth can actually wear the
enamel away.
Tooth and gum disease are extremely common all over the world.
They cause pain, bad breath, loss of teeth and difficulty eating. The
good news is that they can both be avoided, especially if you have
good dental care available. Ways to avoid tooth decay include:
Regular brushing of your teeth and gums twice a day. This removes
the plaque from the teeth, preventing the build-up of a sticky,
acidic film over the enamel.
Avoiding sweet, sugary foods - if the bacteria in your teeth are
deprived of sugar, they cannot make acidic waste and your teeth
are safe.
Have regular dental check-ups. A dentist can clean your teeth
more thoroughly than you can, and any early signs of decay can be
treated. Your teeth won't heal themselves, but any tooth decay can
be removed and replaced by a filling.
The Esophagus
The swallowed food travels from the mouth to the stomach by way of
the esophagus. The bolus of food stretches the walls of the esophagus,
Grade 10 Biology
99
Unit 5: Human Biology
activating muscles that set up waves of rhythmic contractions called
peristalsis. Peristaltic contractions, which are involuntary, move food
Food mass muscle muscle
(Bollus) contracted relaxed
along the gastrointestinal tract (Figure 5. 2). Peristaltic action will
move food or fluid from the esophagus to the stomach. Look at the
process of peristalsis in figure 5.2.
Activity 5.5 Answer to the questions
After studying the digestive system in the mouth, answer the
following questions:
1. Discuss the structure and function of the teeth.
2. What are the functions of saliva?
3. How does chewing assist in the digestion of food?
4. What are amylase enzymes, and why are they necessary?
Figure 5.2 Rhythmic
5. How is food moved along the esophagus?
contractions of muscle move
food along the digestive tract
The stomach
The stomach is the site of food storage and initial protein digestion.
What are the processes of
The stomach contains three layers of muscle, which run in different
digestion that take place
directions so that the muscle contractions can churn the food (Figure
in the stomach?
5.3 (a)). The movement of food to and from the stomach is regulated
by circular muscles called sphincters. Sphincters act like the draw
strings on a bag. Contraction of the lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) closes the opening to the stomach, while its relaxation allows
food to enter. The lower esophageal sphincter prevents food and acid
from being regurgitated up into the esophagus. A second sphincter,
the pyloric sphincter, regulates the movement of food and stomach
acids into the small intestine (Figure 5.3(b)).
A
B
esophagus
Esophageal
sphincter
stomach
muscle layer
Pyloric
Sphincter
duodenum
Figure 5.3 a) Muscle is responsible for the contractions of the stomach
b) Sphincters regulate the movement of food.
The J-shaped stomach has numerous ridges that allow it to expand so
that it can store about1.5L of food. Millions of cells line the inner wall
of the stomach.
100
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Activities in the stomach:
1. the cells secrete the various stomach fluids, called gastric fluids or
gastric juice, that aid digestion;
2. contractions of the stomach mix the food with the gastric fluids;
and
3. it is involved in both physical (churning action if stomach wall) and
chemical digestion( (e.g. digestion of proteins by the action of enzyme
pepsin).
Approximately 500mL of the fluids in the stomach are produced
following a large meal.
What is the composition
of gastric juice?
Gastric fluid includes: (1)mucus, (2)hydrochloric acid (Hydrochloric
acid (HCI)), (4) pepsinogens, and other substances.
Hydrochloric acid kills many harmful substances that are ingested with
food. It also converts pepsinogen into its active form, pepsin, which is a
protein-digesting enzyme. Pepsin breaks the long amino acid chains in
proteins into shorter chains, called polypeptides.
The pH inside the stomach normally ranges between 2.0 and 3.0 but
may approach pH 1.0. Acids with a pH of 2.0 can dissolve fibres in a
rug. It is the high acidity of hydrochloric acid that makes it effective
at killing pathogens and allows pepsin to do its work.
How does the stomach safely store these strong chemicals, both
of which dissolve the proteins that makeup cells?
A layer of alkaline mucus protects the stomach lining from being
digested. Pepsinogen passes across the cell membrane and is
activated by Hydrochloric acid (HCl) to become pepsin. The pepsin
breaks down the proteins in the food, but not the proteins of the
stomach's cells because these proteins are protected by the mucous
layer. The esophagus does not have a protective mucous layer, so if the
lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is weak, stomach acid may enter the
esophagus and damage its lining. This causes pain known as heartburn.
The partially digested food and gastric juice mixture are called chyme.
Gastric emptying occurs within two to six hours after a meal. Only a
small amount of chyme is released into the small intestine at a time.
The movement of chyme from the stomach into the small intestine
is regulated by hormones, stomach distension, and muscular reflexes
that influence the pyloric sphincter. The low pH of the stomach will
denature the amylase and lipase that were secreted in the mouth.
What do we call the
Therefore, over time, the chemical digestion of starches and fats will
partially digested food in
decrease in the stomach and their further digestion will take place in
the stomach?
the small intestine.
Grade 10 Biology
101
Unit 5: Human Biology
Absorption in the stomach
What is the reason for the
release of small amount
Although the stomach absorbs few of the products of digestion, it can
of chyme in to the small
absorb many other substances, including glucose and other simple
intestine at a time?
sugars, amino acids, and some fat soluble substances, water, specific
vitamins, and alcohol, etc.
The small intestine
The small intestine is up to 7 m in length, but only 2.5 cm in diameter
(Figure 5.4a). Most chemical digestion takes place in the small intestine.
Parts of the small intestine:
1. duodenum the first 25 cm to 30 cm of the small intestine where
the majority of digestion occurs,
2. jejunum is the second component of the small intestine and
3. ileum the third component
The small intestine secretes digestive enzymes and moves its contents
along by peristalsis. The stomach absorbs some water, specific
vitamins, some medicines, and alcohol, but most absorption takes
place within the small intestine. Long finger like projections called
villi (singular: villus) greatly increase the surface area of the small
intestine (Figure 5.4(b)). One estimate suggests that villi account for
a tenfold increase in surface area for absorption. The cells that make
up the lining of each villus have microvilli, which are fine, threadlike
extensions of the membrane that further increase the surface for
absorption.
Mouth
Tongue
Teeth
Pharynx
Salivary
glands
Esophagus
Villus
sperosa
Muscle layers
Submucosa
Liver
Stomach
Gallbladder
Pancreas
mu coosa
villi
Small
Large
intestine
intestine
Duodenum
Transverse
colon
Jejunum
Ascending
artery
ileum
colon
Descending
vein
colon
WW
Cecum
Appendix
Rectum
Anus
A
B
Figure 5.4 Parts of the digestive system and the absorption villi
102
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Each villus is supplied with a capillary network that intertwines with
lymph vessels called lacteals that transport materials. Some nutrients
thin
are absorbed by diffusion, but some nutrients are actively transported
surface layer
lactial
from the digestive tract. Monosaccharides and amino acids are
absorbed into the capillary networks; fats are absorbed into the
capillaries
lacteals(Figure 5.5).
blood vessel
Activity 5.6 Group work
Figure 5.5Anatomy of a villus,
In a group of 2-3 students, discuss:
with the lacteal
1. the sites of absorption of digested foods, minerals, vitamins,
water;
2. the structural adaptation of the small intestine (villi with
lacteals and capillaries) for absorption.
3. the causes of poor absorption;
Then, present your work to the class.
Finally, your teacher will summarize the sites of absorption;
adaptations of the small intestine for absorption and the roles of
lacteals and capillaries.
The accessory organs
The organs discussed above are the organs of the digestive tract
through which food passes. Accessory organs add secretions and
enzymes that break down food into nutrients. Accessory organs
What are accessory
organs?
include:
the salivary glands,
the pancreas,
the liver, and
the gall bladder.
The secretions of the pancreas, liver, and gallbladder are regulated
by hormones in response to food consumption. The liver is the
largest internal organ in humans and it plays an important role in
the digestion of fats and detoxifying blood. The liver produces bile,
which is a digestive juice that is required for the breakdown of fats in
the duodenum. The liver also processes the absorbed vitamins and
fatty acids and synthesizes many plasma proteins. The gallbladder is
a small organ that aids the liver by storing bile and concentrating bile
salts. The pancreas secretes bicarbonate that neutralizes the acidic
chyme and a variety of enzymes (trypsin, amylase, and lipase) for
the digestion of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, respectively. The
details of the accessory organs are presented in the next sections.
Grade 10 Biology
103
Unit 5: Human Biology
Pancreas
Activity 5.7 Discussion
The pancreatic secretions contain enzymes that promote the
As you already know, food
breakdown of the three major components of food: proteins,
moves from the stomach to
carbohydrates, and lipids. Pancreatic secretions contain the following
the small intestine. Partially
digestive enzymes:
digested food reaches the
small intestine already
Trypsin- a protein-digesting enzyme called trypsinogen is released
soaked in HCl and pepsin.
from the pancreas. Once trypsinogen reaches the small intestine, an
How are the cells of the
enzyme called enterokinase converts the inactive trypsinogen into
small intestine protected
trypsin, which acts on the partially digested proteins. Trypsin breaks
from the effects of HCl and
pepsin? Discuss this issue
down long-chain polypeptides into shorter-chain peptides.
with your classmates after
Erepsins- are released from the pancreas and small intestine. They
collecting information from
complete protein digestion by breaking the bonds between short-
the internet or books.
chain peptides, releasing individual amino acids.
Amylase- continue the digestion of carbohydrates that begun in the
mouth by salivary amylase. The intermediate-size chains are broken
down into disaccharides. The small intestine releases disaccharide
enzymes, called disaccharidases, which complete the digestion of
carbohydrates
Lipases-enzymes released from the pancreas that breaks down lipids
(fats). There are two different types of lipid-digesting enzymes:
Pancreatic lipase, the most common lipase, breaks down fats into
fatty acids and glycerol.
Phospholipase acts on phospholipids.
The summary of the enzymes found in the small intestine, where
they are produced, and their actions that take place are given in Table
5.1 below.
Table 5.1 Digestion in the Small Intestine
Enzyme
Produced by
Reaction
lipase
pancreas
fat droplets + H2O
glycerol + fatty
acids
trypsin
pancreas
protein + H2O
peptides
erepsin
pancreas, small intestine
peptides + H2O
amino acids
pancreatic amylases
pancreas
starch + H2O
maltose
maltase
small intestine
maltose + H2O
glucose
Liver and Gallbladder
The liver continually produces fluid called bile. Bile contains bile
What is the importance of
salts, which aid fat digestion. When the stomach is empty, bile is stored
liver?
and concentrated in the gallbladder. When there are fats in the small
intestine, the hormones trigger the gall bladder to release bile salts.
104
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Once inside the small intestine, the bile salts:
Why liver is said to
Emulsify or breakdown, large fat globules. The breakdown of fat globules
be unusual organ
into smaller droplets is physical digestion, not chemical digestion
with regard to blood
since chemical bonds are not broken. Physical digestion prepares the
circulation?
fat for chemical digestion by increasing the exposed surface area on
which fat-digesting enzymes, such as pancreatic lipase, can work.
Bile also contains pigments. The liver breaks down haemoglobin from
red blood cells and stores the products in the gallbladder for removal.
The characteristic brown colour of feces results from haemoglobin
breakdown.
Stores glycogen and vitamins A, B12, and D.
Detoxify many harmful substances in the body. Harmful chemicals
are made soluble and can be dissolved in the blood and eliminated in
the urine. One of the more common poisons is alcohol.
Large Intestine
The human large intestine is much smaller in length compared to the
Activity 5.8 Library/
small intestine but larger in diameter. It has three parts: the cecum,
Internet search
the colon, and the rectum. The cecum joins the ileum to the colon
Conduct library/internet
and is the receiving pouch for the waste matter. The colon is home
search on groups of enzymes
to many bacteria or intestinal flora that aid in the digestive processes.
associated with digestion
The colon has four regions, the ascending colon, the transverse
of different food staffs, the
colon, the descending colon and the sigmoid colon (Figure 5.4a).
sites of their action and the
The main functions of the colon are to extract the water and mineral
required environment (pH)
for each group. Finally,
salts from undigested food, and to store waste material.
present your findings to the
Chemical digestion is complete by the time food reaches the large
class for discussion.
intestine (Figure 5.4a). The colon, the largest part of the large intestine,
must store waste long enough to reabsorb water from it. During this
time, some inorganic salts, minerals, and vitamins are also absorbed
with the water.
The large intestine houses bacteria, such as Escherichia coli
(E. coli), which are essential to life and use waste materials to
synthesize vitamins B and K. Cellulose, the long-chain carbohydrate
characteristic of plant cell walls, reaches the large intestine undigested.
Although cellulose cannot be broken down by humans, it serves
an important function: cellulose provides bulk. As wastes build up
in the large intestine, receptors in the wall of the intestine provide
information to the central nervous system, which, in turn, prompts
a bowel movement. The bowel movement ensures the removal of
potentially toxic wastes from the body. Individuals who do not eat
sufficient amounts of cellulose (roughage or fiber) have fewer bowel
movements. This means that wastes and toxins remain in their bodies
for longer periods. Scientists have determined that cancer of the colon
Grade 10 Biology
105
Unit 5: Human Biology
can be related to diet. Individuals who eat mostly processed, highly
refined foods are more likely to develop cancer of the colon.
List the fibre rich foods
that are commonly found
The rectum (Figure 5.4a) stores feces until defecation. The feces are
in you locality.
propelled using peristaltic movements during elimination. The anus
is an opening at the far-end of the digestive tract and is the exit point
for the waste material. Two sphincters regulate the exit of feces, the
inner sphincter is involuntary and the outer sphincter is voluntary.
Table 5.2 Summary of digestion in human alimentary canal
Region of gut
Glands and
Enzymes and opti- Food digested, products and other activity
secretion
mum pH
Mouth: mastica-
Salivary glands
1. pH-7, slightly
1.mucin lubricates food bolus
tion by jaws and
:saliva 1-2
acid in adults,
.(A) arch(amylase)
dextrins
tongue
liters/daily
slightly alkali to
(B) cooked starch
maltose
neutral in children
2. amylase
Oesophagus
None
None
Food bolus moves by peristalsis
Stomach churn-
Gastric gland,
1. pH 1, strongly
1. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) is bacteriocidal
ing action. Tem-
stomach
acidic
2. clots milk protein-caesin
porary storage 1
wall-gastric
2. rennin (in young
3. lipids---fatty acids and glycerine
to3 hrs
juice
children)
4. proteins-amino acids
2-4L; stores
3. lipase(in young
Absorption: water, salts, vitamins and ethanol
daily
children)
4. pepsin
Duodenum(Ac-
1.liver- bile
1. pH 7-8, slightly
1. alters pH of stomach contents
cessory organ
juice, 700CM3-
alkaline
2. bile salts emulsify or cream lipids
secretions)
1.2 litres daily
2. no enzyme
2 pancre-
1. pH 7-8,slightly
1. .food as chime propelled by peristalsis
as-pancreatic
alkaline
2. starch(amylase)
maltose
juices, 700Cm3
2. amylase
3. lipids
fatty acids and glycerol
daily
3. lipase
4. peptones
short peptides
4. Trypsin
5. nucleic acids nucleotides
5.nuclease
Small intestine
Glands in
1. pH 7-8
1
and duodenum
intestine and
2. entrokinase
2. dipeptides, peptides
amino acids
duodenum
changes trypsino-
3. lipids---fatty acids and glycerol (propanetriol)
wall-intestinal
gen into trypsin
4. maltase maltose into glucose molecules
juice, 200cm3
3.lipase
Lactase
lactose into glucose and galactose
4.glycosi-
Sucrose sucrose into glucose and fructose
dases-maltase,
Absorption: large surface area, villi, and mi-
lactase, sucrase
crovilli, main region of absorption of vitamins,
minerals, amino acids, glucose, fatty acids and
glycerol
Large intestine
Lining with
pH 6-8
1. mucous lubricates faces
mucous glands
no enzymes
2. water absorbed from faces
3. bacteria synthesis vitamin B groups
4. faces mainly water 75%, bacteria, 8%, lipids,
6%, dietary fiber cellulose, 2% etc
106
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.2 The circulatory and lymphatic system
Objectives
What do you know about
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
the movement of blood in
Demonstrate the structure of the heart using a heart model/
your body?
diagram
Differentiate between pulmonary and systemic circulations.
Compare and contrast arteries and veins based on their
structures and functions
Discuss types of blood
Debate on the importance of blood donation and its health
implications on the donors and recipients.
Discuss the key functions and components of the lymphatic
system.
The circulatory system is a means by which blood moves throughout
your body. The circulatory system:
carries nutrients to cells,
remove wastes away from cells,
carry chemical messages from cells in one part of the body to
distant target tissues,
distributes heat throughout the body and, along with the kidneys,
maintain levels of body fluid,
provide oxygen for the cellular respiration and
transport of immune cells throughout the body to defend against
invading organisms
Moreover, your circulatory system has 96 000 km of blood vessels to
sustain your 100 trillion cells. Your heart is about the size of your fist
and with a mass of about 300g. The heart beats about 70 times/min
from the beginning of your life until death. Every minute, 5L of blood
cycles from the heart to the lungs, picks up oxygen, and returns to
the heart. The structure of the heart and the activities of its parts are
given in the figure (Figure5.6).
Activity 5.9 Group work
In groups of 4-6 students,
Have you ever heard about a live pump?
prepare diagrams /models
of the heart and study each
part with its functions and
In this section, you will explore the remarkable live pump - the heart
present for the whole-class.
that propels the blood into the vessels. There is no single better word
to describe the function of the heart other than "pump" since its
Grade 10 Biology
107
Unit 5: Human Biology
contraction develops the pressure that ejects blood into the major
vessels: the aorta and pulmonary trunk. From these vessels, the
What are the chambers of
the heart?
blood is distributed to the other parts of the body. A field of study
about the heart is called cardiology and the scientists, cardiologists.
Posterior
3
Description
Tricuspid valve
Bicuspid (mitral)
4
valve
1. Right atrium (Atrium
5
dextra)
2. Left atrium (Atrium
2
sinistrum)
1
3. Superior Vena Cave
(Venea cava Superior)
4. Aorta
Right
Left
5. Pulmonary artery
side of
side of
6
6. Pulmonary vein
heart
heart
13
7
7. Bicuspide (Mitral) valve
8
8. Semilunar (Aortic) valve
12
9. Left ventricle
10. Right ventricle
11. Inferior Vena Cave
10
9
(Venea cava Inferior)
Aortic valve
11
12. Tricuspid valve
Pulmonary valve
13. Semilunar (Pulmonary)
valve
Anterior
Figure 5.7 The valves of the heart
Figure 5.6 The heart anatomy
The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood to circulate
throughout the body. The heart wall consists of three layers: the
endocardium, myocardium, and epicardium.
The endocardium is the thin membrane that lines the interior of the
heart,
The myocardium is the middle layer of the heart. It is the heart
muscle and is the thickest layer of the heart, and
The epicardium is a thin layer on the surface of the heart in which
the coronary arteries lie.
The pericardium is a thin sac the heart sits in, often filled with a small
amount of fluid, which separates the heart from the other structures
in the chest such as the lungs.
Activity 5.10 Group discussion
In group of 2-3 students:
1.
Discuss the 4 chambers of the heart.
2.
Explain the process of movement of blood though the
chambers.
3.
Which chamber is the strongest?
4.
Which chamber carries deoxygenated blood?
What types of valves are there between the heart chambers?
108
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Valves
Attention
In the cardiovascular system of the heart four valves prohibit the
backflow of blood:
The heart consists of two
a. Tri-cuspid valve (Right atrioventricular RAV) - valve separates the
(right & left) parallel
pumps separated by the
rightatria from the rightventricle.
septum (Figure 5.6). The
b. Bi-cuspid valve (Left atrioventricular LAV) -valve separates
four-chambered human
the left atria from the left ventricle
heart is composed of two
thin-walled atria (singular:
Semi-lunar valves
atrium) and two thick-
walled ventricles. Blood
a. Valve that separate the right ventricle from the pulmonary artery
from the systemic system
and
enters the right atrium, and
blood from the pulmonary
b. Valve that separate the left ventricle from the aorta. The semi-lunar
system enters the left atrium.
valves are half-moon-shaped (hence, the name semi-lunar), and
The stronger and more
they prevent blood that has entered the arteries from flowing
muscular ventricles pump
back into the ventricles (Figure 5.6).
the blood to the lungs and
distant tissues.
Laboratory Activity 5.11: Dissection of mammalian heart (cow or sheep)
The human heart is a pump. It pumps blood around the body at different speeds and at
different pressures according to the body's needs. It can do this because the wall of the
heart is made from cardiac muscle. Cardiac muscles are unlike any other muscle. It never
gets fatigued like skeletal muscles. On average, cardiac muscle fibres contract and relax about 70
times a minute. In a lifetime, this muscle will contract over two billion times. The objective of
this activity, therefore, is to study the external and internal structure of this amazing mammalian
heart.
Procedures:
1. Collect a freshly slaughtered sheep or cow heart from the butcheries
2. Carefully handle and observe:
the external structures (the outlets and inlets of the pulmonary artery and pulmonary veins),
the inlets (superior and inferior vena cava), and
the epicardium.
3. Using a dissecting knife carefully cut open the heart vertically and observe the following
structures:
the right and left ventricles,
the septum,
the tricuspid and bicuspid valves and
the semi-lunar valves.
Answer the following questions
1. What do you deduce from your study of the structure of the mammalian heart structure?
2. Now, can you associate what you have studied in the classroom with your practical activity in
the laboratory?
3. Write a short report on your activity in the laboratory.
Grade 10 Biology
109
Unit 5: Human Biology
Activity 5.12 THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
What are the two types of blood circulation?
Recall what you have studied
about the 4 chambers of
The human circulatory systems are a double circulatory system. It
the heart and movement
has two separate circuits and blood passes through the heart twice:
of blood. Then, share ideas
pulmonary and systemic circulation.
about the movement of
blood in our body. Finally,
Pulmonary circulation - the movement of blood from the heart
your teacher will help you
to the lungs for oxygenation, then back to the heart again. Oxygen-
to classify the two types of
depleted blood from the body leaves the systemic circulation when
circulations. Try to support
your activity using virtual
it enters the right atrium through the superior and inferior venae
lab (circulatory system
cavae. The blood is then pumped through the tricuspid valve into the
animation, video).
right ventricle. From the right ventricle, blood is pumped through
the pulmonary valve and into the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary
artery splits into the right and left pulmonary arteries and the blood in
the arteries travel to each lung (Figure 5.8).
Lungs
Pulmonary
circulation
Pulmonary
artery
Pulmonary vein
Vena cava
Aorta
Upper
body
Liver
Vessels transporting
Hepatic
oxygenated blood
vein
Hepatic artery
Vessels transporting
Systemic
circulation
Hepatic
deoxygenated blood
portal vein
Vessels involved in gas
Stomach,
excange
intestines
Renal
vein
Renal artery
Kidneys
Lower body
Figure 5.8 Pulmonary and
systemic circulation
Systemic circulation - is the movement of blood from the heart
through the body to provide oxygen and nutrients to the tissues
of the body while bringing deoxygenated blood back to the heart.
Oxygenated blood enters the left atrium from the pulmonary veins
(Figure 5.8). The blood is then pumped through the mitral valve into
the left ventricle. From the left ventricle, blood is pumped through
the aortic valve and into the aorta, the body's largest artery. The
aorta arches and branches into major arteries to the upper body
before passing through the diaphragm, where it branches further
into the iliac, renal, and suprarenal arteries which supply the lower
parts of the body.
110
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
The arteries branch into smaller arteries, arterioles, and finally
capillaries. Gas and nutrient exchange with the tissues occurs within
the capillaries that run through the tissues. Metabolic waste and
carbon dioxide diffuse out of the cell into the blood, while oxygen
and glucose in the blood diffuse out of the blood and into the cell.
Systemic circulation keeps the metabolism of every organ and every
tissue in the body alive, except the parenchyma of the lungs, which
are supplied by pulmonary circulation.
Activity 5.13 Pulse rate
Walking or mild exercise will increase your heart rate by 20 to 30%. For those in good health,
increased energy demands during extreme exercise can raise the heart rate to an incredible 200
beats per minute. Although few individuals can sustain such a rapid heart rate, it indicates the
capacity of the heart to adjust to changing situations.
1. While sitting still, place your index and middle finger near your wrist. The pulse you feel is
blood rushing through the brachial artery in your arm. Count the number of heartbeats in 30 S.
Record your pulse at rest and then calculate the heart rate as beats per min.
2. Remain sitting quietly and place your index finger and middle finger on the side of your neck
just to the side of your trachea. You will feel blood pulse through the carotid artery, which is an
artery that carries blood to the head. Take your pulse for 30 S and then calculate the heart rate
for 1 min.
3. Run on the spot for approximately 2 min.
4. Take your pulse immediately after exercise using either the carotid artery or the brachial artery.
5. Record your heart rate.
a. Compare the strength of the pulse in the carotid artery with that in your arm.
b. Compare your heart rate before and after exercise.
c. Do you think the difference between resting heart rate and the heart rate after exercise would
be greater for athletes? Explain your answer.
Cardiac Cycle
The period of time that begins with contraction of the atria and ends
with ventricular relaxation is known as the cardiac cycle. The period
of contraction that the heart undergoes while it pumps blood into
circulation is called systole. The period of relaxation that occurs as
the chambers filled with blood is called diastole. Both the atria and
ventricles undergo systole and diastole, and it is essential that these
components be carefully regulated and coordinated to ensure blood
is pumped efficiently to the body.
Grade 10 Biology
111
Unit 5: Human Biology
Heart Sounds
One of the simplest, yet effective, diagnostic techniques applied to
assess the state of a patient's heart is auscultation (listening to various
internal sounds) using a stethoscope. In a normal, healthy heart,
there are only two audible heart sounds: Lub and Dup (or Dub).
Lub, or rest heart sound is the sound created by the closing of the
atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction. The second
heart sound, "Dup" (or "Dub") is the sound of the closing of the
semilunar valves during ventricular diastole.
The term murmur is used to describe an unusual sound coming from
the heart that is caused by the turbulent flow of blood. Murmurs are
graded on a scale of 1 to 6, with 1 being the most common, the most
difficult sound to detect, and the least serious. The most severe is a
scale of 6. Specialized electronic stethoscopes are used to record both
normal and abnormal sounds.
When using a stethoscope to listen to the heart sounds, called
asculation, it is common practice for the clinician to ask the patient
to breathe deeply. This procedure not only allows for listening to air
flow, but it may also amplify heart murmurs. Inhalation increases
blood flow into the right side of the heart and may increase the
amplitude of right-sided heart murmurs. Expiration partially restricts
blood flow into the left side of the heart and may amplify left-sided
heart murmurs.
Activity 5.14 Heart sound
Medical workers use stethoscopes to measure blood pressure and to listen
to the heart, lungs, and intestines. You will use a stethoscope to listen to
your heart. Disinfect the earpieces of the stethoscope with rubbing
alcohol before and after use.
i. Place a stethoscope on your own chest and listen for a heart
sound. Locate the area where the heart sounds are loudest and
clearest.
ii. After 1 min of moderate exercise (e.g., walking on the spot), listen
for your heart sounds again.
a)
Drawa diagram of a chest showing where you located the clearest
sound.
b) Did the sound of your heart beat change after exercise? Describe
what differences you heard.
Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is the force of the blood on the walls of the
arteries. It can be measured indirectly with an instrument called a
112
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
sphygmomanometer. A cuff with an air bladder is wrapped around
the arm. A small pump is used to inflate the air bladder, thereby closing
off blood flow through the brachial artery, one of the major arteries
of the arm. A stethoscope is placed below the cuff and air is slowly
released from the bladder until a low-pitched sound can be detected.
The sound is caused by blood entering the previously closed artery.
Each time the heart contracts, the sound are heard. A gauge on the
sphygmomanometer measures the pressure exerted by the blood
What are the major foods
during ventricular contraction. This pressure is called systolic blood
which lead to high blood
pressure. Normal systolic blood pressure is less than 120 mmHg.
pressure (hypertension)?
Blood pressure is measured in the non-SI units of millimeters of
mercury, or mmHg. The cuff is then deflated even more, until the
Do you have any idea
about the lines of
sound disappears. At this point, blood flows into the artery during
movement of blood in the
ventricular relaxation, or filling. This pressure is called diastolic blood
body?
pressure. Normal diastolic blood pressure is less than 80 mmHg. A
systolic pressure of 120 mmHg and a diastolic pressure of 80 mmHg
would be reported as 120/80 (120 over 80). Reduced filling, such as
that caused by an internal hemorrhage, will cause diastolic blood
pressure to fall.
Blood Vessels
Blood vessels are the channels or conduits through which blood
Activity 5.15 Compare and
is distributed to body tissues. The vessels make up two closed
contrast
systems of tubes that begin and end at the heart. One system,
In a pair, compare and
the pulmonary vessels, transports blood from the right ventricle to
contrast arteries, veins and
the lungs and back to the left atrium. The other system, the systemic
capillaries based on their
vessels, carries blood from the left ventricle to the tissues in all parts
structures and functions by
of the body and then returns the blood to the right atrium. Based
using diagrams and models,
on their structure and function, blood vessels are classified as
and then prepare your own
summarized notes.
arteries, capillaries, and veins.
In small groups, answer the following questions.
What is blood?
What components of blood do you know?
What types of cells are there in blood?
Why do you think your white blood cells could be higher
than the normal?
What are platelets?
Blood
Blood is a constantly circulating fluid providing the body with
nutrition, oxygen, and waste removal. Blood is mostly liquid, with
numerous cells and proteins suspended in it, making blood "thicker"
than pure water. The average person has about 5 litres of blood.
Grade 10 Biology
113
Unit 5: Human Biology
Liquid called plasma makes up about half of the content of the
blood. Plasma contains proteins that help the blood to clot, transport
substances through the blood, and perform other functions. Blood
plasma also contains glucose and other dissolved nutrients. About
half of blood volume is composed of blood cells.
Blood Components
Normally, 7-8% of human body weight comes from blood. This
essential fluid carries out the critical functions of transporting
oxygen and nutrients to our cells and getting rid of carbon dioxide,
ammonia, and other waste products. In addition, it plays a vital
role in our immune system and in maintaining a relatively constant
body temperature. Blood is a highly specialized tissue composed of
more than 4,000 different kinds of components. Three of the most
important ones are:
Red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the tissues
White blood cells, which fight infections
Platelets, smaller cells that help blood clot
Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
Red blood cells, or erythrocytes, are relatively large microscopic cells
without nuclei. Red blood cells normally make up 40-50% of the total
blood volume. They transport oxygen from the lungs to all of the
living tissues of the body and carry away carbon dioxide. The red cells
are produced continuously in our bone marrow from stem cells at a
rate of about 2-3 million cells per second. Haemoglobin (containing
iron) is the gas transporting protein molecule that makes up 95%
of a red cell. People who are anemic generally have a deficiency in
red cells, and subsequently feel fatigued due to a shortage of oxygen.
The red colour of blood is primarily due to oxygenated red cells.
Human fetal haemoglobin molecules differ from those produced by
adults in the number of amino acid chains. Fetal haemoglobin has
three chains, while adults produce only two. As a consequence, fetal
haemoglobin molecules attract and transport relatively more oxygen
to the cells of the body.
Red blood cell adaptation for efficient oxygen transportation:
RBC have nucleus at the young stage and lose its nucleus when
What are adaptations of
matured. Not having a nucleus means that there is more space inside
a red blood cell that equip
for haemoglobin, so each red blood cell can carry more oxygen.
it for efficient oxygen
transport?
Biconcave shape gives it a larger surface area for gaseous diffusion
than a flat disc of the same volume.
Very thin cell surface membrane enables oxygen and carbon dioxide
can diffuse in and out rapidly.
114
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Flexible cell surface membrane allows it to squeeze along the
narrowest blood capillaries.
White blood cells (leukocytes)
White blood cells, or leukocytes, exist in variable numbers and types
but make up a very small part of blood's volume; in normally exists
among only about 1% in healthy people. Leukocytes are not limited
to blood. They occur elsewhere in the body as well, most notably in
the spleen, liver, and lymph glands. Most are produced in our bone
marrow from the same kind of stem cells that produce red blood
cells. Others are produced in the thymus gland, which is at the base
of the neck. White blood cells (called lymphocytes) are:
the first responders to our immune system. They seek out,
identify, and bind to alien proteins on bacteria, viruses,
and fungi so that they can be removed. Other white blood cells
(called granulocytes and macrophages) then arrive to surround and
destroy the alien cells.
have the function of getting rid of dead or dying blood cells as well
as foreign matter.
Individual white blood cells usually only last for 18-36 hours before
they are removed, though some types live as much as a year. There
are several different kinds of white blood cells (Table 5.3). The two
important types are:
neutrophils white blood cells that have a lobed nucleus, and
lymphocytes white blood cells that are smaller than neutrophils and
which have a large nucleus that takes up most of the cell.
Platelets or thrombocytes that are tiny cell fragments without
nuclei enclosed in a membrane. Platelets play an essential role in
What are platelets?
blood clotting. Clotting has two important functions:
it helps to stop blood from flowing out of the damaged vessel, and
it prevents disease-causing pathogenic micro-organisms (viruses,
bacteria) from getting into the body.
they collect where a damaged blood vessel is leaking blood and
form a temporary plug by combining with fibres of collagen, a
protein of the blood vessel wall.
they release an enzyme that sets off a chain of chemical reactions
in the blood. The result of these reactions is to change fibrinogen,
a soluble plasma protein into a network of insoluble fibrin
threads. These networks of fibrin threads, then plug in the cut
and clot the blood.
Grade 10 Biology
115
Unit 5: Human Biology
Table 5.3 Red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets
Cell types
Number
Life span
Functions
Erythrocytes(red blood cells)
5-6million
120 days
Transport oxygen and
help transport carbon-
dioxide
Leukocytes(White blood cells)
Neutrophil
Eosinophil
Basophil
5000-10000
18-36 hours, some
Defense and immunity
can survive as long as
Monocyte
Lymphocyte
a year
Platelets
250000-400,000
9-10 days
Blood clotting
Plasma
Plasma is a yellow-tinted water, sugar, fat, protein, and salt fluid that
transports red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
Plasma makes up 55 percent of our blood volume.
provides nutrients to cells while also removing metabolic waste.
What is plasma?
blood clotting factors, carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, minerals,
hormones, enzymes, antibodies, and other proteins are all found
in it.
includes some of every protein generated by the body; so far, only
about 500 proteins have been discovered in human plasma.
Activity 5.16 Answer to the
questions
Blood groups
1. Have you ever heard
The blood grouping depends on which antigens are on the surface
about A, B, AB & O
of the red blood cells. Antigens are molecules. They can be either
blood groups?
proteins or sugars. The types and features of antigens can vary
2. If yes, do you know what
between individuals due to small genetic differences. The antigens in
your blood group is?
blood have various functions, including:
3. What are the bases for
blood grouping?
transporting other molecules into and out of the cell,
maintaining the structure of red blood cells, and
116
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
detecting unwanted cells that could cause illness.
Scientists use two types of antigens to classify blood types:
ABO antigens and
Rh antigens.
Antigens and antibodies play a role in the immune system's defence
mechanism. White blood cells produce antibodies. These antibodies
will target an antigen if they consider it a foreign object. This is why it
is essential to match blood types when a person needs a transfusion.
If a person receives red blood cells with antigens that are not already
present in their system, their body will reject and attack the new red
blood cells. This can cause a severe and possibly life-threatening
reaction.
The ABO blood group system classifies blood types according to the
different types of antigens in the red blood cells and antibodies in the
plasma. They use the ABO system alongside the Rh antigen status to
determine which blood type or types will match for a safe red blood
cell transfusion.
The following are the four ABO groups.
Group A: The surface of the red blood cells contains A antigen, and
the plasma has anti-B antibody. Anti-B antibodies would attack blood
cells that contain B antigens.
Group B: The surface of the red blood cells contains B antigen, and
the plasma has anti-A antibody. Anti-A antibody would attack blood
cells that contain A antigen.
Group AB: The red blood cells have both A and B antigens, but the
plasma does not contain anti-A or anti-B antibodies. Individuals with
type AB can receive any ABO blood type.
Group O: The plasma contains both anti-A and anti-B antibodies,
but the surface of the red blood cells does not contain A or B antigens.
Since these antigens are not present, a person with any ABO blood
type can receive this type of blood.
Do you have any idea about the relationship between biology
and other sciences?
Rhesus factor
During the 1940s scientists discovered another antigen on the red
blood cell, the Rhesus factor. Like the ABO blood groups, the Rhesus
Grade 10 Biology
117
Unit 5: Human Biology
factor is inherited. Individuals who have this antigen are said to be
Rhesus positive (Rh+). Approximately 85 % of the populations have
the antigen. The remaining 15% of individuals who do not have the
antigen are said to be Rhesus negative (Rh⁻). Individuals who are
Rh- may donate blood to Rh+ individuals, but should not receive Rh+
blood. The human body has no natural antibodies against Rh factors,
but antibodies can be produced following a transfusion. Although
Rh antibodies are produced in response to antigens, it should be
pointed out that the immune reaction is subdued compared with
that of the ABO group.
How does Rh+ blood differ from Rh- blood and what happens if
the Rh factor of the blood transfused is incompatible?
Rhesus-factor incompatibilities become important for Rh+ babies of
Rh- mothers. If the baby inherits the Rh+ factor from the father, a
condition called erythroblastosis fetalis (a medical condition where
an Rh negative mother's antibodies attack the red blood cells of an
Rh positive fetus) can occur with these condition and subsequent
pregnancies. The first child is spared because the blood of the mother
and baby are separated by the placenta (a membrane inside the uterus
that exchanges materials between mother and baby). During birth,
the placenta is shed from the uterus. Capillary beds rupture, and, for
the first time, the blood of the baby comes into contact with the blood
of the mother.
Why does a fetus with erythroblastosis fetalis develop anemia?
The mother's immune system recognizes the Rh+ antigens and
triggers the production of antibodies. But, by the time the antibodies
are produced, the first baby is no longer connected to the placenta and
has escaped the potentially dangerous situation. However, a second
pregnancy presents problems if the fetus is Rh+. The mother retains
many of the antibodies from her first encounter with Rh+ blood. If
antibodies cross the placenta, they attach to the antigen on the red
blood cells of the fetus, causing them to be destroyed. Symptoms
when an Rh negative mother's antibodies attack the red blood cells of
an Rh positive fetus include anemia, jaundice, and an enlarged liver.
118
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.2.1 Blood Donation
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discuss the reason for blood donation,
Outline the conditions for blood transfusion, and
Discuss blood type and Rh factor compatibility.
Blood is a very vital component of the human body. In case of an
Activity 5.17 THINK-PAIR-
injury, severe sickness, or during operations, loss of a large quantity
SHARE
of blood may result in death. In such cases, blood from a healthy
In a group of 4-5 students,
person called the donor is given to the sick or a person that lost
go to the nearby blood
blood under some other unexpected condition. The sick person who
bank, hospital, health
receives blood is called the recipient. The process of transferring
centers or posts, and
blood from a healthy person (donor) to a person deficient in blood
gather information on
(recipient) is called blood transfusion. Great care has to be taken by
the importance of blood
donation and its health
the doctors while transfusing blood from the donor to the recipient.
implication (if any) on the
Blood group compatibility
donor and/or the recipients.
Finally, report your findings
If the blood from two different blood groups is mixed and if it is
to the classroom discussion.
not compatible, there may be a reaction between the antigen and
the complementary antibody which makes the red blood cells stick
together, a phenomenon known as agglutination. The agglutins
block the capillaries and even larger blood vessels. But if someone
loses a lot of blood in an accident, an injury, during giving birth or
an operation, then they may need a blood transfusion. This is when
blood taken from one person is given to another to save their life.
Before a transfusion it is vital to know the blood groups of both the
person giving the blood (the donor) and the person receiving the
blood (the recipient).
This means the right type of blood can be given to prevent
agglutination. The blood groups must be compatible. It is not
usually the case that only one type of blood can be given, simply
that blood containing a particular antigen must not be mixed with
blood containing the matching antibody (summarized in table 5.4).
For example, blood group O has no antigens so it can be given to
anyone, but someone who has blood group O has both antibodies
so they can only receive group O blood. On the other hand someone
with blood group AB which has no antibodies can receive any type
of blood. Figure 5.9 summarizes the compatibilities of the different
blood groups.
Grade 10 Biology
119
Unit 5: Human Biology
Table 5.4 Antigens and antibodies
Form group of 2-3
Blood group
Antigen on red blood
Antibody in plasma
students and do a
cells
library search about the
A
A
B
lymphatic system and
B
B
A
present your findings to
AB
AB
None
the class.
O
None
AB
The O blood groups is termed "Universal Donor" while the AB blood
group is termed as a "Universal recipient"
Key: x-shows coagulation
Recipient
O
A
B
AB
(antibodies
(antigen A,
(antigen B,
(antigens
Donor
a and b)
antibody b)
antibody a)
A and B)
o
(antibodies
a and b)
A
(antigen A,
antibody b)
B
(antigen B,
antibody a)
AB
(antigens
A and B)
Figure 5.9 Blood compatibility chart
The Lymphatic System
A little amount of protein spills from capillaries into tissue voids on
What is the lymphatic
a regular basis. Even if the leak is modest, the build-up of proteins in
system?
the extracellular fluid (ECF) would be a significant problem; osmotic
pressure would drop and tissues would enlarge.
The proteins are emptied from the ECF and return to the circulatory
system via the lymphatic system, a collection of vessels (Figure 5.10).
Lymph, a fluid similar to blood plasma, is transported through lymph
vessels that are open-ended like veins. This low-pressure return
system is driven by slow muscle contractions against the arteries,
which are equipped with flap-like valves to prevent fluid back flow.
Through the right and left subclavian veins, the lymphatic system
returns lymph to the venous system.
120
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Activity 5.18 Outline the
relationship
Lymph vessels
Based on your studies
Right lymphatic
duct, entering right
Thoracic duct entering
above and using Internet
subclavian vein
and books a source of
subclavianvein vein
Thymus
information, outline the
Thoracic duct
relationship between the
Spleen
lymphatic and the immune
systems.
Appendix
Lymph vessels
Bone marrow
Figure 5.10 The lymphatic system
Lymph nodes are enlargements that appear in the lymph channel at
regular intervals (Figure 5.10). These contain white blood cells that,
through the process of phagocytosis, filter out any bacteria present.
Lymph nodes store lymphocytes in addition to screening damaged
cells and debris from the lymph. The lymph nodes in your neck can
expand when you have a sore throat.
What are the functions of the lymphatic system?
The key functions of the lymphatic system:
returns excess interstitial fluid to the blood.
the absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins from the digestive
system and the subsequent transport of these substances to the
venous circulation. The blood capillaries absorb most nutrients,
but the fats and fat-soluble vitamins are absorbed by the lacteals.
The lymph in the lacteals has a milky appearance due to its high
fat content and is called chyle.
defence against invading microorganisms and disease. Lymph
nodes and other lymphatic organs filter the lymph to remove
microorganisms and other foreign particles. Lymphatic organs
contain lymphocytes that destroy invading organisms.
Components of the Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system consists of a fluid (lymph), vessels that
Which components of the
transport the lymph and organs that contain lymphoid tissue.
lymphatic system do you
know?
Grade 10 Biology
121
Unit 5: Human Biology
Lymph
Lymph is a fluid substance made up of lymphocytes and white blood
cells that is clear to white in colour. Lymph is a component of the
lymphatic system that is present in lymphatic veins and other cavities
throughout the body. It transports white blood cells within lymph
nodes and bones, removes interstitial fluid from organs, and fights
disease-causing and infectious bacteria invading blood cells. Lymph
serves a variety of purposes:
Removes metabolic wastes from tissue cells,
Provides the body with nutrition,
Aids in the invasion of microbe-caused pathogenic diseases,
Through lymphatic vessels, absorbs fat-soluble vitamins and
other digested fat molecules from the small intestine, and
Maintain the composition of tissue fluid.
Lymphatic vessels
Unlike blood vessels, lymphatic vessels transport only fluid away
from tissues (Figure 5.11). The lymph capillaries are the smallest
lymphatic vessels, beginning in the tissue spaces as blind-ended sacs.
Lymph capillaries can be found in every part of the body except
the bone marrow, the central nervous system, and tissues that lack
blood vessels, such as the epidermis. The wall of the lymph capillary
is made up of endothelium, which is made up of simple squamous
cells that overlap to form a simple one-way valve. This configuration
allows fluid to enter the capillary but prevents lymph from exiting
the vessel.
Tissue
Arteriole
cell
Tissue
Lymph
spaces
capillary
Venule
Tissue
fluid
Lymphatic
vessel
Figure 5.11 Lymphatic vessels
Lymphatic vessels are formed when microscopic lymph capillaries are
connected. Small lymphatic vessels connect to form larger tributaries
known as lymphatic trunks, which drain large areas. The lymphatic
trunks join together until lymph enters the two lymphatic ducts. The
right lymphatic duct drains lymph from the upper right quadrant of
the body. The thoracic duct drains the remainder.
122
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Lymphatic tributaries, like veins, have thin walls and valves to
prevent blood back-flow. The lymphatic system lacks a pump like
Why the lymphatic
in cardiovascular system. The pressure gradients that move lymph
system is an open system?
through the vessels are caused by skeletal muscle action, respiratory
movement, and smooth muscle contraction in vessel walls.
Organs of the lymphatic system
Clusters of lymphocytes and other cells, such as macrophages, are
enmeshed in a framework of short, branching tissue fibres that
Which types of lymphatic
distinguish lymphatic organs. Lymphocytes are formed alongside
organs do you know?
other types of blood cells in the red bone marrow and are transported
in the blood from the bone marrow to the lymphatic organs.
When the body is exposed to microorganisms and other foreign
substances, lymphocytes proliferate within the lymphatic organs
and are transported to the site of the invasion via the blood. This
Have you ever
is a component of the immune response that seeks to eliminate the
encountered injury
invading agent. Among the lymphatic organs are:
on your hands, legs or
somewhere on your limbs
Lymph nodes
and felt tenderness, pain,
Tonsils
and uncomfortable at
Spleen, and
your groin area and
armpits? What do you
Thymus.
think is the reason?
i. Lymph nodes
Lymph fluid flows in the lymph nodes throughout the body before
finally making its way back to the blood stream. While doing so,
it collects and traps harmful matter, such as bacteria, viruses, and
You may have
bodily waste products. The lymph nodes filter the fluid and release it
experienced tonsillitis
in your early child hood
back into the bloodstream. Lymph nodes also contain immune cells
with red swollen tonsils.
that help fight infection by attacking the germs that the body's lymph
Do you know why the
fluid has collected. The lymph nodes may swell when a person has a
tonsils are swollen?
temporary infection. The swelling occurs as a result of immune cell
What are the causative
activity in the lymph nodes. The location of the swelling often relates
agents for this ?
to the affected area. For example, an ear injury/infection may cause
swollen lymph nodes near the ear, while someone with an upper
respiratory tract infection may notice swollen lymph nodes in their
neck.
ii. Tonsils
Hard
palate
Tonsils are lymphatic tissue clusters located just beneath the mucous
BOAR
Soft palate
membranes that line the nose, mouth, and throat (pharynx) (Figure
Uvula
Tonsils
5.12). The tonsils' lymphocytes and macrophages protect us from
Tongue
harmful substances and pathogens such as bacteria and viruses that
enter the body through the nose or mouth.
Figure 5.12 Locations of
Tonsils
Grade 10 Biology
123
Unit 5: Human Biology
Spleen
The spleen is found in the upper left abdominal cavity, just below the
diaphragm and posterior to the stomach (Figure 5.10). Its shape and
structure are similar to that of a lymph node, but it is much larger.
The spleen performs the following functions:
filters blood in the same way that lymph nodes filter lymph;
lymphocytes in the spleen react to pathogens in the blood and
attempt to destroy them;
macrophages engulf debris, damaged cells, and other large
particles;
removes old and damaged erythrocytes from the circulating
blood; and
it produces lymphocytes, particularly in response to infection.
Thymus
The thymus is a soft organ with two lobes anterior to the ascending
aorta and posterior to the sternum (Figure 5.10). It is relatively
large in infants and children, but after puberty, it begins to shrink
in size until it is quite small in older adults. The thymus' primary
function is to process and mature special lymphocytes known as
T-lymphocytes or T-cells. Pathogens and foreign agents are not
recognized by lymphocytes while they are in the thymus. After
maturing, lymphocytes enter the bloodstream and travel to other
lymphatic organs, where they aid in disease defence. Thymosin,
a hormone produced by the thymus, stimulates the maturation of
lymphocytes in other lymphatic organs.
Activity 5.19 THINK-PAIR-
5.2.2. Diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
SHARE
Objectives
Nowadays, with the
modernization of human
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
life style, feeding habits and
Discuss the diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic
environmental pollution,
systems (leukemia, varicose vein, elephantiasis,
people all over the world
cardiovascular diseases).
are suffering from severe
cardiovascular diseases of
different types. Being in
Leukemia
groups of 2-3 students, write
Leukemia is a type of cancer that affects blood-forming tissues,
down the types of circulatory
including bone marrow (Figure 5.13). There are several types of
and lymphatic system
diseases and discuss causes
leukemia, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid
and symptoms of such
leukemia, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. For example, many
diseases. Finally, report your
patients with slow-growing leukemia are asymptomatic, and rapidly
finding to your classmates.
progressing types of leukemia can cause fatigue, weight loss, frequent
Some of them are described
infections, and easy bleeding or bruising. Also, the treatment
below.
varies greatly. Treatment for slow-growing leukemia may include
124
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
monitoring. Chemotherapy, sometimes followed by radiation and
stem-cell transplant, is used to treat aggressive leukemia.
normal blood
leukemia
RBC
- Neutrophil
- Lymphocyte
- Monocyte
- Platelets
Figure 5.13 Leukemia
Varicose veins
Varicose veins are enlarged, swollen, and twisting veins that often
have blue or dark purple colour (Figure 5.14). They occur when
faulty vein valves allow blood to flow in the wrong direction or pool.
Varicose veins are thought to affect more than 23% of all adults. It is
common in:
pregnant women are more prone to varicose veins, and
overweight people are more prone to varicose veins
Aching legs, swollen ankles, and spider veins are some of the
symptoms. It occurs when the valves in the veins fail to function
properly, allowing blood to flow inefficiently. Treatment for varicose
veins is rarely necessary for health reasons; however, if swelling,
aching, and painful legs occur, and there is significant discomfort,
treatment is available. There are several options, including some
home remedies. In severe cases, a varicose vein may rupture or
develop into varicose ulcers on the skin.
Healthy
Varicose
vein
vein
C
d
Valve
Valve
Figure 5.14 Figure A, shows a
normal vein with a properly
a - dilated vein
C - thin wall of vein
working valve. In Figure B, the
varicose vein has a faulty valve;
b - skin bulging
d - deformed valve
the walls of the vein are thin and
stretched
Grade 10 Biology
125
Unit 5: Human Biology
Elephantiasis
Activity 5.20 Reflection
Elephantiasis is a condition that causes a large enlargement of a part
of the body, usually the limbs (Figure 5.15). External genitals are
Based on your studies in the
another area that is frequently affected. Elephantiasis is caused by a
previous lessons, reflect on
diseases of the circulatory
blockage in the lymphatic system, resulting in an accumulation of a
and lymphatic system, and
fluid known as lymph in the affected areas. Elephantiasis is caused
explain why some people are
by parasitic worms transmitted by mosquitoes. Wuchereria bancrofti,
easily susceptible to infection
Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori are the three worms involved.
while others are resistant to
many infections. Use virtual
lab (animation and video) to
reflect.
Figure 5.15 Elephantiasis
Worms have an impact on the body's lymphatic system. The
lymphatic system is in charge of eliminating waste and toxins. If it
becomes clogged, it is unable to properly remove waste. This causes
a build-up of lymphatic fluid, resulting in swelling.
Cardiovascular diseases
Cardiovascular diseases are classified into several types. Among
them are:
What are cardiovascular
diseases?
Abnormal heart rhythms, also known as arrhythmias;
Aorta disease and Marfan syndrome are two examples,
Congenital heart disease is a condition that occurs at birth,
Coronary artery disease is a condition that affects the arteries in
the heart (narrowing of the arteries),
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE),
A heart attack,
Heart failure, and
Muscle disease of the heart (cardiomyopathy).
Have you heard about any type of heart disease? If yes, mention
and share your classmates.
126
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Heart disease
Heart and blood vessel disease (also known as heart disease)
encompasses a wide range of issues, many of which are linked to a
process known as atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a condition that
occurs when a substance called plaque accumulates in the artery
walls. This buildup narrows the arteries, making blood flow more
difficult. When a blood clot forms, it can obstruct blood flow. This
can result in a heart attack or a stroke.
Heart attack
A heart attack occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to a
portion of the heart. If the clot completely obstructs blood flow, the
part of the heart muscle supplied by that artery begins to die. Most
people recover from their first heart attack and go on to live normal
lives, gaining many more years of productive activity. However,
having a heart attack means that you must make some changes. The
medications and lifestyle changes recommended by your doctor may
differ depending on how badly your heart was damaged and the
degree of heart disease that caused the heart attack.
Stroke
What is the reason for stroke?
Stroke is a cerebrovascular disease. It occurs when a blockage or
bleed of the blood vessels either interrupts or reduces the supply of
blood to the brain. When this happens, the brain does not receive
enough oxygen or nutrients, and brain cells start to die.
There are 2 types of stroke:
1. An ischemic stroke (the most common type of stroke) occurs
when a blood vessel that supplies the brain becomes blocked,
typically due to a blood clot. When a part of the brain's blood
supply is cut off, some brain cells begin to die. This can lead to
the loss of functions controlled by that part of the brain, such as
walking or speaking.
2. When a blood vessel in the brain bursts, it causes a hemorrhagic
stroke. Uncontrolled hypertension is the most common cause of
this (high blood pressure). Some stroke effects are permanent if
too many brain cells die as a result of oxygen deprivation. This
population of cells is never replenished.
The good news is that brain cells do not always die during a stroke;
instead, the damage is only temporary. As injured cells repair
themselves, previously impaired function improves over time. In
Grade 10 Biology
127
Unit 5: Human Biology
other cases, nearby undamaged brain cells may take over for the
Activity 5.21 Group work
injured areas of the brain. In any case, strength may return, speech
Here in this section
may improve, and memory may improve.
are mentioned some
Heart failure
cardiovascular and
lymphatic system diseases.
Heart failure, also known as congestive heart failure, occurs when
Yet there are too much of
the heart does not pump blood as efficiently as it should. Heart
them to mention. Therefore,
failure does not imply that the heart ceases to beat; this is a common
in groups of 3-4 students
and reading books and
misconception. Instead, the heart continues to beat, but the body's
browsing Internet resources,
need for blood and oxygen is unsatisfied. If left untreated, heart
list cardiovascular and
failure can worsen. It is critical to follow the doctor's orders if your
lymphatic system diseases as
loved one has heart failure.
much as you can and discuss
among your classmates. Two
Arrhythmia
of them are given below.
An abnormal heart rhythm is referred to as arrhythmia. Arrhythmias
1.
Endocarditis?
come in a variety of forms. The heart can beat too slowly, too quickly,
2.
Rheumatic fever?
or in an irregular pattern. Bradycardia or a slow heart rate, occurs
when the heart rate is less than 60 beats per minute. Tachycardia, or
an abnormally fast heart rate, is defined as a heart rate of more than
100 beats per minute. An arrhythmia can impair the function of your
heart. Your heart may not be able to pump enough blood to meet
your body's needs if it has an irregular heartbeat.
5.3 The breathing system
Hold your breath and
Objectives
see how long you can
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
hold your breath as
Draw and label the human breathing systems,
you continue reading.
How long can you do
Show the link between the human breathing system and the
it? May be you are
circulatory system, and
feeling uncomfortable
Demonstrate the mechanism of breathing using locally
available materials
already. Why do you feel
uncomfortable? Then,
individually, write down
You can't go more than 3 minutes without breathing, and even if
the reasons why this
you tried, your autonomic nervous system would take over. This
happens. Share your list
is because every cell in the body needs to run the oxidative stages
and discuss in groups on
of cellular respiration, the process by which energy is produced
your reasons.
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Oxygen is used as a
reactant, and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product, in order
for oxidative phosphorylation to take place. Although cells require
oxygen, your need to breathe is primarily driven by the accumulation
of carbon dioxide.
The respiratory system, which includes muscles to move air into
and out of the lungs, passageways through which air moves, and
microscopic gas exchange surfaces covered by capillaries, allows
128
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
carbon dioxide to be exhaled and oxygen to be inhaled. Gases are
Activity 5.22 Individual
transported from the lungs to tissues throughout the body via the
work
circulatory system. If your breathing is disrupted by a variety of
Students, you will be
conditions, such as what you did in your activity above, or diseases
provided with prepared
of the respiratory system, such as asthma, emphysema, chronic
diagram/model of the
obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), and lung cancer, you will
human breathing systems.
experience difficulties in the normal functioning of your breathing
Observing your diagram/
system, which can be quite severe at times.
model draw, label and study
the breathing system. During
What is the primary function of the breathing system in human
your activity use virtual
body?
lab (simulation software,
animation and video).
The breathing system organs' primary functions are to:
Then, answer the following
question given below.
provide oxygen to body tissues for cellular respiration,
remove the waste product, carbon dioxide,
help to maintain acid-base balance, and
portions of the breathing system are also used for non-vital
functions such as sensing odors, producing speech, and coughing.
The nose, larynx, pharynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchios, and alveoli
are the major structures of the breathing system. The following
sections go over these structures and their functions one by one.
nasal
passages
epiglottis
larynx
oesophagus
(voice box)
(gullet)
trachea
WIRTHI
rings of
cartilage
alveoli
left bronchus
bronchile
heart
intercostal
muscles
pleural
membranes
pleural cavity
containing
pleural fluid
ribs
muscular
diaphragm
Figure 5.16. The human breathing system
Grade 10 Biology
129
Unit 5: Human Biology
In humans, air enters the breathing system through the two nasal
Activity 5.23 Individual
work
cavities or the mouth (Figure 5.18). The tiny hairs that line the nasal
When you are sick of
cavities act as a filter, keeping foreign particles out of the lower
common cold or influenza,
breathing tract. The nasal cavity contains mucus, which warms and
you may lose your smelling
moistens the incoming air, traps foreign particles and keeps the cells
sense for some time and
that line the cavity moist.
regain it back when you get
better of the common cold.
Major breathing structures and their functions
1. Explain this
phenomenon
The Nose
2. What is the reason for the
The nostrils are the main entry and exit points of breathing system,
loss of you sense of smell?
which are located in the nose. The nasal cavity, which is divided
into left and right sections by the nasal septum, receives the inhaled
air. The air moves from the nasal cavities to the pharynx. Mucous
membranes line portions of the nasal cavities, which contain
sebaceous glands and hair follicles that prevent large debris, such as
dirt, from passing through the nasal cavity.
Why nasal cavity is considered as a good air conditioner?
Goblet cells, a type of specialized columnar epithelial cell that
produces mucus to trap debris, are found in the nasal epithelium.
With a constant beating motion, the cilia of the breathing epithelium
help remove mucus and debris from the nasal cavity, sweeping
materials towards the throat to be swallowed. Cold air, on the other
hand, slows the movement of the cilia, resulting in the accumulation
of mucus, which can lead to a runny nose in the winter. This moist
epithelium warms and humidifies the incoming air. The incoming air
is warmed by capillaries just beneath the nasal epithelium. Because
the thick mucus produced to defend you from pathogens blocks the
surface of the receptors on the nasal epithelium, you lose your ability
to smell during a common cold or influenza.
Nasal cavity
Pharynx
The pharynx is a tube made up of skeletal muscle and mucous
Oral cavity
membrane that runs parallel to the nasal cavities. The pharynx, also
Uvula
known as the throat, is a tube that runs from the base of the skull to
Lips
Pharynx
the sixth cervical vertebra. It receives air from the nasal cavity and
Epiglottis
air, food, and water from the oral cavity, serving the breathing and
Jaw
Oesophagus
Tongue
digestive systems. It opens into the larynx and esophagus from the
Larynx
back.
Figure 5.17. The pharynx
Only air can pass through the upper part of the pharynx (throat).
Air, food, and fluids can pass through the lower parts. The pharynx
130
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
contains the pharyngeal, palatine, and lingual tonsils. Sometimes the
pharynx can be infected by microorganisms. The pharyngeal tonsil
has a large number of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) and
is covered with ciliated epithelium that traps and destroys pathogens
that enter through inhalation.
Larynx
The larynx is a structure that connects the pharynx to the trachea
and helps regulate the amount of air that enters and leaves the lungs
(Figure 5.18). Several pieces of cartilage make up the structure of
larynx.
Hyoid bone
Epiglottis
False vocal cords
Thyroid cartilage
Vocal ligament
Cricoid cartilage
Vocal cords
Tracheal cartilage
Trachea
Figure 5.18. The larynx extends to the trachea.
The epiglottis is a thin, elastic cartilage that covers the trachea's
opening and is attached to the thyroid cartilage. When the epiglottis
is closed, the unattached end of it rests on the glottis. The glottis is
made up of the vestibular folds, true vocal cords, and space between
them (Figure 5.19).
I
Do you know how sound is formed in the voice box?
The inner borders of the real vocal cords (Figure 5.19) are free,
allowing oscillation to make sound. The size of true vocal cord
membranous folds varies from person to person, resulting in voices
with various pitch ranges. Males have greater folds than females,
which gives them a deeper voice.
What happens if pieces of food or fluid you swallow-in wrongly
entered into your trachea? Which structure of. your laryngeal
area prevents you from such drop-ins?
During swallowing, the pharynx and larynx lift upward, allowing the
pharynx to expand and the laryngeal epiglottis to swing downward,
Grade 10 Biology
131
Unit 5: Human Biology
closing the trachea opening. Because of these movements, food and
liquids cannot enter the trachea, which creates a bigger region for
food to travel through.
Arytenoid cartilage
Inner Lining of trachea
True vocal folds
Glottis
False vocal folds
Epiglottis
Tongue
Figure 5.19 The vocal cords
Trachea
The trachea (windpipe) extends from the larynx toward the lungs
(Figure 5.20). The trachea is formed by 16 to 20 stacked pieces
of cartilage that are connected by connective tissue. The elastic
membrane of the trachea allows it to stretch and expand slightly
during inhalation and exhalation, whereas the rings of cartilage
provide structural support and prevent the trachea from collapsing.
Larynx
Trachea
Primary bronchi
Secondary Bronchile
Figure 5.20 The trachea
132
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Bronchi and Bronchioles
The right and left primary bronchi branch of the trachea towards
the right and left lungs. The primary bronchi further branch into
the secondary and tertiary bronchi. A bronchiole branches from the
tertiary bronchi. Bronchioles, which are about 1 mm in diameter,
further branch until they become the tiny terminal bronchioles,
which lead to the structures of gas exchange. There are more than
1000 terminal bronchioles in each lung. The muscular walls of
the bronchioles do not contain cartilage-like those of the bronchi.
However, smooth muscle can change the size of the tubing to increase
or decrease airflow through it.
Activity 5.24 Group work
Before you move to the next topic, in groups of 2-3 students, identify
the interplay between the circulatory and the breathing systems.
How is the breathing system interrelated to the circulatory system?
Explain.
Breathing Gas Exchange
Structures involved directly in gas exchange are found in the breathing
Where in the breathing
zone. The breathing zone begins when the terminal bronchioles join
system does the actual
a breathing bronchiole (Figure 5.21), the smallest type of bronchiole
gas exchange take place?
which leads to an alveolar duct and opens into a cluster of alveoli.
Pulmonary Artery
Inhaled Air
Aleveolar (air sac)
Air in
and out
Pulmonary
vein
Blood
capillary
oxygenated
blood
Muscle
Bands
Bronchioles
Alveolus
Capillaries
Deoxygenated
blood
Elastic Fibers
Alveoli
A
B
Figure 5.21 Bronchioles (a) lead to alveolar sacs (b) in the breathing zone,
where gas exchange occurs.
Alveoli
An alveolar sac is a cluster of many individual alveoli that are
responsible for gas exchange. An alveolus with elastic walls, stretch
during air intake which greatly increases the surface area available for
Grade 10 Biology
133
Unit 5: Human Biology
gas exchange. Alveoli are connected to their neighbours by alveolar
Activity 5.25 Individual
pores, which help maintain equal air pressure throughout the alveoli
work
and lung (Figure 5.21).
Now individually, do the
In the following table is shown the composition of atmospheric and
following: (the teacher will
exhaled air.
help you in this activity)
1. Put your pointing figure
Table 5.5 Comparison of atmospheric and exhaled air
in between two of your
ribs.
Component
Atmospheric air
Exhaled air
oxygen
21%
16%
2. Inhale air to the
maximum. What happens
Nitrogen
78%
78%
with your ribs?
Carbon dioxide
0.04%
4%
3. Now, exhale the volume
Temperature
37 degree centigrade
variable
of air you inhaled. What
Moisture
saturated
variable
happens to your ribs?
4. What happens with
Breathing Movements
your chest cavity as you
Pressure differences between the atmosphere and the chest, or
inhales and exhale air
thoracic cavity determine the movement of air into and out of the
from your lungs?
lungs. Atmospheric pressure remains relatively constant, but the
pressure in the chest cavity may vary. An understanding of breathing
hinges on an understanding of gas pressures. The mechanism of
breathing is shown in Figure 5.22.
Gases move from an area of high pressure to an area of low pressure:
Inspiration occurs when the pressure inside the lungs is less than
that of the atmosphere, and
expiration occurs when the pressure inside the lungs is greater
than that of the atmosphere.
Inhalation
Exhalation
air enters lungs
air pushed out of
lungs
external
internal
intercostal
intercostal
muscles
muscles
contract, pulling
contract, pulling
ribs up and out
ribs down and in
lower pressure
higher pressure
than the outside
than the outside
diaphragm
diaphragm
muscles
muscles relax
contract
diaphragm
diaphragm
becomes
A
flattens
dome-shaped
B
Figure 5.22 Breathing movements: a) Inspiration b) Expiration
The diaphragm, a dome-shaped sheet of muscle that separates the
thoracic, or chest cavity from the abdominal cavity, can regulate the
pressure in the chest cavity.
134
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
During inspiration, the diaphragm muscle contracts, or shortens,
Activity 5.26 Individual
pulling downward. The chest volume increases and pressure in the
work
lungs decreases. The atmospheric pressure is now greater than the
pressure in the chest cavity, and air moves into the lungs.
With the help of an
During expiration, the diaphragm relaxes and returns to its dome
experiment prove that
shape due to the force exerted by the organs in the abdomen. The
exhaled air carbon dioxide.
chest volume decreases and pressure increases. The pressure in the
Procedures
chest cavity is now greater than the atmospheric pressure, and air
1. Take two beakers A and B
moves out of the lungs (Figure 5.22).
containing equal volume of
lime water.
Changes in chest volume during inspiration and expiration:
2. Cover both beakers with
A. The intercostals muscles contract and the rib cage pull upward.
cardboard using tape and
Because the pressure in the chest cavity is lower than the
make hole in them for straw.
atmospheric pressure, air moves into the lungs.
3. Blow air in beaker B
with the help of a strew A
B. The intercostals muscles relax and the rib cage falls. Because
undisturbed.
the pressure in the chest cavity is higher than the atmospheric
What is the color change in
pressure, air moves out of the lungs.
beaker B? Why?
What happens with the
content in baker A? Why?
Activity 5.27 Observing the mechanism of breathing
In order to observe the breathing movement of your lungs, prepare a lung
model from locally available materials as indicated in the left hand corner.
rubber
tubing
Materials you may need for this activity: 1. A bell jar 2. Plastic tubing (like
"Y'-piece
juice straw) 3. Threads 4. The stopper and rubber tubing
balloon
Finally, produce the model and observe how your lungs move during
'lungs'
inhalation and exhalation.
bell-jar
'thorax'
rubber sheet
diaphragm
ring to pull rubber sheet
The respiratory and circulatory systems work together to provide OX-
ygen to the body and remove carbon dioxide from the body. While the
former deals with air and the latter with blood, they work together to
coordinate the operations of each system's components. Other body
systems, such as the digestive and neurological systems, are crucial
as well, but the circulatory and respiratory systems must work contin-
ually even without a few minutes of rest.
How a blood circulatory
system does interact with
The circulatory and respiratory systems take oxygen from the air and
the respiratory system?
transport it throughout the body while the digestive and respiratory
systems take carbon dioxide from the body and release it into the at-
mosphere. The lungs expand and fill with fresh air as a person inhales.
The respiratory system works in collaboration with the circulatory
Grade 10 Biology
135
Unit 5: Human Biology
system to transport oxygen from fresh air to red blood cells in the
arteries of the lungs, as well as to release carbon dioxide from the
blood into the lungs' air. This used air leaves the body when a person
exhales. The heart circulates blood from the lungs, carrying oxygen-
ated red blood cells, down the arteries to the cells, where oxygen is
released and carbon dioxide is absorbed. Then the used blood is sent
back through the veins to the lungs, and the cycle begins again.
Table 5.6 Summary: Comparison of inspiration and expiration
Parts of respiratory system
Inspiration
Expiration
1. Diaphram
Contracts and flattens down-
Relaxes and moves upwards to
wards
dome shape
2. External Intercostal Muscles
Muscles contract
Muscles relaxes
3. Internal Intercostal Muscles
Muscles relax
Muscles contract
4. Ribcage And Sternum
Move upwards and out wards
Moves downwards and inwards
5. Thorax Volumes
Increases
Decreases
Air Pressure
Decrease in pressure inside
Increases in pressure inside thorax
thorax and lung
and lung
Air Movement
External air pressure drives
Air forced out of lungs by thorax
air into lungs at low pressure
compression and elastic recoil of
lungs
Activity 5.28 Individual
Disorders of the Breathing System
presentation
All breathing disorders share one common characteristic: they all
Conduct Internet search/
decrease oxygen delivery to the tissues. The following activity will
consult health professionals/
users about the effects of
help you to explore the different types of breathing disorders.
smoking and cannabis on
Some of the breathing disorders are:
the normal functioning of
the breathing system and
Bronchitis
present your findings to your
classmates. During your
Breathing difficulties can be caused by bacteria or viral illnesses,
presentation, use virtual
as well as reactions to environmental pollutants. Bronchitis is a
lab (simulation software,
condition in which the airways narrow and the mucous lining of the
animation and video) as
bronchial tubes becomes inflamed. Excess mucus production, tissue
available.
swelling, constriction of the airways, and restricted airflow through
the bronchi are all symptoms of this condition. In the bronchioles,
the situation becomes even more acute. The bronchioles, unlike the
trachea and bronchi, are not maintained by cartilage bands to keep
them open.
Emphysema
The alveolar walls become irritated in emphysema. The air sacs lose
their flexibility, stretch, and eventually rupture as a result of this. As
a result, exhaling becomes difficult, and air is trapped in the lungs.
Because there are fewer alveoli, the surface area available for gas
136
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
exchange is reduced, resulting in lower oxygen levels. Emphysema
is caused by smoking, which is by far the most common cause.
Chronic bronchitis has been linked to emphysema. COPD (chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease) is the name given to both of these
conditions. COPD, like bronchitis, causes the bronchioles to become
more resist[pant to air movement. Although air moves freely into
the alveoli, the smaller diameter of the bronchioles increases barrier
to air movement out of the lungs, making exhalation difficult. The
breathing rate increases as the body attempts to maintain homeostasis.
The circulatory system responds by speeding up the heartbeat.
Bronchial Asthma
The inflammation of the bronchioles is linked to bronchial asthma.
Exhaling requires more work than inhaling in asthma. The imbalance
between the amount of air entering and leaving the lungs must be
addressed by increasing the exertion of expiration. Common causes
for asthma are tobacco smoking, pollution, and allergens such as
pollen, mold, dust, etc.
5.4 The Human Urinary system
You will be provided with
diagrams or models of
the human excretory
Objectives
system(kidney) and you
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
should draw, label, and
study the structure and
discuss the structure and function of the kidney,
function of the excretory
identify the process of urine formation, and
system(Kidney). Finally,
tell the role of the excretory system in the homeostatic process.
present your diagram to
your classmates. Support
your activity using
virtual lab (simulation
software, animation and
What do you know about the excretory system of human beings?
video). You can browse
from internet, books and
school digital libraries.
You may be familiar with the functions of the excretory system,
which include blood purification and waste removal. The system, on
the other hand, performs additional equally vital functions. Consider
pH control, which is shared by the lungs and blood buffers such as
carbonic acid (H2CO₃) and bicarbonate anion (HCO₃) in order to
maintain blood pH between 7.35 and 7.45 as the value higher than
7.8 or lower than 6.8 can lead to death.
What do you know about regulating the concentration of solutes
in the blood? Did you know that the kidney is important in
determining the concentration of red blood cells?
The kidneys produce 85% of the erythropoietin (EPO) needed
Grade 10 Biology
137
Unit 5: Human Biology
to drive red blood cell formation. The kidneys also undertake the
Activity 5.29 Group work
final synthesis step in the creation of vitamin D. When the kidneys
Being in groups of 3-4
fail, these functions are weakened or removed entirely, causing
students and using locally
homeostasis to be disrupted. Weakness, fatigue, shortness of breath,
available resources construct
anemia, generalized edema (swelling), metabolic acidosis, increased
a model of the kidney and
potassium levels, heart arrhythmias, and other symptoms may occur
discuss its structure and
in the affected person. Each of these functions is critical to your
functions.
survival and well-being.
The section explains the anatomy of the excretory system and how
it facilitates the physiologic tasks required for equilibrium. The
kidney should be thought of as a plasma regulator rather than a urine
maker. As you read through each section, consider the following
scenario: What if this doesn't work? This inquiry will assist you in
comprehending how the urinary system maintains homeostasis and
influences all other bodily systems as well as one's quality of life.
External structure of kidney
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs in the abdominal
cavity that are placed directly below the liver. The endocrine system
includes the adrenal glands, which are located on top of each kidney.
Blood is purified and filtered by the kidneys. The kidneys filter all of
the blood in the human body on a daily basis, consuming over 25%
of the oxygen taken by the lungs in the process. Through aerobic
What do we call the
respiration, oxygen enables kidney cells to produce chemical energy
in the form of ATP.
filtrate that leaves the
human urinary system?
Urine is the filtrate that comes out of the kidneys. The ureters, which
are around 30 cm long, transport urine from the kidneys to the urinary
bladder. Urine is driven through the ureters by waves of peristalsis,
rather than passively draining into the bladder (smooth muscle
contractions). Urine from both ureters is collected in the bladder. Its
capacity is diminished during late pregnancy because to compression
by the increasing uterus, resulting in increased urination frequency.
Urine is transported from the bladder to the exterior of the body via
the urethra.
The only urologic organ that differs significantly between males and
girls is the urethra; all other urine transport systems are identical.
Female urethras are shorter than male urethras, measuring around
4 cm in length, and provide less protection against fecal germs
(approximately 20 cm). The increased frequency of urinary tract
infections (UTIs) in women can be explained by this length disparity.
In males, the urethra also serves as a reproductive organ, transporting
sperm (sperm and accessory fluids).
138
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Renal artery.
Renal vein
Ureter
Kidney
prostate
Bladder
Figure 5.23 Kidneys filter the
Urethra
blood and produce urine that
is stored in the bladder before
removal
Internal structure of kidney
The kidney is divided into three sections on the inside: an outer
cortex, a medulla in the middle, and the renal pelvis in the hilum
of the kidney. The hilum is the concave portion of the bean form
where blood arteries and nerves enter and exit the kidney, as well as
where the ureters exit. The presence of renal corpuscles causes the
renal cortex to be granular, and nephron tubules can be observed
throughout the renal cortex and renal pyramids, which make up the
majority of the renal medulla. Each kidney has an average of eight
renal pyramids. The urine produced by the nephrons passes via the
renal pelvis and into the ureters, which transport it to the bladder
(5.24).
Cappilaries
Venule
Arteriole
Minor calyx
Renal vein
Major calyx
Renal pelvis
Renal nerve
Pyramid
Renal artery
Medulla
Ureter
Capsule
Cortex
Figure 5.24. The internal
structure of the kidney
The network of blood arteries in the kidney is an important part of
its anatomy and function because it filters blood. The renal hilum
is where the arteries, veins, and nerves that supply the kidney enter
and exit. Renal blood flow begins with the aorta branching into renal
arteries and finishes with the renal veins exiting to join the inferior
vena cava, which takes blood back to the heart's right atrium. Before
branching into several afferent arterioles and entering the capillaries
supplying the nephrons, the renal arteries split multiple times to form
Grade 10 Biology
139
Unit 5: Human Biology
additional blood vessels. As mentioned previously, the functional
unit of the kidney is the nephron, illustrated in figure 5.25. Each
kidney is made up of over one million nephrons that dot the renal
cortex. A nephron consists of three parts:
a renal corpuscle,
a renal tubule, and
the associated capillary network.
Glomerular capsule
Efferent
arteriole
Afferent
arteriole
Proximal
convoluted tubule
Ureter
Renal artery
Renal vein
Interlobular
artery
Venule
Interlobular
vein
Loop of
the nephron
Peritubular
Minor
Renal
Renal
capillary
network
calyx
medulla
cortex
Urine flows into renal papilla
Figure 5.25. The Structure of a nephron.
Renal corpuscle
The glomerulus, a network of capillaries that surrounds the renal
corpuscle in the renal cortex, is made up of the glomerular or
Bowman's capsule, a cup-shaped chamber that surrounds it (Figure
5.25).
Renal Tubule
The renal tubule is a long, convoluted structure that emerges from the
glomerulus and can be split into three segments based on function:
1. the Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT),
2. the loop of Henle, which forms a loop (with descending and
ascending limbs), and
140
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
3. the Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT). The DCT, or distal
collecting duct, joins and discharges the nephron's contents into
collecting ducts. Urine will eventually pass via the renal pelvis
and into the ureters.
Capillary Network within the Nephron
The nephron receives blood that needs to be filtered via a capillary
network that branches off from the renal arteries. Afferent arterioles
are the branches that enter the glomerulus. Efferent arteriole refers
What are the functions of
to the branch that leaves the glomerulus. The glomerular capillary
the kidney?
bed is the capillary network that runs through the glomerulus. The
peritubular capillary network surrounds and interacts with portions
of the renal tubule after the efferent arteriole exits the glomerulus.
The formation of urine
Kidneys filter blood in a three-step process:
The nephrons filter blood as it passes through the glomerulus'
capillary network. Except for proteins, almost all solutes are filtered
out into the glomerulus by a process known as glomerular filtration.
The filtrate is collected in the tubules of the kidneys. Tubular
reabsorption is the process by which most of the solutes are
reabsorbed in the PCT. The filtrate continues to exchange solutes
and water with the peritubular capillary network in the Henle loop.
During this phase, water is also reabsorbed.
Tubular secretion, which is essentially the inverse of tubular
reabsorption, secretes extra solutes and wastes into the renal tubules.
The collecting ducts collect filtrate from the nephrons, which are
then carried into the renal pelvis and eventually to the ureters as
urine. The full procedure is depicted in Figure 5.26.
2. Proximal convoluted tubule:
5. Distal tubule:
reabsorbs ions, water, and
selectively secretes
nutrients; removes toxins
and absorbs different
Activity 5.30 Group work
and adjusts filtrate pH
ions to maintain blood
pH and electrolyte
1. Glomerulus:
balance
In group of 3-4 students
filters small
solutes from
answer the following
the blood
questions with examples.
6. Collecting
duct:
1. Do you find any
reabsorbs
solutes and
relationship between
water from
the filtrate
circulatory system and
excretory system? What
4. Ascending loop
are they?
3. Descending
of Henle:
loop of Henle:
reabsorbs Na⁺ and
aquaporins
2. Nowadays our society is
Cl⁻ from the filtrate
allow water
into the interstitial
to pass from
affected by kidney diseases.
fluid
the filtrate
What could be the reason?
into the
interstitial fluid
Figure 5.26. The process of urine formation in the kidney
Grade 10 Biology
141
Unit 5: Human Biology
Each part of the nephron performs a different function in filtering
waste and maintaining
Homeostatic balance:
1. The glomerulus forces small solutes out of the blood by pressure.
2. The proximal convoluted tubule actively transfers toxins and
medications from the interstitial fluid into the filtrate, reabsorbing
ions, water, and nutrients from the filtrate. By selectively secreting
ammonia (NH₃) into the filtrate, where it interacts with H+ to
generate NH₄⁺, the proximal convoluted tubule also regulates
blood pH. More ammonia is secreted when the filtrate is acidic.
3. Aquaporin-containing cells border the descending loop of Henle,
allowing water to flow from the filtrate into the interstitial fluid.
4.Na+ and Cl- ions diffuse into the interstitial fluid in the thin
section of the ascending loop of Henle. These same ions are
actively transferred into the interstitial fluid in the thick region.
The filtrate becomes increasingly dilute as it passes up the leg
because salt but not water is lost.
5.K+ and H+ ions are selectively secreted into the filtrate in the distal
convoluted tubule, while Na⁺, Cl; and HCO3 ions are reabsorbed
to maintain blood pH and electrolyte balance.
6. Solutes and water from the filtrate are reabsorbed by the collecting
duct, resulting in dilute urine.
5.5 The immune system
In a group of 3 students,
Objectives
discuss the immune
system and types of
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
immunity, and present
define what is immunity,
your findings to the class
mention types of immunity, and
with the guidance of your
discuss what is innate and acquired immunity.
teacher.
Immunity is defined as the body's ability to prevent the invasion
of pathogens. The immune system includes varieties of defences
against viruses, bacteria, fungal infections, and parasites (such as
threadworms). The lymphatic system is part of the broader immune
system. The types of immune systems include innate and adaptive
(Acquired) immune systems.
Mothers are recommended to breastfeed their kids immediately
after delivery. Do you know why?
142
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
a) Innate immune system
The body's initial line of defense against invading microbial diseases
is innate immunity. Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which are
produced by innate immune cells, help to maintain homeostasis by
regulating endogenous processes including inflammation and cell
death.
These are the non-specific, unchanging lines of defenses which
include:
Physical and chemical barriers to pathogens.
To attract immune cells to infection locations, cytokines and other
chemical agents are produced.
To recognize bacteria, stimulate cells, and facilitate the clearance
of dead cells or antibody complexes, the complement cascade is
activated.
Specialized white blood cells identify and remove foreign
compounds found in organs, tissues, blood, and lymph.
What do you know about the vaccines against certain diseases
e.g. vaccine against COVID-19?
ii) Adaptive (Acquired) immune system
After an initial reaction to a new pathogen, adaptive (or acquired)
immunity is formed, resulting in an increased response to future
exposure to the same disease. Vaccination is based on this acquired
immunity process. Because bacteria and viruses are always changing
and evolving in an 'arms war' with our immune systems, this is critical.
The adaptive immune system has the following characteristics:
During the antigen presentation process, particular "non-self"
antigens are recognized.
The development of targeted responses to eradicate specific
infections or pathogen-infected cells.
Immunological memory is the process through which signature
antibodies or T cell receptors "remember" each infection. If another
infection arises, these memory cells can be summoned to eliminate
the invader swiftly.
Do you have any idea about the cells of the immune system?
What types of cells of the immune system do you know?
Grade 10 Biology
143
Unit 5: Human Biology
Cells of the immune system
The immune system is made up of numerous different cell types and
subtypes. The following are some of the most common types:
Lymphocytes: White blood cells that travel between the bloodstream
and the lymphatic system. They are crucial in the battle against
infection. T cells, B cells, and natural killer cells are the three most
common types of lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are formed in the bone
marrow. Some move to the thymus and mature into T cells, while
others mature into B cells in the bone marrow.
Neutrophils: The most common form of white blood cell, neutrophils
play a vital role in the innate immune system. A type of phagocyte
is neutrophils (cells that engulf and then digest cellular debris
and pathogens). They are ordinarily located in the bloodstream,
but chemical signals like Interleukin-8 cause them to be promptly
recruited to the site of injury or infection.
Macrophages: phagocytes that play a role in both the innate and
adaptive immune systems are another form of phagocyte. Foreign
chemicals, pathogenic bacteria, and cancer cells are all targets for
them. Lymphocytes and other immune cells are also stimulated by
macrophages to respond to infections.
Dendritic cells: Antigen-presenting cells serve as intermediaries
between the innate and adaptive immune systems. They are
frequently found in tissues that come into contact with the outside
world, such as the skin, nose, lungs, stomach, and gut linings. They
travel to lymph nodes in response to infections, where they interact
with T cells and B cells to start the adaptive immune response.
Antigens and antibodies
Antibodies (also called immunoglobulins) are Y-shaped proteins
produced by B-cells that bind to antigens on the surface of foreign
substances like bacteria and viruses. This recognizes and identifies
the foreign thing as "non-self," prompting other immune cells to
attack it.
Hormones and the immune system
The immune system produces a wide range of hormones. Lymphokines
are the common name for these hormones. The immune system is
suppressed by steroids and corticosteroids (adrenaline components).
144
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.6 Renowned Physicians in Ethiopia
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
mention renowned Ethiopian physicians,
discuss contributions of renowned Ethiopian physicians,
and
appreciate the contributions of Ethiopian physicians.
1. Prof. Asrat Woldeyes (1928-1999) was the first distinguished
Ethiopian surgeon and professor of medicine in Addis Ababa
University. He was the first Ethiopian to qualify in this field of
medicine in the West after medical studies at Edinburgh University.
He devoted the majority of his working life to surgery at Addis
Adaba's two main hospitals, as well as the deanship of medicine at
the university.
Prof. Asrat Woldeyes
2. Dr. Widad KidaneMariam was born to an Ethiopian emigrant
family in Palestine during the Italian occupation of her country of
origin. She studied medicine at the American University of Beirut
and became the "first female" medical practitioner and topmost
physician administrator in charge of the medical services division in
the Ministry of Health in the 1960s-1970s. When she was asked to be
the first Ethiopian gynecologist to volunteer for the Swedish Save the
Children Fund project in Addis Abeba, she also became a founding
organizer responsible for the establishment of the first Ethiopian
Family Planning Association as well as Maternal and Child services
for the homeless in Addis Abeba Municipality.
Dr. Widad Kidane Mariam
Activity 5.31 THINK-PAIR-SHARE
In Ethiopia, as it is true in all countries of the world, the history of
medicine begins much earlier and the number of physicians that
contributed to their country has increased time to time. Here are
mentioned two of the most renowned pioneer Ethiopian physicians.
Now, being in groups of 3-4 students and using books, internet and
interviewing as a source of information:
1. List down names of the renowned Ethiopian physicians.
2. Write a report on their contributions to Ethiopian society
and the world.
3. Finally, share your findings to the whole classroom.
Grade 10 Biology
145
Unit 5: Human Biology
Unit Review
The digestive tract is made up of the alimentary canal and its auxiliary organs, which break down
food into molecules that may be absorbed and used by the body's cells.
In the body, food travels through four different processes: ingestion, digestion, absorption, and
excretion.
The digestive system has six actions or tasks that prepare nutrients for use by body cells: ingestion,
mechanical digestion, chemical digestion, motions, absorption, and elimination. The wall of the
digestive tract has four layers or tunics: mucosa, submucosa, muscular layer, and serous layer or
serosa.
The alimentary tract and accessory organs are the two primary components of the digestive system.
The mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small and large intestines, rectum, and anus are all
parts of the digestive system's alimentary tract.
The salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas are all accessory organs that are connected to
the alimentary system.
Secretions of organs and glands in the digestive system
Organ/gland
Secretion(s)
Function
of secretion
Salivary
Salivary amylase
Initiates the breakdown of polysaccharides to simpler carbohy-
glands
drates
Stomach
Hydrochloric acid
Converts pepsinogen to pepsin; kills microbes
Pepsinogen
when converted to pepsin, initiates the digestion of proteins
Mucus
protects the stomach from pepsin and Hydrochloric acid
(HCl)
Pancreas
Pancreatic Amy-
Continues the breakdown of carbohydrates into disaccharides
lase
Bicarbonate ions
neutralize Hydrochloric acid (HCl) from the stomach
Trypsinogen
when activated to trypsin, converts long-chain peptides into
short-chain peptides
Lipase
Breaks down fats to glycerol and fatty acids
Small intes-
Erepsin
Completes the breakdown of proteins
tine
Disaccharidases
breakdown disaccharides (e.g., maltose) into monosaccharide
(e.g., maltase)
Liver
Bile
Emulsifies fat
Gallbladder
Bile
Stores and secretes concentrated bile from the liver
Large intes-
Mucus
Helps the movement of food waste
tine
The cardiovascular system is made up of a muscle pumping apparatus called the heart, as well as
a closed system of vessels called arteries, veins, and capillaries.
The heart is a muscle pump that provides the required force to circulate blood throughout the
body's tissues.
The epicardium, myocardium, and endocardium are the three layers of the heart.
The right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle is the four chambers of the heart.
146
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Atrioventricular valves and semi-lunar valves are two types of heart valves.
The right atrium pumps blood to the right ventricle, which then pumps it to the lungs, where it
receives oxygen. Blood goes from the lungs to the left atrium and subsequently to the left ventricle.
It is then injected into the systemic circulatory system.
The conduction system of the heart is made up of specialized cardiac muscle cells that coordinate
the contraction of the chambers.
Blood travels from the right ventricle to the lungs and returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary
arteries.
The systemic vessels transport blood from the left ventricle to all regions of the body's tissues
before returning it to the right atrium.
Diffusion, filtration, and osmosis are all ways for substances to flow past the capillary wall.
Ventilation, external respiration, gas transfer, internal respiration, and cellular respiration are all
part of the respiration process.
The pharynx also referred to as the throat, is a tract that runs from the base of the skull to the sixth
cervical vertebra.
The larynx, often known as the voice box, is an airway that connects the pharynx above and the
trachea below.
The major airway to the lungs is the trachea, sometimes known as the windpipe.
The trachea is divided into the right and left principal bronchi, which branch off into smaller and
smaller passages until they reach alveoli, which are tiny air sacs.
Beyond the major bronchi, the two lungs contain all of the bronchial tree's components.
The right lung is narrower, wider, and divided into three lobes than the left lung.
The left lung is longer, narrower, and divided into two lobes than the right lung.
The urinary system eliminates waste products from the body, controls fluid volume, maintains
electrolyte concentrations in body fluids, regulates blood pH, and secretes erythropoietin and
renin.
The kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra are all parts of the urinary system.
The parenchyma of the kidney is made up of the cortex and medulla.
The renal pelvis is located in the centre of the kidney and collects urine as it is produced.
A nephron, which is made up of a renal corpuscle and a renal tubule, is the functional unit of the
kidney.
Urine is transported from the kidney to the urinary bladder via the ureters.
The urinary bladder serves as a temporary urine storage reservoir.
The urethra is the last tube through which urine flows.
An involuntary internal urethral sphincter and a voluntary external urethral sphincter govern the
passage of urine through the urethra.
Grade 10 Biology
147
Unit 5: Human Biology
Review Questions
I. True False Items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise book.
1. Blood pressure is highest in veins.
2. Atherosclerosis is the build-up of plaque inside arteries.
3. Platelets are blood cells that fight infections.
4. Food travels from the mouth to the stomach because of gravity.
5. Most absorption of nutrients takes place in the stomach.
6. For good health, you should never eat lipids.
7. The kidneys are the main organs of the excretory system.
8. Nephrons carry urine out of the body.
II. Multiple Choice Items: Choose the correct answer from A - E and write on your exercise book.
1. Part of the alimentary canal where mechanical digestion and the chemical digestion of
polysaccharides begin.
A. Mouth
B. Stomach
C. Liver
D. Small Intestine
E. None of the above
2. The 1st location in the digestive system where peristalsis occurs:
A. Mouth
B. Esophagous C. Stomach D. Small Intestine
E. Large Intestine
3. Where in the alimentary canal does pepsinogens are activated into pepsin to aid in the digestion
of proteins.
A. Mouth
B. Esophagous C. Stomach D. Small Intestine
E. Pancreas
4. The organ that releases many enzymes that aid in the breakdown of all types of organic molecules:-
A. Mouth
B. Gall Bladder
C. Stomach
D. Liver
E. Pancreas
5. The tube though which food and air (that you breathe) passes:-
A. Esophagous
B. Larynx
C. Trachea
D. Pharynx
E. Rectum.
6. Bile is produced in
.
A. Salivary Glands
B. Pancreas
C. Stomach
D. Liver
E. Gall Bladder
7. Which of the following organs produce insulin, required for glucose uptake into body cells?
A. Liver
B. Gall Bladder
C. Pancreas
D. Stomach
E. None of the above
8. Which of the following is not a major task of the digestive system?
A. Secretion
B. Digestion
C. Absorption D. Elimination E. Circulation
9. Which of the following is not considered an accessory gland to the digestive system?
A. Wall of the gastrointestinal tract GI)
C. Liver
B. Salivary Glands
D. Pancreas
E. All of the above
148
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
10. Rank the following blood vessels in order of their average pressure, from highest to lowest:
artery, vein, arteriole, venule, aorta, capillary.
A. Capillary > vein >venule> arteriole > artery > aorta
B. Aorta > arteriole >venule> artery > vein > capillary
C. Aorta > artery > arteriole > capillary >venule> vein
D. Capillary > arteriole >venule> artery > vein > aorta
E. None of the above
11. Which of the following statement about circulatory systems is false?
A. In closed circulatory systems, blood flows through vessels that are separate from the
interstitial fluid of the body.
B. The earthworm has a closed circulatory system.
C. In an open circulatory system, the hemolymph empties into the body cavity.
D. Lobsters are organisms that have closed circulatory systems.
12. Red blood cells are also known as:-
A. Lymphocytes
B. monocytes
C. erythrocytes
D. basophils
13. How does the structure of red blood cells allow them to deliver oxygen to the cells of the body?
A. Their size and shape allow them to carry and transfer oxygen.
B. Their disc shape contains many small vesicles that allow them to carry and transfer oxygen.
C. They have nuclei and do not contain haemoglobin.
D. They contain coagulation factors and antibodies.
E. All of the above
14. Which of the following best describes plasma?
A. It is a protein synthesized in the liver.
B. It is a liquid that contains only lipids and antibodies.
C. It is a blood component that is separated by spinning blood.
D. It is an antibody produced in the mucosal lining.
E. All of the above except A
15. Which of the following is a function of the breathing system?
A. gas exchange
C. transport of oxygen
B. absorption of nutrients
D. structural support
E. A and D
16. The trachea leads to the
.
A. bronchioles
B. Bronchii
C. oesophagus
D. pulmonary vessel E. Nasal cavity
Grade 10 Biology
149
Unit 5: Human Biology
17. The space at the back of the mouth, which leads either to the airway or the esophagus is the:
A. larynx
B. nasal cavity
C. Pharynx
D. None of the above
18. Oxygen from the air enters the bloodstream through:-
A. cardiac notch B. pulmonary vein C. alveoli D. paranasal sinuses E. larynx
19. When the diaphragm contracts (is pulled downward),
occurs.
A. inhalation
C. hiccup
B. exhalation
D. Lung collapse E. Both exhalation and inhalation
20. Which one of the following is the correct path urine takes as it moves through the urinary system?
A. kidneys - ureters - bladder - urethra
C. bladder - kidneys -urethra - ureters
B. ureters - kidneys - bladder - urethra
D. Uretra - kidneys - Ureters - badder
E. None of the above
21. The
is the functional unit of the kidney.
A. Villus
C. Lymph node
B. Alveoli
D. Nephron
E. All of the above
22. Which of the following substances are not filtered out of the blood in the nephrons?
A. Blood cells and proteins
C. Urea and water
B. Glucose and amino acids
D. Salts and hormones E. A and C
23. All of the substances that are removed from the blood via the Bowman's capsule are called
.
A. Plasma
B. Filtrate
C. Urine
D. Lymph
W E. C and D
24. What substances must be reabsorbed back into the blood from the convoluted tubule and loop
of Henle?
A. Water
B. Salts C. Glucose
D. All of the above
E. None of the above
25. Urine is primarily composed of:
A. Lymph
B. Red blood cells C. Carbon dioxide
D. Water
E. Oxygen
26. What is the role of liver in the maintenance of homeostasis?
A. Stores extra carbohydrates in the form of glycogen
B. Produces bile to aid in fat digestion
C. Produces clotting proteins
D. All of the above
E. Only A and B
III. Fill in the Blanks: Fill in the blank with the term that best completes the sentence.
1. Blood pressure that is higher than normal termed
.
2. The liquid part of blood is referred to as
.
3. Blood type is determined by the presence or absence of
on blood cells.
150
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
4. Tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place are called
.
5. The disease in which air passages of the lungs periodically become too narrow is
.
6. A wave of involuntary muscle contractions that moves food through the digestive system is
called
.
7. The physical breakdown of chunks of food into smaller pieces is referred to as
digestion.
8. The small intestine is lined with tiny finger-like projections named
.
9. Solid waste that leaves the large intestine is known as
.
10. Nutrients needed in small amounts for the body to function properly are
.
IV. Short Answer Items
1. Which enzymes secreted by the pancreas promote digestion?
2. Explain the chemicals and processes involved in protein and carbohydrate digestion. Why are
carbohydrates not digested in the stomach?
3. List the lipid-digesting enzymes secreted from the pancreas. Do these enzymes allow for acomplete
breakdown of lipids?
4. How is the duodenum protected against stomach acid? Why does pepsin remain inactive in
the duodenum?
5. In cases of extreme obesity, a section of the small intestine may be removed. What effect do you
think does this procedure have on the patient?
6. Describe what the inside of the small intestine looks like and how this organ increases thethe
efficiency of its operation.
Write the structures A-L
1.
F
2.
A
G
3.
H
4.
5.
6.
B
I
C
7.
J
8.
K
D
9.
E
10.
L
11.
12.
Grade 10 Biology
151
Unit 5: Human Biology
7. Discuss functions of the circulatory system?
8. Mention types of blood circulation in human body?
9. Define pulmonary Circulation.
10. What is the difference between pulmonary and Systemic Circulation?
11. Discuss the effect of fat deposits on the artery walls.
12. State functions of the right atrium.
13. What is the function of the right ventricle?
14. Why muscles of the heart on the left side are thicker?
15. Label the following kidney diagram following the letters pointed at each structure.
Write the structures A-F
E
B
1.
A
F
1.
C
G
1.
1.
1.
1.
D
1.
16. What are the Breast milk components?
17. Describe the process from food intake to excretion? How does nutrition and immunity
development relates?
152
Grade 10 Biology
