Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to:
explain that a chemical bond is an attractive force between particles
demonstrate an understanding of the formation and general properties of
substances containing ionic, covalent and metallic bonds
draw Lewis structure for simple ionic and covalent compounds
identify the origin of polarity within molecules
describe the formation and nature of hydrogen bonds, dipole-dipole
forces and London forces
explain the bonding models (Lewis model, valence bond model and
molecular orbital model) and show the usefulness of the bonding theories
in explaining and predicting molecular properties (bond angle, bond
length, bond energy, etc...)
explain how the properties of a substance (solid or liquid) depends on the
nature of the particles present and the type of intermolecular forces
discuss the importance of intermolecular forces in plant and animal life
explain how the Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) model
can be used to predict molecular shape
conduct experiments to observe and analyze the physical properties of
different substance to determine the type of bonding present
describe scientific enquiry skills along this unit: observing, inferring,
predicting, classifying, comparing and contrasting, making models,
communicating, asking questions, applying concepts, relating cause and
effect and making generalization.
66
UNIT 2
Introduction
Start-up Activity
Discuss the following issues in a group and present your ideas
to the class.
Why do the substances around us behave differently? For instance, table
salt is a hard, brittle, high-melting solid that conducts electricity only when
molten or dissolved in water. Candle wax melts at a low temprature, is soft,
and non-conducting. Copper (and most other metallic substances) is shiny,
malleable, and able to conduct electricity whether it is molten or solid.
2.1
Introduction
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
define chemical bonding
explain why atoms form chemical bonds
illustrate chemical bonding using the octet rule
describe the types of chemical bonding and the mechanisms of the
bonding process.
In Grade 9, you learned about chemical bonding and its types, such as ionic,
covalent and metallic bonding. In this unit, we will discuss some new concepts
about chemical bonding, like intermolecular forces, molecular geometry, theories
of chemical bonding, etc.
Activity 2.1
Discuss the following issues in groups, then present your ideas to the whole class.
1. Why do atoms combine?
2. Why are molecules more stable than free atoms?
3. What forces act on two atoms as they come together?
4. Explain how the potential energy changes when two hydrogen atoms
form a bond.
The attractive force which holds atoms, ions, and molecules together is called a
chemical bond. Since these forces of attracstion are intramolecular forces, they have
an effect on the chemical properties as well as the physical properties of the chemical.
UNIT 2
67
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
2.1.1
The Octet Rule
Activity 2.2
From your knowledge of Grade 9 chemistry discuss the following questions
in a group of four, then present your responses to the whole class.
1. Why do some atoms combine while others do not? Give some
examples in your answer.
2. Why do different atoms form different types of bonding?
All noble gases except helium (1s²) have ns²np⁶ electron configurations (where n
indicates the highest occupied shell). The noble gases are quite unreactive because
they have very stable electron configurations, as reflected by their high ionization
energies and low electron affinities. Because all the noble gases (except helium) have
outer shells with eight electrons, many atoms undergoing reactions also attain eight
valence electrons (ns²np⁶). This rule has become known as the octet rule, as follows:
Atoms tend to gain or lose electrons until they have achieved an outer shell that
contains an octet of electrons (eight electrons).
Do you know any compound whose central atom does not obey the octet rule?
2.1.2
Types of Chemical Bonding
Activity 2.3
Discuss the following questions in pairs and share your ideas with the whole class.
1. Why do metals tend to form cations and why do non-metals tend to form
anions?
2. Why do two non-metals combine to form compounds while no similar
process exists for two metals to form a compound?
In general, there is a gradual change from metallic to non-metallic character as you
move from left to right across a period and from bottom to top within most groups
in the periodic table. Accordingly, atoms can combine to form three types of bond:
metal with non-metal (ionic bond), non-metal with non-metal (covalent bond), and
metal with metal (metallic bond).
68
UNIT 2
Ionic Bonds
2.2
Ionic Bonds
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
define ionic bonding
use Lewis electron dot symbols for main group elements
describe ionic bonding using Lewis electron dot symbols
list the favourable conditions for the formation of ionic bonds
explain the formation of ionic bonding
give examples of ionic compounds
define lattice energy
calculate lattice energy of ionic crystals from given data using the Born-
Haber cycle
discuss the exceptions to the octet rule
describe the properties of ionic bonding
carry out an activity to demonstrate the effect of electricity on ionic
compounds (Pbl₂ and NaCl)
carry out an investigation into the melting point and solubility of some
ionic compounds (NaCl and CuCl₂).
Activity 2.4
Form a group of four and discuss the following questions, then present
your responses to the whole class.
1. Why do elements form ions in certain chemical reactions?
2. Which of the following pairs of elements are likely to form an ionic
compound?
a. sodium and chlorine b. nitrogen and fluorine c. lithium and oxygen
An ionic bond is formed by the electrostatic attraction between positive and negative
ions. The bond forms between two atoms when one or more electrons are transferred
from the valence shell of one atom to the valence shell of the other. The atom that loses
electrons becomes a cation (positive ion), and the atom that gains electrons becomes
an anion (negative ion). Any given ion tends to attract as many neighboring ions of
opposite charge as possible.
UNIT 2
69
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
When large numbers of ions gather together, they form an ionic solid. The solid
normally has a regular, crystalline structure that allows for the maximum attraction of
ions, given their particular sizes.
Example 2.1
The formation of NaCl from sodium and chlorine can be explained as:
Na
Na+ + e⁻
[Ne]3s¹
[Ne]
Cl + e⁻
Cl⁻
[Ne]3s²3p⁵
[Ne]3s²3p⁶ or [Ar]
Na+ + Cl⁻
NaCl or Na+Cl⁻
The bond formed, as a result of the electrostatic attraction between the positive and
negative ions is called the electrovalent bond or ionic bond.
Note: Ionic compounds are usually formed when metal cations bond with non-metal
anions. What about an ionic compound containing an ammonium ion?
Exercise 2.1
1. Explain the formation of bonds in the following pairs of elements:
a. potassium and chlorine
c. sodium and oxygen
b. magnesium and oxygen
2. Which of the following elements will form an ionic bond with
chlorine, why?
a.
calcium
b. carbon
c. oxygen
d. silicon
3. Identify the species found in the following ionic compounds: CaCl₂,
MgO, and A1₂O₃. From this what can you conclude about the formation
of these compounds?
4. Why do elements located on the opposite sides of the periodic table
tend to form ionic bonds?
70
UNIT 2
Ionic Bonds
2.2.1
Lewis Electron-Dot Symbols
The American Chemist Gilbert N. Lewis (1875-1946) developed a special set of
symbols for his theory. A Lewis symbol consists of a chemical symbol to represent the
nucleus and core (inner-shell) electrons of an atom, together with dots placed around
the symbol to represent the valence (outer-shell) electrons. For example, the Lewis
symbol for chlorine, which has the electron configuration, [Ne]3s²3p⁵, is
Cl
A Lewis structure is a combination of Lewis symbols that represents either the transfer
or the sharing of electrons in a chemical bond.
For example, the formation of sodium chloride from sodium and chlorine atoms can
be represented as:
X
+
Na
+
Cl
[Na]
[x
Lewis symbols
Lewis structure
Activity 2.5
Discuss the following questions in pairs and present your responses to the
whole class.
1. Sodium atom is highly reactive, but sodium ion is not. Explain.
2. Write the Lewis symbols of K+, S²⁻, Al³⁺, and F⁻ ions.
Exercise 2.2
1. Use Lewis electron-dot symbols to depict the formation of lithium
and fluoride ions from the atoms and determine the formula of the
compound.
2. Apply the Lewis formula to illustrate the formation of calcium chloride
from calcium and chlorine atoms.
3. Write Lewis structures for the following compounds:
a. BaO
b. potassium oxide
c. aluminum oxide
4. Use Lewis symbols to show electron transfer between the following
atoms to form cations and anions:
a. K and S
b. Ca and O
c. Al and N
UNIT 2
71
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
2.2.2
Formation of Ionic Bonds
You may be surprised to learn that the electron-transfer process actually absorbs
energy! So why does it occur? As you will see, the reason ionic substances exist at all
is because of the enormous release of energy when the ions come together and form
a solid.
Consider just the electron-transfer process for the formation of lithium fluoride, which
involves two steps:
1. A gaseous Li atom loses an electron (IE₁):
Li(g)
Li+(g) + e⁻
IE₁ = +520 kJ
2. A gaseous F atom gains an electron lost by Li atom (EA):
F(g) + e-
F⁻(g)
EA = -328 kJ
Note that the two-step electron-transfer process by itself requires energy:
Li(g) + F(g)
Li+(g) + F⁻(g)
IE₁ + EA = +192 kJ
The total energy needed for ion formation is even greater than this because metallic
lithium and diatomic fluorine must first be converted to separate gaseous atoms, which
also requires energy. Despite this, the standard heat of formation (AHƒ) of solid LiF is
-617 kJ/mol; that is, 617 kJ is released when 1 mol of LiF(s) forms from its elements.
That is, there must be some exothermic energy component large enough to overcome
the endothermic steps. These are:
When 1 mol of Li+(g) and 1 mol of F⁻(g) form 1 mol of LiF (g):
Li+(g) + F-(g)
LiF(g)
№ = -755 kJ
When the gaseous ions coalesce into a crystalline solid. That occurs because
each ion attracts others of opposite charge:
Li⁺(g) + F⁻(g)
LiF(s)
№ = 1050 kJ
The negative of this value, 1050 kJ, is the lattice energy of LiF. The lattice energy (U)
is the enthalpy change that occurs when 1 mol of ionic solid separates into gaseous
ions. It indicates the strength of ionic interactions, which influence melting point,
hardness, solubility, and other properties.
72
UNIT 2
Ionic Bonds
Lattice Energies from the Born-Haber Cycle
So we need to know the lattice energy of solid lithium fluoride. Finding the lattice
energy of an ionic solid by eperiment is difficult. However, this quantity can be found
indirectly using the Born-Haber cycle. The reasoning is based on Hess's law, which
states that an overall reaction's enthalpy change is the sum of the enthalpy changes for
the individual reactions that make it up:
Consider the Born-Haber cycle for the formation of NaCl. We think that solid sodium
chloride can be formed from the elements by two different routes, as shown in Figure 2.1.
In one route, NaCl(s) is formed directly from Na(s) and 1/2Cl₂(g); 1 -411 kJ mol⁻¹
Direct
Na(s)
+ 1/2Cl2(g)
route
NaCl(s)
Step 1
Step 2
Na(g)
Cl(g)
Step 3
Step 4
Na + (g)
+
Cl (g)
Step 5
Figure 2.1: Born-Haber cycle for NaCl
The second route consists of the following five steps, along with the enthalpy change
for each.
Step1: Metallic sodium is vaporized to a gas of sodium atom:
Na (s)
Na (g)
№ step1 = + 108 kJ mol⁻¹
Step 2: Chlorine molecules are dissociated to atoms:
1/2C1₂ (g)
Cl (g)
№ step2 = ½ bond energy of C1₂
= ½ (240 KJ) = + 120 kJ mol⁻¹
Step 3: Sodium atoms are ionized to Na⁺ ions:
Na (g)
Na⁺ (g) + e⁻
AH° step3 = IE₁ = + 496 kJ mol⁻¹
Step 4: Formation of chloride ion:
Cl (g) + e⁻
Cl⁻ (g)
№ step4 = EA = -349 kJ mol⁻¹
UNIT 2
73
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Step 5: Formation of NaCl(s) from ions. The ions Na⁺ and Cl⁻ combine to give solid
sodium chloride whose enthalpy changes (the lattice energy) is unknown:
Na⁺(g) + Cl⁻(g)
NaCl(s) ДН° step5 = U (lattice energy) =?
We know the enthalpy formation of NaCl (Direct route) and equals -411 kJ
mol⁻¹. Therefore, we can calculate the lattice energy using Hess's low: Solving for
U NaCl gives:
U NaCl = ДН°- step1 № step2 № step3 № )
= 411 kJ mol⁻¹ - [108 kJ mol⁻¹ + 120 kJ mol⁻¹ + 496 kJ mol⁻¹ + (-349 kJ mol⁻¹)]
= -786 kJ mol⁻¹
Note: Ionic solids exist only because the lattice energy exceeds the energy required
for the electron transfer.
Exercise 2.3
1. Draw a Lewis electron-dot symbol for each atom:
a. Rb
b. As
c. I
2. Give the group number and general electron configuration of an element
with each electron-dot symbol:
a.
X
b.
X
3. How does the lattice energy of an ionic compound depend on the charges
and sizes of the ions?
4. Use condensed electron configurations and Lewis electron dot symbols
to depict the monatomic ions formed from each of the following atoms,
and predict the formula of the compound the ions produce.
a. Ba and Cl
b. Sr and O
c. Al and F
d. Rb and O
5. Identify the main group to which X belongs to in each ionic compound
formula:
a. X₂O₃
b. XCO₃
c. Na₂X
6. For each pair, choose the compound with the lower lattice energy, and
explain your choice:
a. CaS or BaS b. NaF or MgO c. LiCl or CsCl d. BaS or CsCl
74
UNIT 2
Ionic Bonds
Factors Affecting the Formation of Ionic Bonds
Activity 2.6
Discuss each of the following questions and forward your responses to the
whole class.
1. In general, how does the lattice energy of an ionic compound depend
on the charges and sizes of the ions?
2. Why is an ionic compound unlikely to consist of ions of noble gases?
3. What characteristic charges do atoms in Groups 13 (IIIA) up to 17
(VIIA) of the periodic table have when they form ions?
The formation of ionic bonding is influenced by various factors. Some of the major
factors are presented below.
Ionization energy (IE): The lesser the ionization energy, the greater is the ease of the
formation of a cation. Thus, low ionization energy of metallic elements such as alkali
and alkaline earth metals favours the formation of an ionic bond.
Electron affinity (EA): A higher electron affinity favours the formation of an anion.
Generally, the elements having higher electron affinity such as halogens favour the
formation of an ionic bond. Thus, low ionization energy of a metal atom and high
electron affinity of a non-metal atom facilitate the formation of an ionic bond between
them.
Lattice energy: When a cation and an anion come closer, they get attracted to each
other due to the electrostatic (coulombic) force of attraction. The electrostatic force of
attraction between oppositely-charged ions release a certain amount of energy and an
ionic bond is formed. If the coulombic attraction forces are stronger, then more energy
gets released and a more stable or a stronger ionic bond is formed. Larger lattice
energy would favour the formation of an ionic bond. Lattice energy thus is a measure
of coulombic attractive force between the combining ions. The lattice energy (U) of
an ionic compound depends directly on the product of the ionic charges (q₁ X q₂), and
inversely on the distance (r) between them:
U ∞ q₁ X q₂
r
UNIT 2
75
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
where q₁ and q₂ are the charges on +ve and -ve ions respectively, and r is the distance
between the charges q₁ and q₂. Thus, small ions having a higher ionic charge will have
a larger lattice energy. If the total energy released is more than that which is absorbed,
then the formation of an ionic compound is favoured.
Activity 2.7
Answer the following questions in groups, then present your answers to the
whole class.
1. Given that the ions in LiF and in MgO are of similar size, which
compound has the stronger ionic bonding?
2. The radii of the sodium and potassium ions are 102 pm and 138 pm,
respectively. Which compound has stronger ionic attractions, sodium
chloride or potassium chloride?
2.2.3
Exceptions to the Octet Rule in Ionic Compounds
Activity 2.8
Discuss the following issues in a group of four and share your responses
with the whole class.
1. Comment on the possible formation of the K²⁺ ion. Why is its
formation unlikely?
2. How many electrons does a Se atom have to gain to have a complete
octet in its valence shell?
3. Identify the cations that obey the octet rule in the following compounds:
a. LiF
b. NaCl
c. CuO
d. FeCl₃
Why does the octet rule work well only for the representative metals (Groups IA, IIA)
and the non-metals, but not for the transition elements?
There are certain exceptions to the octet rule. We will discuss it here with ionic
compounds.
76
UNIT 2
Ionic Bonds
Less than Octet (Central Atom is Deficient of Electrons)
Ions of some elements which are near to helium in the periodic table do not obey the
octet rule. The tendency of these atoms (H, Li, Be and B) is to attain an arrangement of
two electrons like the noble gas He, which is also a stable configuration. The hydride
ion (H⁻), lithium ion (Li⁺), beryllium ion (Be²⁺) and boron ion (B³⁺) are isoelectronic
with He.
Can you give some compounds that contain less than eight electrons around the central
atom?
Although atoms with less than an octet may be stable, they will usually attempt to
form a fourth bond to get eight electrons. For example BF₃ is stable, but it will form
BF₄ when possible.
More than Octet (18-Electron Rule)
The ions of some transition and post-transition elements do not usually obey the octet
rule. For transition metals, the 18-electron rule replaces the octet rule, due to the
involvement of d orbitals of these atoms.
Why don't the atoms of these elements lose electrons to achieve the noble-gas
configurations of ns²np⁶?
Note that when these atoms form positive ions, electrons are always lost first from
the shells with the highest value of the principal quantum number (n). Consider the
electron configurations of the ions of the transition elements iron and zinc and the
post-transition elements gallium and tin.
Electron Configurations of Iron:
26 Fe:
26 Fe²⁺:
26 Fe³⁺:
A stable ion of iron with valence shell electron configuration is 3s² 3p⁶ 3d⁵ which is
not isoelectronic with a noble gas. Fe²⁺ is a well-known stable ion with a valence shell
electron configuration 3s² 3p⁶ 3d⁶ which is not isoelectronic with any of the noble
gases.
UNIT 2
77
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Electron configurations of zinc:
₃₀Zn: 1s² 2s² 2p⁶ 3s² 3p⁶ 4s² 3d¹⁰ = [Ar] 4s²3d¹⁰
₃₀Zn²⁺: 1s² 2s² 2p⁶ 3s² 3p⁶ 3d¹⁰ = [Ar]3d¹⁰
Zn²⁺ is also not isoelectronic with any of the noble gases.
Electron configurations of gallium:
The post-transition element gallium (Ga) loses electrons first from the 4p orbital and
then from the 4s orbital to from a Ga³⁺ ion as
31 Ga: 1s² 2s² 2p⁶ 3s² 3p⁶ 4s²3d¹⁰⁴p¹ = [Ar]4s²3d¹⁰⁴p¹
³₁Ga³⁺: 1s² 2s² 2p⁶ 3s² 3p⁶3d¹⁰ = [Ar]3d¹⁰
On closely examining the electron configurations of Zn²⁺ and Ga³⁺, we will realize
that ions have completely-filled outer subshells and a noble gas core. Their valance
electron configuration can be generally represented as ns²np⁶nd¹⁰.
Exercise 2.4
1. From which orbital (s) do the heavier post-transition elements such as
Pb and Sn lose electrons?
2. Can you write the electron configurations of Sn, Sn²⁺, and Sn⁴⁺? Check
if any of these tin ions are isoelectronic with any of the noble gases.
3. Which group of ions of elements, in general, show more than the octet
(18-electron rule)?
78
UNIT 2
Ionic Bonds
2.2.4
Properties of Ionic Compounds
Experiment 2.1
Investigation of Solubility of Ionic Compounds
Objective: To investigate the solubility of NaCl and CuCl, in polar and non-
polar solvents
Apparatus and Chemicals: Test tube, Bunsen burner, NaCl, CuCl₂, water,
ethanol, cyclohexane, and petroleum ether
Procedure:
1. Place about 0.5 g each of NaCl and CuCl, in to two separate test tubes and
add about 2.5 mL of water and shake both test tubes quickly.
2. If some residue is left in the test tubes, heat the solutions with a Bunsen
burner.
SAFETY: Turn off the Bunsen burners as these chemicals are HIGHLY
FLAMMABLE!
3. Repeat Step 1 using fresh ethanol, cyclohexane, and petroleum ether solvents,
separately. (SAFETY: Do not heat these, as they are highly flammable!)
Observations and analysis:
Prepare an observation table in your notebook for the solubility of NaCl and
CuCl₂ in all the four solvents at room temperature and on heating (SAFETY:
only heat when water is the solvent) and record the observations.
Solvent
NaCl
CuCl2
Water
Ethanol
Petroleum ether
Cyclohexane
Inference/Conclusion
Interpret the observation table and give results.
Make a generalized statement about the solubility of ionic compounds in polar
and non-polar solvents.
UNIT 2
79
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Experiment 2.2
Thermal behavior of ionic compounds
Objective: To study the effect of heat on ionic compounds
Apparatus and chemicals: Test tubes, Bunsen burner, test tubes holders,
sodium chloride, and copper (II) chloride.
Procedure:
1. Take two hard glass test tubes and label them as A and B.
2. Add 0.5 g each of dry sodium chloride crystals and copper (II) chloride
in test tubes A and B, respectively.
3. Hold these test tubes with the help of test tube holders.
4. Heat the tubes at the same time in the Bunsen burner flame, first slowly
and then strongly. Shake them a little when heating.
Caution: Chlorine gas is produced, this would be best carried out in a fume
cupboard.
Observations and analysis:
A. Do the crystals melt?
B. Do they have high or low melting points?
Experiment 2.3
Electrical Conductivity of Ionic Compounds
Objective: To test the electrical conductivity of molten compounds
Apparatus and chemicals: 9-volt battery, 6-watt bulb with a bulb holder,
conducting wires include: beaker, tripod, wire gauze, clamp and stand, two
carbon rods, lead (II) iodide or lead (II) bromide, copper (II) , sulphate or sodium
chloride. Caution: Lead compounds are harmful. Copper sulphate is corrosive
and an irritant.
Procedure A:
1. Connect the circuit as shown in Figure 2.2 in which a 9 volt DC is
connected via a bulb.
80
UNIT 2
Ionic Bonds
2. Using about 2 cm depth of lead (II) iodide or lead (II) bromide in a
small beaker, test the conductivity of the crystals. Do not throw the
crystal away and be careful not to contaminate the sample because you
will reuse it later. (Note: A fairer test of the solid compound would be to
use a lump of the compound rather than its powder).
3. Test the conductivity of large crystals of copper (II) sulphate and
sodium chloride if any of them are available in your laboratory.
Procedure B:
1. Now heat the same lead (II) iodide or lead (II) bromide (used in the
above experiment) in a beaker on a tripod and wire gauze or in a boiling
tube supported by a clamp and stand until it melts.
2. Test the conductivity of the molten compound by dipping the carbon
electrodes (carbon rods) into the molten compound as shown in the
Figure 2.2.
3. Repeat for the other compounds.
9V DC supply
Anode
Cathode
Molten lead (II) iodide
Figure 2.2: Conductivity in the molten state
Observations and analysis:
A. What did you observe?
B. Which of the compounds (molten or solid) conduct electricity? Why?
C. All compounds contain at least two elements. Examine the names of
those compounds which conduct electricity when in the molten state
and decide which groups of the components of these compounds
belong. Name the type of bonding that exists in the compounds used.
UNIT 2
81
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Experiment 2.4
Electrical Conductivity of Ionic Compounds
Objective: To test the electrical conductivity of the aqueous solutions of some
common ionic compounds
Apparatus and chemicals: 9-volt battery, 6-watt bulb with a bulb holder,
conducting wires, two carbon rods, H₂O, lead (II) iodide, NaCl. Caution: Lead
compounds are harmful.
Procedure:
1. Dissolve the compound in 50 mL of water in two separate beakers.
2. Connect the same circuit you used in Experiment 2.3 and test the
conductivity of each aqueous solution (Figure 2.3).
Observations and analysis:
A. Predict what happens at the electrodes based on the type of the compound
used for the experiment.
B. Do you expect the same product(s) at the electrodes when electricity
passes through molten and aqueous solutions of the compounds?
9V DC supply
Anode
Cathode
Lead (II) iodide
solution in water
Figure 2.3: Electrochemical cell showing the conductivity of an aqueous solution
82
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Group Assignment 2.1
Based on the observations and results of Experiments 2.1 to
Experiment 2.4, give a summary of the properties of ionic
compounds.
2.3
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
define covalent bonding
explain the formation of covalent bonding using examples
draw Lewis structures or electron dot formulas of some covalent
molecules
illustrate the formation of coordinate covalent bonding using examples
draw resonance structures of some covalent molecules and polyatomic
ions
discuss the exceptions to the octet rule in covalent bonding
distinguish between polar and non-polar covalent molecules
describe the properties of covalent molecules
carryout an activity to investigate the effects of heat, electricity and
some solvents on covalent compounds (naphthalene, graphite, iodine and
ethanol)
describe the valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR)
distinguish between the bonding pairs and nonbonding pairs of electrons
describe how electron pair arrangements and shapes of molecules can be
predicted from the number of electron pairs
explain why double bonds and lone pairs cause deviations from ideal
bond angles
explain the term dipole moment with the help of a diagram
describe the relationship between dipole moment and molecular geometry
describe how bond polarities and molecular shapes combine to give
molecular polarity
UNIT 2
83
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
predict the geometrical shapes of some simple molecules on the bases of
hybridization and the nature of electron pairs
construct models to represent shapes of some simple molecules
define intermolecular forces
name the different types of intermolecular forces
explain dipole-dipole interactions
give examples of dipole-dipole interaction
define hydrogen bonding
explain the effect of hydrogen bond on the properties of substances
give reasons why hydrogen bonding is stronger than ordinary
dipole-dipole interactions
explain dispersion (London) forces
give examples of dispersion forces
predict the strength of intermolecular forces for a given pair of
molecules.
Formation of Covalent Bonding
Activity 2.9
Discuss each of the following in your group and present your ideas to the
whole class.
1. Can two non-metal atoms combine together? How?
2. Why doesn't a hydrogen atom lose an electron and form an ionic bond?
3. Give one main difference between ionic and covalent bonds.
4. Explain the formation of polar covalent and coordinate covalent bonds.
Consider the formation of a hydrogen molecule (H₂). When two isolated hydrogen
atoms come close together, electrostatic interactions begin to develop between them.
The two positively charged nuclei repel each other, and the two negatively charged
electrons repel each other, but each nucleus attracts both electrons and each electron
is attracted to both nuclei (Figure 2.4). If the attractive forces are stronger than the
repulsive forces, a covalent bond is formed, with the two atoms held together and the
two shared electrons occupying the region between the nuclei.
84
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Attractive
Electron cloud
Electron cloud
Nucleus
Repulsive
Nucleus
Attractive
Figure 2.4: Attractive and repulsive forces in a covalent H-H bond formation
The magnitudes of the various attractive and repulsive forces between nuclei and
electrons in a covalent bond depend on how close together the atoms are.
What happens if the hydrogen atoms are too far apart? What if the hydrogen atoms are
too close together?
There is an optimum distance between nuclei, called the bond length, where net
attractive forces are maximized and the H-H molecule is most stable. In the H2
molecule, the bond length is 74 pm. On a graph of energy versus internuclear distance,
the bond length is the H-H distance in the minimum energy. This is the most stable
arrangement (Figure 2.5).
If the atoms are too close,
HH
(too close)
strong repulsions occur.
+
If the atoms are too far
apart, attractions are weak
and no bonding occurs.
H
H
(too far)
0
When the atoms are
H-H
optimally separated,
Bond
energy is at a minimum
Energy
length
(74 pm)
Internuclear distance
Figure 2.5: Covalent bond formation in H2
UNIT 2
85
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Therefore, a covalent bond is formed when a pair of electrons is shared between two
atoms. Formation of a bond always results in greater electron density between the
nuclei. Some examples of covalent molecules are HCl, H2S, C₂H₄, N₂, CCI₄, BCl₃,
H2O, NH₃, SO₂, PCl₅, O₃, etc. Generally, substances that contain covalent bonds are
called molecules.
Representation of Covalent Bonds (Drawing Lewis Structures)
The representation of covalent bonding through Lewis symbols and shared electron
pairs is called a Lewis structure. The Lewis structure for a hydrogen molecule formed
from hydrogen atoms is:
An electron-pair bond
H·
H
H:H
Two hydrogen
A hydrogen
atoms
molecule
By sharing two electrons in a covalent bond, each hydrogen effectively has one
electron pair and the stable, 1s² electron configuration of helium.
This hydrogen shares
and this hydrogen
an electron pair
shares an electron pair.
Similarly, fluorine has seven valence electrons, and an electron-dot structure for the F2
molecule shows how a covalent bond can form:
A bonding pair
:
F
F:
:F:F:
A lone pair
Two F atoms
An F2 molecule
(seven valence electrons
(each F is surrounded
per atom)
by eight valence electrons)
The shared pairs of electrons in a molecule are called bonding pairs. The other electron
pairs that stay with on atom and are not shared are called non-bonding pairs or lone
pairs.
Do the fluorine atoms in a fluorine molecule (F₂) obey the octet rule?
Note that in molecules such as 0₂, N₂, and many others, the atoms share more than one
pair of electrons, leading to the formation of multiple covalent bonds.
86
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
For example, consider the formation of oxygen molecule (O₂) from the oxygen atoms.
Can you give the atomic number, number of protons and electrons of an oxygen atom?
The electronic configuration of oxygen atoms is 2,6. Now each oxygen atom needs
two electrons to complete its octet. The two oxygen atoms share two electrons and
complete their octet:
:0:
+
:
:ö::ö:
oxygen atom
oxygen atom
sharing of 4 electrons
2,6
2,6
or 2 pairs of electrons
The 4 electrons (or 2 pairs of electrons) which are shared between the two oxygen
atoms. So these two pairs of shared electrons can be represented by two bonds between
the oxygen atoms. An oxygen molecul can be sown as follow:
:ö=ö:
=
The two oxygen atoms are said to be bonded together by two covalent bonds. Such a
bond consisting of two covalent bonds is also known as a double bond.
Steps to Writing a Lewis Formula:
We can write the Lewis formula for a covalent compound of known geometry by
using the following steps.
1. Determine the total number of valence electrons. The total number of electrons
for a molecule is the sum of the valence electrons for each atom. For a polyatomic
anion, which has one or more extra electrons, add one electron for each unit of
negative charge. For a polyatomic cation, which is missing one or more electrons,
subtract one electron for each unit of positive charge.
2. Write the skeletal structure. The most electropositive atom usually occupies the
central position. Connect bonded atoms with an electron-pair bond (a dash).
Hydrogen is an exception; it is always a terminal atom, even when bonded to a
more electronegative atom.
3. Place electron pairs around terminal atoms so that each (except hydrogen) has an
octet. Assign any remaining electrons as lone pairs around the central atom.
4. If at this stage, a central atom has fewer than eight electrons, a multiple bond(s) is
likely. Move one or more lone-pair of electrons from a terminal atom(s) to a region
between it and the central atom to form a double or a triple bond.
UNIT 2
87
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Example 2.2
Write the Lewis structure for nitrogen trifluoride (NF₃) in which all three F
atoms are bonded to the N atom.
Solution:
We follow the steps for writing Lewis structures.
Step 1: The outer-shell electron configurations of N and F are 2s²2p³ and
2s22p5, respectively. Thus, there are 5 + (3 X 7), or 26, valence
electrons to account for in NF₃.
Step 2: The N atom is less electronegative than F, so in the skeletal structure
of NF₃, N goes in the center with the more electronegative F atoms
bonded to it.
F-N-F
π-z
F
Step 3: We draw a single covalent bond between N and each F, and complete
the octets for the F atoms. We place the remaining two electrons on N:
F-N
F
F
Because this structure satisfies the octet rule for all the atoms, step 4 is not
required.
88
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Example 2.3
Write the Lewis structure for the carbonate ion (CO₃²⁻).
Solution: We follow the steps for writing Lewis structures and note that this
is an anion with two negative charges.
Step 1: The outer shell electron configurations of C and O are 2s²2p² and
2s22p4, respectively, and the ion itself has two negative charges. So,
the total number of electrons is 4 + (3 X 6) + 2, or 24.
Step 2: We can deduce the skeletal structure of the carbonate ion by recognizing
that C is less electronegative than O. Therefore, it is most likely to
occupy a central position as follows:
C
Step 3: We draw a single covalent bond between C and each O and comply
with the octet rule for the O atoms:
C
This structure shows all 24 electrons.
Step 4: Although the octet rule is satisfied for the O atoms, it is not for the
C atom. Therefore, we move a lone pair from one of the O atoms to
form another bond with C. Now the octet rule is also satisfied for the
C atom:
12-
|_|
UNIT 2
89
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Exercise 2.5
1. Determine the total number of valence electrons for the following:
a. CO2
b. SO₄²⁻
c. NH₄⁺
d. N₂O₄
2. Write a Lewis structure of
a. nitrogen trichloride, NC1₃
b. chlorate ion, C10₃⁻
c. phosphonium ion, PH₄⁺ +
3. Draw a Lewis structure for SF₄ and HCOOH (formic acid).
4. Which of the following atoms O, He, F, H, and P cannot be used as a
central atom in a Lewis structure? Explain.
5. Write a Lewis structure for carbonyl sulphide, COS.
Coordinate-Covalent Bonding
Activity 2.10
Form a group and discuss the following issues, then present your
responses to the whole class.
1. Consider ammonia and boron trifluoride molecules; identify which
has an incomplete octet and which one has lone pair electrons on the
central atom of the molecule.
2. Can these two molecules react with each other to complete the octet
of an atom with an incomplete octet? How?
Most covalent bonds form when two atoms each contribute one electron. However,
bonds can also form when one atom donates both electrons (a lone pair) to another
atom that has a vacant valence orbital. The ammonium ion (NH₄⁺), for example, forms
when the lone-pair electrons from the nitrogen atom of ammonia, NH₃, bond to H+.
Such kind of bonds is called coordinate covalent bonds or dative bonds.
+
H⁺ + :N:H H H
Some examples of molecules which contain coordinate-covalent bonds include NH3,
BCl₃, H3O+ and AICI₄⁻.
90
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Resonance Structures
Activity 2.11
Form a group and discuss the following questions and present your
responses to the whole class.
1. How many structural formulas can you write for each of the following?
a. H2O
b. NH₄⁺
c. CO3²⁻
d. C₆H₆ (Benzene)
2. What is the difference between a resonance structure and a resonance
hybrid?
Sometimes more than one valid Lewis structure is possible for a given molecule. For
example, two Lewis structures are possible for ozone (O₃):
O
O.
O:
and
0
O:
A
B
In formula A, the oxygen-oxygen bond on the left is a double bond and the oxygen-
oxygen bond on the right is a single bond. In formula B, the situation is just the
opposite. These are not two different O₃ molecules, just different Lewis structures for
the same molecule. However, neither one of these two Lewis structures accounts for
the known bond lengths in O₃ (1.278 Å).
1.278A
1.278A
Since both the bonds are identical, which one is a double bond? Bond length and
bond energy measurements indicate that the two oxygen-oxygen bonds in O₃ are
identical, with properties that lie between those of an 0-0 bond and an 0=0 bond,
something like a "one-and-a-half" bond. The molecule is shown more correctly with
two Lewis structures, called resonance structures (or resonance forms), and a two-
headed resonance arrow (4) between them.
O:
:0:
O'
A
B
UNIT 2
91
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Unfortunately, this notation can be misinterpreted. It does not mean that the ozone
molecule flips back and forth between two forms. There is only one ozone molecule.
The double-headed arrow means that you should form a mental picture of the molecule
by joining the various resonance formulas.
Resonance structures have the same relative placement of atoms but different locations
of bonding and lone electron pairs. Our need for more than one Lewis structure to
depict the ozone molecule is the result of electron-pair delocalization. You can convert
one resonance form to another by moving lone pairs to bonding positions, and vice
versa:
O:
:0
III
O:
A
B
A resonance hybrid
This description of O₃ is called resonance, in which two or more possible Lewis
structures can be written and the true structure is a composite or hybrid of them.
The different structures used to represent the molecule or ion are called resonance
forms or resonance contributors or resonance structures.
Example 2.4
Write two equivalent Lewis structures for the nitirite ion, NO₂⁻ Describe
its resonance hybrid structure.
Solution: In NO2 - there are 5 + 2(6) + 1 = 18 valence electrons. Indicating
the single bonds gives the structure
0-N-0
The remaining 14 electrons (18-4) can be distributed to produce these
structures:
N
N
The electronic structure of the molecule is correctly shown by the average
of the two. There are two equivalent N---O bonds, each one intermediate
between a single and a double bond.
92
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Exercise 2.6
1. Write three equivalent structures for the SO₃ molecule that obey the
octet rule.
2. Draw Lewis structures of all the important resonance forms of each of
the following:
a. NO₂F (N central)
b. HNO3
c. NO₂⁻
Exceptions to the Octet rule in Covalent Bonding
Activity 2.12
Discuss the following issues in groups and present your answers to the
whole class.
1. What requirements are needed for an atom to expand its valence shell?
2. Which of the following atoms can expand its valance shell: F, S, H, Al?
3. Identify the atoms in PCl₃, PC1₅, OF2, BF₃, and SiF₄ which do not obey
octet rule.
Although many Lewis structures follow the octet rule, there are exceptions. There can
be categorized into three groups:
i.
Less than octet (central atom is deficient of electrons):
Electron-deficient compounds are compounds in which an element has an incomplete
octet. The central atoms of such molecules have fewer than eight electrons (below
octet). This group consists of molecules containing central atoms from Group IIA and
IIIA. For example, BeCl₂, BF₃ and AICI₃, whose Lewis formulas are shown:
Cl
Be
Cl
FB-F
Cl
Al
Cl
F
Cl
4 electrons around Be
6 electrons around B
6 electrons around Al
ii. More than octet (central atom has excess of electrons):
Elements with an expanded valence (also called an expanded octet) have more than 8
electrons (often 10 or 12) in a Lewis structure. Elements in the third period and below,
such as phosphorus, sulfur, and bromine, often have an expanded valence because of
their larger radii (when compared to the second-row elements) and the availability of
UNIT 2
93
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
empty d orbitals in the valence shell. For example PF₅, SF₆ and XeF₄ :
S
10 electrons around P 12 electrons around S 12 electrons aroud Xe
iii. Molecules containing an odd number of electrons:
Even if stable molecules of this kind (free radicals) are rare, they do exist. Free radicals
can also be electron-deficient compounds. Some examples are C1O2, NO and NO₂
having 19, 11 and 17 valence electrons, respectively. For example, the best way to
suggest the Lewis-like structure for the NO molecules is:
N=O
Exercise 2.7
1. Suggest the Lewis-like structure for NO₂ and CIO₂ molecules.
2. The following do not obey the octet rule. Draw a Lewis structure
for each one and state the type of octet rule exception:
a. BH₃
b. AsF₄⁻
c. SeCl₄ d. PF₆⁻
Polar and Non-Polar Covalent Molecules
Activity 2.13
Discuss the following questions in groups and present your responses to the
whole class.
1. Describe the trend in electronegativity as "increases" or "decreases" for
each of the following:
a. from B to F
b. from Mg to Ba
c. from F to I
2. What does the word "dipole" refer to?
3. How does electronegativity relate to bond polarity?
94
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
When the atoms are alike in a covalent bond, as in the case of the H-H bond of H2,
the bonding electrons are shared equally. That is, the electrons spend the same amount
of time near each nucleus. The bond formed is called a non-polar covalent bond. In
a covalent bond between atoms of different electronegativities, there is an unequal
sharing of an electron pair and the electrons spend more of their time around the more
electronegative atom. Such a bond is said to be polar covalent bond. The H-F bond
is a polar bond because fluorine is more electronegative than the hydrogen atom. The
bonding electrons spend more time near the fluorine atom than the hydrogen atom.
The polar nature of a bond is shown like this:
H⁸⁺ - Fδ⁻
In the representation the δ+ and δ- (read "delta plus" and "delta minus") signify
that one end (H) is partially positive and the other end (F) is partially negative. The
term "partial charge" implies something less than the full charges of the ions that
would result from complete electron transfer. The bond polarity can also be shown by
drawing an arrow so that the head points toward the negative end (F) of the bond and
the crossed tail indicates the positive end (H).
H-F
For a diatomic molecule having a polar covalent bond, such as HF, we can describe
a quantity called the dipole moment, which is a vector sum of the bond moments in a
molecule. Bond moment is a measure of polarity of a diatomic covalent bond.
The dipole moment (µ) is defined as the product of the magnitude of the charge (δ) at
either end of the dipole multiplied by the distance (d) that separates the charge.
µ= δx d
The SI-unit of dipole moment is coulomb-metre (C.m). Dipole moments are often
expressed in the non-SI unit debye (D), where 1D = 3.33564 X 10⁻³⁰ Cm. A very polar
molecule is one with a large dipole moment, while a non-polar molecule will have a
zero-dipole moment.
Note: For a diatomic molecule, the bond moment is the dipole moment. The dipole
moment of a polyatomic molecule (three or more atoms) depends on the geometry of
the molecule. If the bond moments are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction,
then they will cancel each other and the resultant dipole moment will be zero, provided
that the vector sum of the bond moments is zero.
UNIT 2
95
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Exercise 2.8
1. Both CO2 and BCl₃ have zero dipole moments, but the C = O and
B - Cl bond moments are not zero. Explain.
2. Compare the dipoles in the covalent molecules HF, HCl, HBr, and
HI. Explain your answer.
3. For each of the following bonds, indicate the positive end with δ⁺ and
the negative end with δ⁻. Draw an arrow to show the dipole for each.
a. N and F b. Si and Br c. C and O d. P and Br e. N and P
Properties of Covalent Compounds
Carbon tetrachloride is a covalent compound. Would you expect it to conduct
electricity?
Experiment 2.5
Investigating the melting point of covalent compounds
Objective: To investigate the melting point of naphthalene.
Apparatus and chemicals: Thermometer, stirrer, beaker, melting point tube,
naphthalene, glycerine, Bunsen burner.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus shown in Figure 2.6.
2. Place a small amount of naphthalene in the melting point tube.
3. Attach the tube to the side of the thermometer (the liquid in the beaker
will hold the tube in position).
4. Heat the beaker slowly. When the naphthalene melts, record the reading
on the thermometer.
96
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Thermometer
Rubber cork
Stirrer
Stand
Beaker
Melting point tube
Glycerine
Naphthalene
Bunsen burner
Figure 2.6: Determination of melting point of naphthalen
Observations and analysis:
Check your result by referring to standard melting point values. Discuss possible
reasons for the differences in melting point compared to the standard melting
point.
Experiment 2.6
The effects of electricity and some solvents on covalent compounds
Objective: To test the effects of electricity and some solvents on covalent
compounds.
Apparatus and chemicals: Beakers, stirrer, test tubes, table sugar, cyclohexane,
petroleum ether, water, alcohol, naphthalene.
Procedure A: Solubility test
1. Place about 0.5 g or 5 drops each of naphthalene, table sugar, and ethanol
in three separate test tubes and add about 2.5 mL of distilled water and
shake the test tubes vigorously.
2. See a change in the amount of naphthalene, and table sugar added in
each case; if some residue remains in the test tube/s, heat it on a Bunsen
burner.
UNIT 2
97
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
3. Observe if a separating layer is formed between the ethanol and water, it
indicates ethanol is not soluble in water.
4. Repeat the experiment using cyclohexane and petroleum ether solvents,
separately (Caution: do not heat it.)
Procedure B: Conductivity test
1. Connect the circuit as shown in Figure 2.2, (Experiment 2.3) in which a
9-volt DC is connected via a bulb.
2. Test the conductivity of table sugar.
3. Dissolve a spoonful of table sugar in 50 mL of distilled water in a beaker.
Test the resulting solution for electrical conductivity using the setup of
of Figure 2.3, in Experiment 2.4.
Observations and analysis:
Record your observations on your notebook. Copy and complete the table below.
Property
Solubility in non-
Effect of
Substance
Solubility in water
polar solvent
electricity
Naphthalene
Table sugar
Ethanol
Results and Discussion:
1. Draw your conclusion from the above observations.
2. Do these substances conduct electricity either in the solid state or in the
molten (liquid) state?
3. Is there any chemical reaction that takes place at the electrodes?
98
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Activity 2.14
Form a group of four and dscuss the following questions. Then, present
your responses to the whole class.
1. Why does ammonia, NH₃, dissolve in water but methane, CH₄, does not?
2. Distilled water is very poor electrical conductor, whereas rain water can
conduct electricity. Explain why.
3. Unlike ionic compounds, covalent compounds do not conduct electricity
in molten state. Why is that so?
Unlike any ionic compound, many of the covalent compounds are found in gaseous
state at room temperature. Consider methane (CH₄), the simplest compound between
carbon and hydrogen, which have comparable, intermediate electronegativity. It is a
gas at room temperature. Cooling methane to a low temperature condenses it first to a
liquid and then to a solid. Unlike melted ionic compounds, liquid covalent compounds
do not conduct electricity. Therefore, liquid methane does not conduct electricity.
Covalent compounds are molecular substances. They have low melting and boiling
points. Most covalent compounds are soluble in non-polar solvents. Generally:
Covalent compounds exist as separate molecules because electrically neutral
atoms form them and the forces of attraction between these molecules are
relatively weak.
Due to weak intermolecular forces, many covalent molecules or covalent
compounds are liquids or gases at room temperature. However, some covalent
molecules like iodine are solids at room temperature.
Liquid: H₂O, Br₂
Gas: CO2, H2, Cl2, NH3
Covalent compounds are volatile.
Generally, they have low melting points and boiling points.
Covalent compounds are generally insoluble in water. Most covalent compounds
are soluble in non-polar solvents.
Non-polar covalent compounds are non-electrolytes because they do not
conduct electricity.
UNIT 2
99
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
2.3.1
Molecular Geometry
Molecular geometry is the three-dimensional arrangement of atoms in a molecule.
There is a simple procedure that enables us to predict the geometry of a molecule or ion
if we know the number of electrons surrounding a central atom in its Lewis structure.
The basis of this approach is the assumption that electron pairs in the valence shell of
an atom repel one another.
Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
In a covalent bond, a pair of electrons, often called the bonding pair, is responsible
for holding two atoms together. However, in a polyatomic molecule, where there are
two or more bonds between the central atom and the surrounding atoms, the repulsion
between electrons in different bonding pairs causes them to remain as far apart as
possible. The geometry that the molecule ultimately assumes (as defined by the
positions of all the atoms) minimizes the repulsion. This approach to the study of
molecular geometry is called the valence-shell electron-pair repulsion (VSEPR) model.
The basic principle of VSEPR theory is that the pair of valence-shell electron pairs
around the central atom arrange as far away from one another as possible to minimize
electron-pair repulsions. The arrangements that best minimize repulsions naturally
depend on the number of electron sets. Once we have counted the number of electron
groups surrounding the central atom, we can determine its specific shape from the
number of atoms bonded to the central atom.
Electron Pair Arrangement and Molecular Shape
The electron pair arrangement is defined by the orientation/distribution of pairs of
electrons, both bonding and non-bonding (lone pair), around the central atom. On
the other hand, the molecular shape is defined by the relative positions of the atomic
nuclei. Molecular shapes that occur when all the surrounding electrons are bonding
differ from molecular shapes when some of the electrons are non-bonding. Thus, the
same electron set arrangement can give rise to different molecular shapes.
For the prediction of geometrical shapes of molecules with the help of VSEPR theory,
it is convenient to divide molecules into two categories as molecules in which the
central atom has no lone pair and molecules in which the central atom has one or more
lone pairs.
100
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
i.
molecules in which the central atom has no lone pair
Consider molecules that contain atoms of only two elements, A and B, of which A is
the central atom. These molecules have the general formula ABx, where x is an integer
2,3,
(If x = 1, we have the diatomic molecule AB, which is linear by definition.) In
the vast majority of cases, x is between 2 and 6. In the compounds of AB₂, AB₃, AB₄,
AB₅ and AB₆, the arrangements of electron pairs and the B atoms around the central
atom A are: linear, trigonal planar, tetrahedral, trigonalbipyramidal and octahedral,
respectively. Such arrangements can be seen in molecules such as BeCl₂ (AB₂), BF₃
(AB₃), CH₄ (AB₄) and PCl₅ (AB₅) as shown below (Figure 2.7) by their ball and stick
models.
180°
90°
120°
109.5°
120°
BeCl₂
BF₃
CH4
PCI₅
Figure 2.7: The shapes of molecules in which the central atom has no lone pair
In the case of multiple (double or triple) bonds the counting is not different, because
a double bond is considered as one set and a triple bond as another set of electrons.
For example, in the case of CO2, O=C=0, there are two sets of electrons around the
central atom, acetylene, C₂H₂, H-C=C-H, two sets of electrons around each of the
central atoms.
ii. molecules in which the central atom has one or more lone pairs
In such molecules there are three types of repulsive forces-those between bonding
pairs, those between lone pairs, and those between a bonding pair and a lone pair. In
general, according to the VSEPR model, the repulsive forces decrease in the following
order:
Lone pair vs lone pair > lone pair vs bonding pair > bonding pair vs bonding pair
Why is that repulsions exerted by lone pair is greater than that of bonding pair?
To keep track of the total number of bonding pairs and lone pairs, we show molecules
with lone pairs as ABₓₑ,, where A is the central atom, B is a surrounding atom, and E
is a lone pair on A. Both x and y are integers; x = 2, 3, =
and y = 1,2,
Thus, the
values of x and y indicate the number of surrounding atoms and number of lone pairs
on the central atom, respectively. The simplest such molecule would be a triatomic
molecule with one lone pair on the central atom and the formula is AB₂E.
UNIT 2
101
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
AB2E: Sulfur Dioxide (SO₂)
The Lewis structure of sulfur dioxide is:
0=S=0
Because VSEPR treats double bonds as though they were single, the SO₂ molecule can
be viewed as consisting of three electron pairs on the central S atom. Of these, two are
bonding pairs and one is a lone pair. Thus, the overall arrangement of three electron
pairs is trigonal planar. But because one of the electron pairs is a lone pair, the SO₂
molecule has a "bent" shape.
S
O'
Because the lone-pair versus bonding-pair repulsion is greater than the bonding-pair
versus bonding-pair repulsion, the two sulfur-to-oxygen bonds are pushed together
slightly and the OSO angle is less than 120°.
AB₃E: Ammonia (NH3)
The ammonia molecule contains of three bonding pairs and one lone pair:
H
--
H
H
The overall arrangement of four electron pairs is tetrahedral. But in NH₃ one of the
electron pairs is a lone pair, so the geometry of NH3 is trigonal pyramidal. Because
the lone pair repels the bonding pairs more strongly, the three NH bonding pairs are
pushed closer together:
N
H
H
H
AB₂E₂: Water (H2O)
A water molecule contains two bonding pairs and two lone pairs:
H-O-H
The overall arrangement of the four electron pairs in water is tetrahedral, the same as
in ammonia.
However, unlike ammonia, the HOH angle is 104.5°. The geometry of H2O is bent.
Why do you think this is?
102
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
O
H
H
AB₄E: Sulfur Tetrafluoride (SF₄)
The Lewis structure of SF₄ is:
F
F:
S
F
F:
The central sulfur atom has five electron pairs whose arrangement is trigonal
bipyramidal. In the SF₄ molecule, however, one of the electron pairs is a lone pair, so
the molecule must have one of the following geometries:
F
F
F
F
:
F
S
S
F
F
F
(a)
(b)
In (a) the lone pair occupies an equatorial position, and in (b) it occupies an axial
position. The axial position has three neighboring pairs at 90° and one at 180°, while
the equatorial position has two neighboring pairs at 90° and two more at 120°. The
repulsion is smaller for (a), and indeed (a) is the structure observed experimentally.
Guidelines for Applying VSEPR Model
Here are some guidelines for applying the VSEPR model:
1. Write the Lewis structure of the molecule, considering only the electron pairs
around the central atom (that is, the atom that is bonded to more than one other
atom).
2. Count the number of electron pairs around the central atom (bonding pairs and
lone pairs). Treat double and triple bonds as though they were single bonds. If
there is more than one central atom, treat each central atom separately.
3. Use the VSEPR geometry to predict the shape of the molecule.
4. In predicting bond angles, note that a lone pair repels another lone pair or a
bonding pair more strongly than a bonding pair repels another bonding pair.
UNIT 2
103
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Molecular Shape and Molecular Polarity
Activity 2.15
Discuss the following questions in a group of four and present your answers
to the whole class.
1. Why is it useful to know the polarities of molecules?
2. Are all dissymmetric molecules polar?
3. Under what conditions do bonds of a compound become non-polar?
Many aspects of molecule's chemical behaviour can be understood if we know the
geometry (shape) of a substance. Molecular shape affects many properties of the
molecule like molecular polarity, which in turn influence melting and boiling points,
solubility, and even reactivity. Molecular polarity is created by molecules with a net
imbalance of charge. In molecules with more than two atoms, both shape and bond
polarity determine the molecular polarity.
Bond Polarity and Dipole Moment
Activity 2.16
Discuss the following concepts in groups, and share your ideas with the rest
of the class.
1. How do we indicate a bond dipole when we draw the structure of a
molecule?
2. Use a drawing to show why the SO₂ molecule is polar.
3. Water has a resultant dipole moment of 6.23x10⁻³⁰ C m (1.87D). Explain
why this fact proves that the H2O molecule must have a bent shape.
Diatomic molecules containing atoms of different elements (for example, HCl, CO,
and NO) have dipole moments and are called polar molecules. Diatomic molecules
containing atoms of the same element (for example, H2, O₂, and F₂) are examples of
non-polar molecules because they do not have dipole moments. For a molecule made
up of three or more atoms, both the polarity of the bonds and the molecular geometry
determine whether there is a dipole moment. Polar bonds do not necessarily lead to
polar molecules. For example, the large electronegativity difference between carbon
104
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
and oxygen makes each C-0 bond quite polar. However, because carbon dioxide
(CO₂) has a linear shape, and its bonds are directed 180° from each other, there is no
net dipole moment (µ); µ=0D.
µ=0
=
δ-,
δ+
δ-
δ-
δ+
δ-
c
c
Equal dipole moments with opposite direction
cancel each other.
Another molecule with identical atoms bonded to the central atom is water. Unlike
carbon dioxide, water has a significant dipole moment (µ= 1.87 D). In each O-H
bond, electron density is pulled toward the more electronegative O atom, but the bond
polarities do not counter-balance each other, because the water molecule is V-shaped.
Instead, the bond polarities partially reinforce each other, and the oxygen end of the
molecule is considerably more negative than the other end.
H
H
Predict whether ammonia molecule is polar or non-polar and show the direction of
bond dipoles and the overall molecular dipole.
Carbon dioxide and water demonstrate how molecular shape influences polarity.
When two or more different molecules have the same shape, the nature of the atoms
surrounding the central atom can have a major effect on the polarity of a molecule.
Consider tetrachloromethane (CC1₄) and trichloromethane (CHCI₃), two AB₄ type
molecules: tetrahedral shape with different polarities. In CC1₄, the surrounding atoms
are all Cl atoms. Although each C-Cl bond is polar, the molecule is non-polar because
the individual bond polarities counter-balance each other. In CHCl₃, an H atom
substitutes for one of the Cl atoms, disturbing the balance and giving chloroform a
significant dipole moment.
UNIT 2
105
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Cl
H
CI
C
Cl
CI
C
a
Cl
Cl
µ=0D =
µ = 1.02 D
If you consider the two constitutional isomers of dichloroethene (C₂H₂Cl₂), they have
the same molecular formula. However, they have different physical and chemical
properties. VSEPR theory predicts that all the nuclei lie in the same plane with a
trigonal planar molecular shape around each carbon atom.
resultant
dipole moment
CI
CI
CI
H
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
CI
cis-dichloroethylene
trans-dichloroethylene
µ = 1.89 D
µ=0D =
The trans isomer has no dipole moment (µ= 0 D) because the C - Cl bond polarities
balance each other. In contrast, the cis-isomer is polar (µ= 1.89 D) because the bond
dipoles partially reinforce each other, with the molecular dipole pointing between the
Cl atoms.
Exercise 2.9
1. Determine the molecular shape and ideal bond angles in:
a.
COC1₂
b. PCl₃
c. SF₂ d. SO₄²⁻
e. CS2
2. When is the molecular shape and the electron-set arrangement the same?
3. Arrange the following AFₙ species in order of increasing F-A-F bond
angles. BF₃, BeF₂, CF₄, NF₃, OF₂
4. In the gas phase, phosphorus pentachloride exists as separate molecules.
In the solid phase, however, the compound is composed of alternating
PCl₄⁺ and PCl₆⁻ ions. How does the molecular shape change as PC1₅
solidifies? How does the angle change?
5.
For molecules of general formula ABₙ (where n > 2), how do you
determine if a molocule is polar?
106
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
2.3.2
Intermolecular Forces in Covalent Compounds
Activity 2.17
Form a group of four and discuss the following questions. Then, present
your responses to the whole class.
1. Why does a polar liquid generally have a higher normal boiling point
than a non-polar liquid of the same molecular mass?
2. State the reason why CH₄ is a gas at room temperature whereas H2O is
a liquid.
3. Only one of these substances is a solid at standard temperature and
pressure (STP): C H₅COOH, CH₃(CH₂)₈CH₃, CH3OH, (CH₃CH₂)₂O.
Which do you think it is and why?
4. Only one of these substances is a gas at STP: NI₃, BF₃, PCl₃, and
CH₂COOH. Which do you think it is and why?
There are two types of force that hold matter together. These are intramolecular and
intermolecular forces. Intramolecular force is a chemical bond (ionic, covalent or
metallic) that exists within a particle (molecule or polyatomic ion) and affects the
chemical property of the species.
Intermolecular force are those bonds that hold particles (ions or molecules) together.
A glass of water for example, contains many molecules of water. These molecules are
held together by intermolecular forces, whereas the intramolecular forces hold the two
hydrogen atoms to the oxygen atom in each molecule of water. Intermolecular forces are
relatively weak as compared to intramolecular forces, because they typically involve
lower charges that are farther apart. However, the strength of the intermolecular forces
is important because they affect physical properties of the species such as melting
point and boiling point.
UNIT 2
107
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Activity 2.18
Discuss the following in a group of four, and share your answers with the
rest of the class.
1. Name some intermolecular forces.
2. Explain why cis-1,2-dichloroethene has a higher boiling point than trans-
1,2-dichloroethene.
3. Which type of compound exhibit hydrogen bonding?
4. Name the factors on which the strength of dispersion forces of the
particles depends.
5. Ice is lighter than water. Why?
Three types of attractive force are known to exist between neutral molecules: dipole-
dipole forces, London (or dispersion) forces, and hydrogen bonding forces. The term
van der Waals forces are a general term for those intermolecular forces that include
dipole-dipole and London forces. Van der Waals forces are the weak attractive forces
in a large number of substances, including Cl2, and Br₂.
Dipole-Dipole forces
Dipole-dipole forces act between the molecules possessing permanent dipole. When
polar molecules are brought near one another, their partial charges act as tiny electric
fields that orient them and give rise to dipole-dipole forces; the partially positive
end of one molecule attracts the partially negative end of another. Ends of the dipoles
possess "partial charges" and these charges are shown by Greek letter delta (δ).
δ⁺ δ⁻
δ⁺ δ⁻
H
Cl
H
CI
Dipole-Dipole
attraction
This interaction is stronger than the London forces but is weaker than ion-ion
interaction because only partial charges are involved. The attractive force decreases
with the increase of distance between the dipoles.
108
UNIT 2
Covalent Bonds and Molecular Geometry
Hydrogen Bonding
Polar molecules containing hydrogen atoms bonded to highly electronegative atoms
of nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine form especially strong dipole-dipole attractions.
This type of attraction, called a hydrogen bond, occurs between the partially positive
hydrogen atom in one molecule and the partially negative nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine
atom in another molecule. The atom sequence that leads to an H bond (dotted line) is
indicated below. Hydrogen bonds are the strongest type of attractive forces between
polar covalent molecules.
What is the difference between hydrogen bonds and chemical bonds?
Example 2.5
Some examples of H-bonding are given below.
δ-
δ+
δ-
δ-
δ+
δ-
δ-
δ+
δ-
F:
H
O:
H
N
Dispersion or London Forces
Usually, the electrons in a non-polar covalent molecule are distributed symmetrically.
However, the movement of the electrons may place more of them in one part of the
molecule than another, which forms a temporary dipole. These momentary dipoles
align the molecules so that the positive end of one molecule is attracted to the negative
end of another molecule.
Temporary dipoles
Nucleus
δ⁺
δ⁻
δ⁺
δ⁻
δ⁺
δ⁻
Electrons
Symmetrical
Unsymmetrical
Dispersion forces
distribution
distribution
UNIT 2
109
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
These weak attractive forces between molecules resulting from the small, instantaneous
dipoles that occur because of the varying positions of the electrons during their motion
about nuclei are called London forces or dispersion forces. They are present between
all particles (atoms, ions, and molecules). Although dispersion forces are very weak,
they make it possible for non-polar molecules like CO2, Cl2, noble gases, etc., to form
liquids and solids.
London forces tend to increase with molecular weight, why do you think this is?
For molecules of about the same molecular weight, the strength of the dispersion
forces is affected by molecular geometry (shape). Shapes that allow more points
of contact have more area over which electron clouds can be distorted, so stronger
attractions result. This is probably the reason why n-pentane has a higher boiling point
(36 °C) than its isomers 2-methylbutane (28 °C), and 2, 2-dimethylpropane (9.5 °C).
Exercise 2.10
1. In which of the following substances do hydrogen bonds occur? Explain
by using diagrams.
a. CH₄
b. CH₃CH₂OH
c. R-CH-C-OH NH₂ O
d. H₃C-O-CH₃
2. What kinds of intermolecular forces (London, dipole-dipole, hydrogen
bonding) would you expect in the following substances?
a. CHCl₃
b. H2O
c. F₂
d. HBr
3. Identify the dominant intermolecular force that is present in each of the
following substance and select the substance with the higher boiling
point in each pair:
a. CH3OH or CH₃CH₂OH
b. Hexane or cyclohexane
c. MgCl₂ or PCl₃
d. CH₃NH₂ or CH3F
4. Compare intermolecular forces with intramolecular bonding.
5. Compare the strength and polarity of intermolecular forces.
110
UNIT 2
Metallic Bonding
2.4
Metallic Bonding
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
explain how a metallic bond is formed
explain the properties of metals related to the concept of bonding, and
investigate the conductivity, malleability and ductility of some metals and
non-metals (Al, Си, Fe, Sn, Zn, S, C charcoal, C graphite and Si).
2.4.1
Formation of Metallic Bonding
Activity 2.19
Form a group and discuss the following questions. Then, share your
responses to the whole class.
1. What are the two characteristics that lead to an element being
classified as a metal?
2. Which types of bond exist in solid copper?
3. What is delocalization of electrons?
Metallic bonds are the chemical bonds that hold atoms together in solid metals such
as copper, iron, and aluminum. In these metals, each metal atom is bonded to several
neighboring atoms. Metallic bonding is the sharing of free electrons (delocalized
electrons) among a lattice of positively charged metal ions. The bonding electrons are
relatively free to move throughout the three-dimensional structure.
How is a metallic bond different from that of covalent and ionic bonds?
The strength of the metallic bond depends on:
1. the number of electrons in the delocalized "sea" of electrons. More delocalized
electrons result in a stronger bond and a higher melting point.
2. the packing arrangement of the metal atoms. The more closely packed the
atoms are the stronger the bond is and the higher the melting point.
UNIT 2
111
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
2.4.2
Electron-Sea Model
The electron-sea model is a very simple model, which pictures the metal as an array
of metal cations in a "sea" of electrons, as illustrated in Figure 2.8. It proposes that
all the metal atoms in a sample pool their valence electrons to form an electron "sea"
that is delocalized throughout the piece. The metal ions (nuclei plus core electrons) are
submerged within this electron sea in an orderly array.
+
+
"Sea" of
+
+
+
+
delocalized
electrons
+
+
+
+
Metal
cations
+
+
+
+
Figure 2.8: The electron-sea model for the electronic structure of metals
The metal ions are not held in place as rigidly as the ions in an ionic solid, and no
two metal atoms are bonded through a localized pair of electrons as in a covalent
bond. Rather, the valence electrons are shared among all the atoms in the sample,
and the piece of metal is held together by the mutual attraction of the metal cations
for the mobile, highly delocalized valence electrons. The mobile electrons, known as
conduction electrons, can transfer thermal vibration from one part of the structure to
another i.e., metals can conduct heat. They are good conductors of electricity also.
2.4.3
Properties of Metals and Bonding
Activity 2.20
Perform the following activity in groups, and share your results to the rest
of the class.
1. Take a piece of metal and a piece of wood of the same size.
2. Let these remain on a table so that both reach room temperature.
3. Place your left hand on the metal and right one on the wood. Which
hand feels colder? Why?
112
UNIT 2
Metallic Bonding
The general properties of metals include malleability and ductility and most are strong
and durable. They are good conductors of heat and electricity. Their strength indicates
that the atoms are difficult to separate.
To what do properties of metals like malleability and ductility refer?
The regularity, but not rigidity, of the metal-ion array and the mobility of the valence
electrons account for the physical properties of metals.
We can explain a lot of the properties of metals by thinking about this model of
metallic bonding. The delocalized electrons are not attached to atoms, so they can
move through the metal easily. This makes metals good conductors of electricity and
heat, even when they are solid.
Why do not ionic compounds conduct electricity when they are in solid form? But
conductor when they are dissolved in water?
The electrostatic bonds between the metal ions and the delocalized electrons are hard
to break, so metals are strong. Why do metals bend or dent, rather than crack or shatter
as ionic solids do when they struck by a hammer? Many metals can be flattened into
sheets (malleable) and pulled into wires (ductile). The combination of strength and
malleability means that metals are easy to bend but hard to break. This makes them
extremely useful for making things.
Metals have moderate to high melting points because the attractions between the
cations and the delocalized electrons are not broken during melting, but boiling points
are very high because each cation and its electron(s) must break away from the others.
Gallium provides a striking example: it melts in your hand (mp 29.8 °C) but doesn't
boil until 2403 °C. The alkaline earth metals [Group IIA(2)] have higher melting
points than the alkali metals [Group IA(1)] because of greater attraction between their
2+ cations and twice the number of valence electrons.
UNIT 2
113
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Activity 2.21
Form a group and discuss the following questions, then present your
responses to the whole class.
1.
List four physical characteristics of a solid metal.
2.
Briefly account for the following relative values:
a. Lithium boils at 1317 °C and melts at 179 °C. The boiling point is
about 1138 °C higher than its melting point.
b. The melting point of Li and Be are 180 °C and 1287 °C, respectively.
c. The melting point of sodium is 89 °C, whereas that of potassium is 63 °C.
2.5
Chemical Bonding Theories
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
name two chemical bond theories
explain the valence bond theory
distinguish the Lewis model and the valence bond model
discuss the overlapping of orbitals in covalent bond formation
explain hybridization
show the process of hybridization involved in some covalent molecules
draw hybridization diagrams for the formation of sp, sp², sp³, sp³d and
sp³d² hybrids
suggest the kind of hybrid orbitals on the basis of the electron structure of
the central atom
predict the geometrical shapes of some simple molecules on the basis of
hybridization and the nature of electron pairs
discuss the hybridization involved in compounds containing multiple
bonds
explain bond length and bond strength
explain molecular orbital theory
describe molecular orbital using atomic orbitals
describe bonding and anti-bonding molecular orbitals
114
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
draw molecular orbital energy level diagrams for homonuclear diatomic
molecules
write the electron configuration of simple molecules using the molecular
orbital model
define bond order and determine the bond order of some simple
molecules and molecule-ions
determine the stability of a molecule or an ion using its bond order; and
predict magnetic properties of molecules.
The Lewis model, one of the earliest models of covalent bond formation, represents
chemical bonds by an electron dot formula. However, it fails to explain the formation of
chemical bonds. It gives no idea about the shapes of polyatomic molecules. Similarly,
the VSEPR theory gives the geometry of simple molecules but, theoretically, it does
not explain them and it has limited applications. Covalent bonds are more accurately
explained using modern bonding theories: the valence bond theory and the molecular
orbital theory.
The valence bond (VB) theory assumes that the electrons in a molecule occupy atomic
orbitals of the individual atoms. It give us a picture of individual atoms taking part
in the bond formation. The molecular orbital (MO) theory, assumes the formation of
molecular orbitals from the atomic orbitals.
Which theory explains all aspects of bonding?
2.5.1
Valence Bond (VB) Theory
The valence-bond approach is the most useful approach to answer questions such as:
what is a covalent bond, and what characteristic gives it strength? How can we explain
molecular shapes based on the interactions of atomic orbitals? The basic principle of
valence bond theory is that a covalent bond forms when orbitals of two atoms overlap
and the overlap region, which is between the nuclei, is occupied by a pair of electrons.
By overlap, we mean that the two orbitals share a common region in space.
UNIT 2
115
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
For example, consider the formation of the H2 molecule from two hydrogen atoms.
Each atom has the electron configuration 1s¹. As the H atoms approach each other, their
1s orbitals begin to overlap and a covalent bond forms (Figure 2.9). Electron density is
higher in the overlap region than anywhere else, and the build-up of negative electron
charge between the positive nuclei provides the electrostatic attraction that holds the
atoms together.
H
+
H
H
H
1s
1s
H2 molecule
Figure 2.9: Atomic orbital overlap and bonding in H2
How is the strength of the bond between any two atoms affected by the extent of the
overlap between the two orbitals?
When two atoms are brought closely together, the repulsion of the atomic nuclei
becomes more important than the electron-nucleus attraction and the bond becomes
unstable. There is a condition of optimal orbital overlap that leads to maximum bond
strength (bond energy) at a particular internuclear distance (bond length).
The bond strength depends on the attraction of the nuclei for the shared electrons,
so the greater the orbital overlap, the stronger (more stable) the bond. The extent of
overlap depends on the shapes and directions of the orbitals. An S orbital is spherical,
but p and d orbitals have more electron density in one direction than in another. Thus,
whenever possible, a bond involving p or d orbitals will be oriented in the direction
that maximizes overlap.
In the HF bond, for example, the 1s orbital of H overlaps the half-filled 2p orbital of
F along the long axis of that orbital (Figure 2.10). Any other direction would result in
less overlap and, thus, a weaker bond.
Note that a single bond consists of two electrons of opposite spin: hence, the two
atomic orbitals that give rise to a single bond can have no more than two electrons in
total.
116
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
x
H
HF
y
F
1
+
1
=
1L
+ z
1s
2p2
sp overlapping
Figure 2.10: Orbital and spin pairing in the formation of a HF molecule
Similarly, in the F-F bond of F₂, the two 2p orbitals interact end-to-end, that is along
the orbital axes, to attain maximum overlap (Figure 2.11).
F2
F
F
1
+
1
=
1L
2p
2p
p-p overlapping
Figure 2.11: Orbital and spin pairing in the formation of a F2 molecule
When two atomic orbitals overlap to build up electron density along the two axis
between the two nuclei, the resulting localized bond is called a sigma bond (σ). Such
an overlap is sometimes referred to as a head on, end-to-end, end on or linear overlap.
In Figures 2.9, 2.10 and 2.11, head-to-head overlap resulted in sigma bonds.
Exercise 2.11
1. Sketch the sigma bonds in Cl2 and HCI molecules.
2. Identify the overlapping orbitals that form the single bond in a BrCl
molecule.
So far we have considered only sigma bonds, bonds in which the highest electron
density lies along the bond axis (an imaginary line joining the nuclei) in between
the bonded nuclei. The shape of p atomic orbitals allows them to overlap not only in
a head-to-head fashion. If they are oriented in a parallel position, they can overlap
sideways or laterally as shown in Figure 2.12. A bond formed in this way is called
pi-bond (π).
UNIT 2
117
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
::
or
p orbital
p orbital
p-p overlapping
Figure 2.12: Formation of a pi bond (π bond) by the overlap of two half-filled p
orbitals that are perpendicular to the internuclear axis
Note that the directional nature of p orbital allows to overlap in two ways: end-to-
end or sideways. These two modes give rise to the two types of covalent bond: sigma
(σ) and pi (π) bond, respectively. However, s-s and s-p will always overlap along
the nuclear axis, resulting only in sigma bonds. Pi bonds are present in molecules
containing multiple bonds.
Can you give examples of compounds contain multiple bonds?
All of the electron density in a π bond is found in lobes above and below the line
connecting the atomic centers: one above and one below the sigma bond axis. One π
bond holds two electrons that occupy both regions of the bond. A double bond always
consists of one σ and one π bond. The double bond increases electron density between
the nuclei. A triple bond consists of one σ and two π bonds.
Activity 2.22
Answer the following questions in groups, and share your answers with the
rest of the class.
1. Which bond is stronger: sigma (σ) or pi (π)? Why?
2. Compare the bond strength and length of single, double, and triple
bonds.
118
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
Hybridization of Orbitals
How many covalent bonds is a carbon atom supposed to form? How many covalent
bonds does carbon actually form? This discrepancy and molecular structure, specifically
bond angle, can be explained using the idea of hybridization. It is an imaginary mixing
process in which the orbitals of an atom rearrange themselves to form new orbitals
called hybrid orbitals.
Consider covalent bond formation of carbon atom. From its ground state configuration,
two unpaired electrons in the 2p subshell are observed.
Ground state C:
1s
2s
2p
One can predict the simplest hydrocarbon molecule to be CH2, by overlapping the
two unpaired electrons from two H atoms with the two unpaired electrons of carbon.
However, experiment shows that CH2 is not a stable molecule. The simplest stable
hydrocarbon is methane, CH₄. To account for this, you need an orbital diagram that
shows four unpaired electrons in the valence shell of carbon, requiring four bonds
(and therefore four atoms of hydrogen). To get such a diagram imagine that one of the
2s electrons is promoted to the empty 2p orbital. To excite the 2s electron to a higher
energy sublevel, energy must be absorbed. The resulting electron configuration is that
of an excited state having energy greater than the configuration in the ground state.
Excited state C:
1s
2s
2p
Valence bond theory proposes that the one 2s and all three 2p orbitals of the carbon
atom mix to produce four new orbitals (sp³) that are equivalent to each other in energy
and in shape and pointing in different directions with equal H-C-H bond angles.
This blending is called hybridization and the resultant orbital as hybrid orbitals. The
symbols used for hybrid orbitals identify the kinds and numbers of atomic orbitals
used to form the hybrids.
UNIT 2
119
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
The number of new hybrid orbitals is equal to the total number of atomic orbitals that
are combined. Hybridization provides a useful and convenient method of predicting
the shapes of molecules. Note that it does not explain the reason for the shape.
Exercise 2.12
Which of the following statements are false? Give a reason for your answer.
1. Two σ bonds comprise a double bond.
2. A triple bond consists of one π bond and two σ bonds.
3. Bonds formed from atomic S orbitals are always σ bonds.
4. A π bond consists of two pairs of electrons.
5. End-to-end overlap results in a bond with electron density above and
below the bond axis.
sp hybrid orbital
sp type of hybridization involves the mixing of one S and one p orbital resulting in
the formation of two equivalent sp hybrid orbitals. Each sp hybrid orbitals has 50%
s-character and 50% p-character. Such a molecule in which the central atom is sp
hybridized and linked directly to two other central atoms possesses linear geometry.
This type of hybridization is also known as diagonal hybridization. For example, Be
in BeCl₂ molecule has an sp hybridization.
BeCl₂: The ground state electronic configuration of Be is 1s²2s². In the exited state one
of the 2s-electrons is promoted to vacant 2p orbital to account for its bivalency Figure
2.13. One 2s and one 2p-orbital gets hybridized to form two sp hybridized orbitals as
shown in Figure 2.14.
2p
2p
2p
I
sp
2s
Excitated
2s
Mix
11
II
1
Isolated Be atom
Hybridized Be atom
Be (excitated)
Figure 2.13: Excitation of Be 2s electrons and sp hybrid orbitals formation
120
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
S orbital
p orbital
Hybridize
180°
linear, 180°
Two sp hybrid orbitals
sp hybrid orbitals shown together
(large lobes only)
Figure 2.14: The formation of two equivalent sp hybride orbitals in Be
These two sp hybrid orbitals face opposite directions, forming an angle of 180°. Each
of the sp hybridized orbitals overlaps with the 2p-orbital of chlorine axially and forms
two BeCl sigma bonds. This is shown in Figure 2.15.
3p
Cl
2p
T
T
T1 sp
Be
CI
orbital
Cl
Be
T
sp
T
overlap
2p
CI
3p
Figure 2.15: The sp hybrid orbitals in gaseous BeCl2 sp2 hybrid orbitals
sp² hybridization
In this hybridization there is involvement of one S and two p-orbitals in order to form
three equivalent sp² hybridized orbitals. For example, in BCl₃ molecule, the ground
state electronic configuration of central boron atom is 1s²2s²2p¹. In the excited state,
one of the 2s electrons is promoted to vacant 2p orbital (Figure 2.16) as a result boron
has three unpaired electrons. These three orbitals (one 2s and two 2p) hybridize to
form three sp² hybrid orbitals as shown in Figure 2.16.
P orbital
2p
+
2p
E
Promotion
Hybridization
+ sp²
C
2s
+
B
B
B
ground state
excited state
sp2 hybridzed
sp2 hybrid orbitals
Figure 2.16: Excitation of boron 2s electrons and sp2 hybrid orbitals formation
UNIT 2
121
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
The three equivalent hybrid orbitals formed are oriented in a trigonal planar arrangement
and overlap with 2p orbitals of chlorine to form three B-Cl bonds. Therefore, in BCl₃
(Figure 2.17), the geometry is trigonal planar with CIBCI bond angle of 120°.
What is the percent of s-character and p-character in each sp² hybrid orbital?
Cl
Cl
1L
B
B
1L
1L
CI
Cl
Cl
120°
Cl
Figure 2.17: sp2 hybrid orbitals and bonding in BC1₃
sp³ hybridization
sp³ type of hybridization can be explained by taking the example of CH₄ molecule in
which there is mixing of one s-orbital and three p-orbitals (Figure 2.18) of the valence
shell to form four sp³ hybrid orbital of equivalent energies and shape.
Can you determine the percent of s-character and p-character in each sp³ hybrid orbital?
The four sp³ hybrid orbitals so formed are directed towards the four corners of the
tetrahedron. The angle between sp³ hybrid orbital is 109.5° as shown in Figure 2.19.
2p³ ¹ 1 +
++++ sp³ hybrids
2s² 1L
2s 1
ground state
excited state
hybridized state
sp³
Figure 2.18: Excitation of carbon 2s electrons and sp³ hybrid orbitals formation
122
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
A
C
B
H
109.5°
C
C
1.09Å
H
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 2.19: sp³ hybrid orbitals and bonding in methane
The structure of NH₃ and H2O molecules can also be explained with the help of sp³
hybridization. In NH₃, the valence shell (outer) electronic configuration of nitrogen
in the ground state is 2s²2p x¹2p y¹2pz¹. In the formation of NH₃, one 2s orbital
and three 2p orbitals of nitrogen are mix up forming four hybrid orbitals (sp³) of
equivalent energy. One of the sp³ hybrid orbitals has a lone pair of electrons and the
other three sp³ orbitals are half-filled. These three half-filled hybrid orbitals overlap
with 1s orbitals of hydrogen atoms to form three N-H sigma (σ) bonds. We know that
the force of repulsion between a lone pair and a bond pair is more than the force of
repulsion between two bond pairs of electrons. So the molecule gets distorted and the
bond angle is reduced to 107° from 109.5°. The geometry of such a molecule will be
pyramidal as shown in Figure 2.20.
Ip
N
H
H
H
Ammonia, NH3
Figure 2.20: sp³ hybrid orbitals and bonding in NH3
In the case of H2O molecule, the four oxygen orbitals (one 2s and three 2p) undergo sp³
hybridization forming four sp³ hybrid orbitals out of which two contain one electron
each and the other two contain a pair of electrons. These four sp³ hybrid orbitals
acquire a tetrahedral geometry, with two corners occupied by hydrogen atoms while
UNIT 2
123
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
the other two by the lone pairs. The bond angle in this case is reduced to 104.5° from
109.5° (Figure 2.21) and the molecule thus acquires a V-shape or angular geometry.
Ip
Ip
H
H
H2O
Figure 2.21: sp³ hybrid orbitals and bonding in H2O
Why is the HOH bond angle in water less than the HNH bond angle in NH3?
Hybridization of elements involving d orbitals
The elements present in the third period contain d orbitals in addition to S and p
orbitals. The energy of the 3d orbitals is comparable to the energy of the 3s and 3p
orbitals. The energy of 3d orbitals is also comparable to those of 4s and 4p orbitals.
As a consequence, the hybridization involving either 3s, 3p and 3d or 3d, 4s and 4p is
possible.
Do you expect hybrid orbitals formation by mixing 3p, 3d and 4s orbitals? Explain
it.
Group Assignment 2.2
Summarize in a table the shapes of molecules and ions,
types of hybridization involving s, p and d orbitals, the
number of atomic orbitals engaged in the hybridization,
and give examples.
i.
Formation of PC1₅ (sp³d hybridization):
The ground state and the excited state outer electronic configurations of phosphorus
(Z=15) are represented below in Figure 2.22a.
124
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
P (ground state)
3s
3p
3d
P (excited state)
PCI₅
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
Figure 2.22 (a): sp³d hybrid orbitals filled by electron pairs donated by five Cl atoms
Now the five orbitals (i.e., one s, three p and one d orbitals) are available for
hybridization to yield a set of five sp³d hybrid orbitals which are directed towards the
five corners of a trigonal bipyramidal as in Figure 2.22b.
Cl
Cl
P
CI
CI
Cl
Figure 2.22 (b): Trigonal bipyramidal geometry of PCl₅ molecule
Note that all the bond angles in trigonal bipyramidal geometry are not equivalent. In
PCl₅ the five sp³d orbitals of phosphorus overlap with the singly occupied p orbitals of
chlorine atoms to form five P-Cl sigma bonds. Three P-Cl bonds lie in one plane and
make an angle of 120° with each other; these bonds are termed as equatorial bonds. The
remaining two P-Cl bonds-one lying above and the other lying below the equatorial
plane, make an angle of 90° with the plane. These bonds are called axial bonds. As
the axial bond pairs suffer more repulsive interaction from the equatorial bond pairs,
axial bonds have been found to be slightly longer and hence slightly weaker than the
equatorial bonds; which makes PC1₅ molecule more reactive.
UNIT 2
125
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
ii. Formation of SF₆ (sp³d² hybridization):
In SF₆ the central sulphur atom has the ground state outer electronic configuration
3s23p⁴. In the exited state the available six orbitals i.e., one s, three p and two d orbitals
are singly occupied by electrons (Figure 2.23a). These orbitals hybridize to form six
new sp³d² hybrid orbitals, which are projected towards the six corners of a regular
octahedron in SF₆. These six sp³d² hybrid orbitals overlap with singly occupied orbitals
of fluorine atoms to form six S-F sigma bonds. Thus, SF₆ molecule has a regular
octahedral geometry as shown in Figure 2.23b.
S (ground state)
TV
3s
3p
3d
S (excited state)
SF₆
TV
F
F F F
FF
Figure 2.23 (a): ): sp³d² hybridization
F
F
F
S
F
F
F
Figure 2.23 (b): Octahedral geometry of SF₆ molecule
126 UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
In hybridization schemes, one hybrid orbital is produced for every single atomic orbital
involved. In a molecule, each of the hybrid orbitals of the central atom acquires an
electron pair, either a bond-pair or a lone-pair. And the hybrid orbitals have the same
orientation as the electron-set arrangement predicted by VSEPR theory.
When describing the probable hybridization scheme for a structure, follow the
following four steps:
1. Write a reasonable Lewis structure for the chemical.
2. Use VSEPR theory to predict the electron-set arrangement of the central atom.
3. Select the hybridization scheme that corresponds to the VSEPR prediction.
4. Describe the orbital overlap.
Example 2.6
Describe a hybridization scheme for the central atom of iodine pentafluoride,
IF5.
Solution:
a. The reasonable Lewis structure for IF₅ is
F:
F
F:
F:
b. VSEPR predicts an octahedral electron-set arrangement for six electron
pairs (AB₅ E type)
c. The hybridization scheme corresponding to octahedral electron
arrangement is sp³d²
d. The six sp³d² hybrid orbitals are directed to the corners of an octahedron,
but one of the orbitals is occupied by a lone pair of electrons. The
resulting molecular shape is that of a square pyramid with bond angles of
approximately 90°.
UNIT 2
127
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Exercise 2.13
1. List the three types of hybrid orbital that may be formed by an atom
with only S and p orbitals in its valence shell. Draw the shapes of the
hybrid orbitals produced.
2. Describe a hybridization scheme for the central atom and molecular
geometry of the triiodide ion, I₃⁻.
Multiple bonds and hybridization
The hybrid orbital model accounts well for the geometry of molecules involving single
covalent bonds. Is it also capable of describing molecules containing double and
triple bonds? We have already discussed that multiple bonds consist of σ and π bonds.
Now, we will consider how we visualize these components and how they relate to
hybrid orbitals. We will discuss here the ethene, C₂H₄, and acetylene, C2H₂ molecules,
however pi bonds are also present in other molecules such as N₂, SO₂, NO₃, etc.
The Lewis structure of ethene, C₂H₄, shows us that each carbon atom is surrounded by
one other carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms.
H
H
C
C
H
H
The three bonding regions form a trigonal planar electron-pair geometry. Thus we
expect the σ bonds from each carbon atom are formed using a set of sp² hybrid orbitals
that result from hybridization of two of the 2p orbitals and the 2s orbital (Figure 2.24).
These orbitals form the C-H single bonds and the σ bond in the C = C double bond
(Figure 2.25). The π bond in the C= C double bond results from the overlap of the third
(remaining) 2p orbital on each carbon atom that is not involved in hybridization. This
unhybridized p orbital (lobes shown in red and blue in Figure 2.25 is perpendicular to
the plane of the sp² hybrid orbitals. Thus, the hybridized 2p orbitals overlap in a side-
by-side fashion, above and below the internuclear axis and form a π bond.
128
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
unhybridized
2p2 1 1
2p³ 1 1 1
1
p orbital
1 1 1 sp² hybrids
2s2 1L
2s 1
ground state
excited state
hybridized state
Figure 2.24: sp² hybridization of each carbon atom in ethene
σ bonds
σ bond
σ bonds
One π bond
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.25: Bond formation in the ethene molecule, C2H₄: (a) five σ bonds and
(b) one π bond
In an ethene molecule, the four hydrogen atoms and the two carbon atoms are all in
the same plane. If the two planes of sp² hybrid orbitals tilted relative to each other,
the p orbitals would not overlap enough to create the π bond.
Why does rotation around single (σ) bond occur easily, but is much more difficult for
multiple bonds?
In molecules with sp hybrid orbitals, two unhybridized p orbitals remain on the
atom (Figure 2.26). We find this situation in acetylene, H-C=C-H, which is a linear
molecule. The two linear sp hybrid orbitals of a carbon atom which lie in a straight
line, and the two unhybridized p orbitals at perpendicular angles (Figure 2.26). The sp
hybrid orbitals of the two carbon atoms overlap end to end to form a σ bond between
the carbon atoms (Figure 2.27). The remaining sp orbitals form σ bonds with two
hydrogen atoms. The two unhybridized p orbitals per carbon are positioned such that
they overlap side by side and, hence, form two π bonds. The two carbon atoms of
acetylene are bound together by one σ bond and two π bonds, giving a triple bond.
UNIT 2
129
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
unhybridized
+ + 2pᵃ
2p³ 1 + +
+ 1
unhybridsed
p orbital
p orbital
+ +
sp hybrids
sp
sp
2s² 1L
2s +
Second
unhybridized
ground state
excited state
hybridsed state
p orbital
Figure 2.26: sp hybridization of each carbon atom and the two linear sp hybrid
orbitals of a carbon atom in acetylene
σ bond
σ bond
σ bond
One π bond
Second π bond
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.27: (a) The formation of σ bonds in an acetylene molecule, C2H2, and (b) π
bonds
Exercise 2.14
1.
Describe the hybridization of the central atoms N and S in molecules
and the molecular geometry of:
a. NO₂
b. SO₃
2. Discuss the bonding in ammonium and sulphate ions: predict the ideal
bond angles, bond length, shape of the ions, and the number of σ and
π bonds.
3. Prepare sketches of the overlaps of the following atomic orbitals: a. S with
s; b. S with p along the bond axis; c. p with p along the bond axis (head-on
overlap); d. p with p perpendicular to the bond axis (side-on overlap).
130
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
2.5.2
Molecular Orbital Theory (MOT)
The molecular orbital theory assumes that when atoms come together, their orbitals
not only overlap, but are also simultaneously transformed into new orbitals. These
new orbitals, called molecular orbitals (MOs), play the same role for molecules that
atomic orbitals play for atoms. Note that atomic orbitals are the allowed states for
an electron moving in the field of one nucleus, whereas molecular orbitals are the
allowed states for an electron moving in the field of several nuclei (atoms present in
the molecules).
Which theory (VBT or MOT) perfectly explains all aspects of bonding?
Bonding and Anti-Bonding Molecular Orbitals
In contrast to VB theory, in which one bonding orbital is formed as a result of the
interaction of two atomic orbitals, in MO theory two molecular orbitals result from the
combination of two atomic orbitals. In mathematical terms, the two molecular orbitals
result from the addition of the atomic orbitals that overlap. The molecular orbitals
that results from the addition of the atomic orbitals that overlap is called a bonding
orbital. In a bonding molecular orbital, because the electron density is concentrated
between the two nuclei, the energy of the system is lowered compared with that of
isolated atomic orbitals. The molecular orbital that results from the subtraction of
atomic orbitals that overlap is called an antibonding molecular orbital. In antibonding
molecular orbitals, the electron density is concentrated away from the region between
the two nuclei. That is, anti-bonding molecular orbitals have a region of zero electron
density (a node) between the nuclei. The net effect of having a low electron density
between the nuclei is that the two nuclei repel each other. Therefore, energy of an
antibonding orbital is increased compared with that of the two isolated atomic orbitals.
When two atomic orbitals overlap end-to-end, they form two σ MOs. Consider the
H2 molecule, which has two H atoms and therefore two 1s AOs. The two 1s atomic
orbitals combine (Figure 2.28) to produce two σ MOs, which differ in energy and
location. One of the σ MOs is a bonding orbital, denoted σ₁ₛ, σ the other is an anti-
bonding orbital denoted σ* σ 1s' The relative energy levels of these two MOs are different.
The σ₁ₛ 1s MO has a lower energy than the original 1s AOs, while the σ* 1s MO has a
higher energy. What is the advantage of VBT compared with that of MOT?
UNIT 2
131
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Electron Configuration of Diatomic Molecules
Electrons occupy molecular orbitals following the same rules that apply to the filling
of atomic orbitals: the aufbau principle and the Pauli Exclusion Principle and Hund's
rule are obeyed. The electronic structure of the molecule is obtained by feeding the
appropriate number of electrons into the new molecular orbitals. For example, both
electrons in H₂ will go into the lower energy orbital denoted by (σ₁ₛ)². There are no
more electrons in H2 so the σ* 1s orbital remains empty in the ground state. A molecular-
orbital diagram shows the relative energy and number of electrons in each MO, as
well as the atomic orbitals from which they form. Figure 2.28 is the molecular orbital
diagram for H2.
+
Is
1
1
E
Is
Is
1L
a
σ₁ₛ
H (AO)
H2 (MOs)
H (AO)
Figure 2.28: Molecular orbital diagram and bonding in the H2 molecule
Note: The number of molecular orbitals formed must equal the number of atomic
orbitals available for combination. Unfilled molecular orbitals are considered to be
there, even when there are no electrons in them.
MO theory uses the term "bond order" to indicate whether a covalent bond is single
(bond order = 1), double (bond order = 2) or triple (bond order = 3). Bond order is
defined as the number of electrons in bonding MOs minus the number in antibonding
MOs, divided by two:
1
Number
of
e
in
Number of e⁻in
Bond order =
bonding MOs
-
bonding
MOs
Thus, for H2, the bond order is ½ (2 - 0) = 1. A bond order greater than zero indicates
that the molecule is stable relative to the separate atoms, whereas a bond order of zero
implies no net stability. In general, the higher the bond order, the stronger the bond.
Why is MOT better than VBT in explaining covalent bond formation?
132
UNIT 2
Chemical Bonding Theories
Exercise 2.15
1. Draw molecular orbital energy diagrams for:
a. C₂⁻
b.
C₂
c.
22
The order of energy of molecular orbitals has been determined mainly from
spectroscopic data.
a. In simple homonuclear diatomic molecules (total electrons = 14 or less) the order
is: (π₂ₚ, π2pz
b. For simple homonuclear diatomic molecules (total electrons greater than 14) the
(π₂ₚₓ =π₂ₚ) comes after σ₂ₚₓ and the order is:
Note that the 2py atomic orbital give π bonding and π antibonding (π*) MOs of the
same energy as those produced from 2p₂ orbitals. The π₂py and π2pz orbitals are said
to be double degenerate, and similarly π₂ₚ, and π2pz are double degenerate. A similar
arrangement of MOs exists from σ₃ₛ too³ₚₓ, but energies are known with less certainty.
Example 2.7
Use the molecular orbital theory to derive the electron configuration of:
a. H2⁺
b. Li₂
c. He2⁺
d. O2
Which of these molecules or molecular ions exist?
Solution:
a. H2⁺ molecular ion. This may be considered as a combination of H atom
and a H+ ion, giving one electron to be accommodated in a MO. The
bond order is ½(1-0) = 1/2, so we predict that H2⁺ does exist. The electron
configuration is σ₁ₛ¹.
b. Li₂ molecule. Each Li atom has two electrons in its inner shell, and one
in its outer shell, making a total of six electrons arranged: (σ₁ₛ)² (σ*1ₛ)²
(σ₂ₛ)². We ignore the inner electrons here because, in general, only outer
(valence) orbitals interact enough to form molecular orbitals. The bond
order is ½(2- 0) = 1, so we predict that Li₂ does exist.
UNIT 2
133
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
c. He₂⁺ Molecular ion. The electron configuration is ( σ₁ₛ )² (σ*1ₛ)¹. The
filled bonding orbital gives stabilization whilst the half-filled gives
destabilization. The bond order is ½(2-1)=1/ 1/2, there is some stabilization,
so the He₂⁺ should exist, and it has been observed spectroscopically.
d. O2 molecule. Each oxygen has eight electrons, making a total of sixteen
for the molecule. These are arranged:
The antibonding π₂ₚ, and π2p2 orbitals are singly occupied in accordance with
Hund's rule. As in previous examples, the inner shell does not participate in
bonding and the π2py and π2P₂ bonding and antibonding 2s orbitals cancel
each other. A σ bond results from the filling of (σ₂ₚₓ)². Two half π bonds
arise form bonding and antibonding.
Therefore, 10+1-π+1π=2 bonds are formed.
Exercise 2.16
1. Use the molecular orbital theory and derive the electron configuration
of the following molecules. Identify those which exist and those which
do not exist.
a. He₂ b. Be₂ c. B₂ d. C₂ e. N₂
2. Use the MO theory to predict the bond order and the number of unpaired
electrons in O₂²⁻, O₂, O₂⁺, NO and CO.
Magnetic Properties
Molecules with unpaired electrons exhibit paramagnetic properties. The species is
attracted by an external magnetic field. When all the electrons are paired, there is
diamagnetism. Such species are not attracted (and, in fact, are slightly repelled) by a
magnetic field.
Can you predict magnetic properties of diatomic molecules by employing VBT?
134
UNIT 2
Types of Crystal
The antibonding π₂ₚy and π₂ₚ₂ orbitals for O2 are singly occupied in accordance with
Hund's rule. Unpaired electrons give rise to paramagnetism. Since there are two
unpaired electrons with parallel spins, this explains why oxygen is paramagnetic.
The MO theory successfully predicts the paramagnetism of O₂, 2' a fact not even thought
of with the VB representation of the oxygen molecule (O = O).
Exercise 2.17
1. What is the bond order for CN⁻, CN and CN+?
2. Which homonuclear diatomic molecules from the second period
elements, besides O₂, should be paramagnetic?
2.6
Types of Crystal
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
define a crystal
name the four types of crystalline solid and give examples
mention the types of attractive force that exist within each type of
crystalline solid
describe the properties of each type of crystalline solid
build a model of sodium chloride crystal structure.
Solids can be crystalline or amorphous. A crystalline solid is composed of one or
more crystals. Each crystal has a well-defined, ordered structure in three dimensions.
Sodium chloride (table salt) and sucrose (table sugar) are examples of crystalline
substances. Are metals crystalline or amorphous solids?
An amorphous solid has a disordered structure; it lacks the well-defined arrangement
of basic units (atoms, molecules, or ions) found in a crystal. A glass is an amorphous
solid obtained by cooling a liquid rapidly enough that its basic units are "frozen" in
random positions before they can assume an ordered crystalline arrangement.
A structural unit of a crystalline solid has a characteristic repetitive pattern.
Do you expect similar repetitive pattern also in amorphous solids?
The crystalline solids can be classified as ionic, molecular, covalent network or
metallic.
UNIT 2
135
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Ionic Crystals
Ionic crystals consist of ions held together by ionic bonds (Figure 2.29).
Does an ionic bonding have intermolecular or intramolecular bonding?
The structure of an ionic crystal depends on the charges on the cation, anion and on
their radii. The properties of ionic solids are direct consequences of the strong inter-
ionic forces, which create a high lattice energy. Ionic solids have high melting points,
an indication of the strong attraction force holding the ions together.
Why don't ionic solids conduct electricity? How can ionic compounds conduct
electricity when they are in a molten state or dissolved in water? Can you give some
examples of ionic solids we use in everyday life?
(a) NaCl
(b) CsCl
Figure 2.29: Ball-and stick diagrams of the unit cells of (a) NaCl(s) and (b) CsCl(s)
Group Assignment 2.3
1. Using balls and sticks of any material or any other modelling
material, build a model of crystal sodium chloride.
2. Explain why ice, which is a crystalline solid, has a melting
temperature of 0 °C, whereas butter, which is an amorphous
solid, softens over a range of temperatures.
136
UNIT 2
Types of Crystal
Molecular Crystals
Molecular solids are made up of discrete molecules that interact via intermolecular
forces. Various combinations of dipole-dipole, dispersion and hydrogen-bonding
forces are operative in molecular solids, which accounts for their wide range of physical
properties. Dispersion forces are the principal forces acting in non-polar substances,
so melting points generally increase with molar mass. Among polar molecules,
dipole-dipole forces and where ever possible, hydrogen-bonding dominates. Compare
the strength of intermolecular forces with covalent and ionic bonds.
Why do molecular crystals have much lower melting points than ionic, metallic and
network covalent solids?
The fundamental unit of a molecular solid is molecules or monatomic elements. Such
solids are common among organic compounds and simple inorganic compounds.
Molecular crystals are usually transparent, brittle, and break easily when stressed. They
are usually non-conductors of heat and electricity and usually have low melting points.
Can you give some examples of molecular crystals we use in everyday life?
Covalent Network Crystals
In this type of crystalline solids, separate particles are not present. Instead, strong
covalent bonds link the atoms together throughout the network of covalent solid.
As a consequence of the strong bonding, all these substances have extremely high
melting and boiling points, but their conductivity and hardness depend on the nature
of their bonding. The two common crystalline forms of elemental carbon (graphite
and diamond) are examples of network covalent solids (Figure 2.30).
335 pm
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.30: The structures of (a) diamond and (b) graphite
Describe the basic differences in properties of graphite and diamond.
UNIT 2
137
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
The most important network covalent solids are the silicates. In a covalent network
solid, the whole crystal is one giant molecule. The fundamental units are atoms
covalently bonded to their neighbours. These crystals are usually hard, non-conductors
of heat and electricity, and have high melting points.
Metallic Crystals
The strong metallic bonding forces hold individual atoms together in metallic solids.
Bonding in metals can be explained as a network of positive ions immersed in a sea
of electrons. That is, the electrons in the valence shell of the metal atoms are highly
delocalized. For this reason, metals are very good conductors of electricity. Metallic
bonding forces are stronger than those arising from intermolecular forces, so metallic
solids have higher melting points than molecular solids.
Metals have a wide range of melting points and hardness, which are related to the
packing efficiency of the crystal structure and the number of valence electrons available
for bonding. For example, Group IIA metals are harder and higher melting than Group
IA metals, because the IIA metals have closer packed structures and twice as many
delocalized valence electrons. The fundamental units of pure metallic solids are
identical metal atoms. Metallic crystals are opaque with reflective surfaces. They are
ductile and malleable, good conductors of heat and electricity, and they usually have
high melting points. Copper, silver, gold, iron and aluminum are familiar examples of
metals.
138
UNIT 2
Types of Crystal
Exercise 2.18
1. Identify the type of crystalline solid (metallic, network covalent, ionic,
or molecular) formed by each of the following substances:
a. SiO₂
b. KCl
c. Cu
d. CO2
e. C (diamond)
2. Classify each substance in the table as either a metallic, ionic, molecular,
or covalent network solid:
Melting
Electrical Con-
Solubility
Substance
Appearance
Point
ductivity
in Water
only if melted/
X
brittle, white
800 °C
soluble
dissolved
Y
shiny, malleable
1100 °C
high
insoluble
Z
hard, colorless
3550 °C
none
insoluble
UNIT 2
139
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
UNIT SUMMARY
Lewis electron-dot formulas are simple representations of the valence-shell
electrons of atoms in molecules and ions.
An ionic bond is a strong attractive force holding ions together. An ionic
bond can form between two atoms by the transfer of electrons from the
valence shell of one atom to the valence shell of the other.
A covalent bond is a strong attractive force that holds two atoms together
by their sharing of electrons. These bonding electrons are attracted
simultaneously to both atomic nuclei, and they spend part of the time near
one atom and part of the time near the other.
In some cases of covalent bonding, one atom appears to provide both
electrons in the bonding pair; the bond is known as coordinate-covalent bond
or dative bond.
Molecular geometry refers to the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.
The valence-shell electron-pair repulsion (VSEPR) model is a simple model
for predicting molecular geometries.
In the valence bond method (VB) a covalent bond is viewed as the overlap of
atomic orbitals of the bonded atoms in a region between the atomic nuclei.
In the VB theory, hybridized atomic orbitals are formed by the combination
and rearrangement of orbitals of the same atom.
Hybridized orbitals are all of equal energy and electron density, and the
number of hybridized orbitals is equal to the number of pure atomic orbitals
that combine.
Molecular orbital theory describes bonding in terms of the combination and
rearrangement of atomic orbitals to form orbitals that are associated with the
molecule as a whole.
Bonding molecular orbitals increase electron density between the nuclei and
are lower in energy than individual atomic orbitals. Anti-bonding molecular
orbitals have a region of zero electron density between the nuclei, and an
energy level higher than that of the individual atomic orbitals.
140
UNIT 2
Types of Crystal
CHECKLIST
KEY TERMS
Anion
Lattice energy
Atomic orbital
London dispersion forces
Covalent bond
Molecule
Crystal
Molecular orbital
Delocalization of electrons
Noble gases
Dipole
Potential energy
Dipole moment
Single bond
Double bond
Substance
Electric charge
Triple bond
Ionic bond
Valence bond theory
Ionization
Valence electron
Kinetic energy
Van der Waals force
UNIT 2
141
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
REVIEW EXERCISE
Part I: Multiple Choice Questions:
Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
1.
Which of the following is not a property of ionic bonds?
a. loss of electrons
c. sharing of electrons
b. gain of electrons
d. transfering of electrons
2.
Which one of the following does not comply with the octet rule?
a. PCl₃
b. CBr₄
c. NF₃
d. AsF₅
3. A π(pi) bond is the result of the:
a.
overlap of two S orbitals
b. overlap of an S and a p orbital
c. overlap of two p orbitals along their axes
d. sidewise overlap of two parallel p orbitals
4.
The maximum number of hydrogen bonds that a molecule of water can have is:
a. 1
b. 2
c. 3
d. 4
5.
Which of the following is planar?
a. NO₃⁻
b. H₃O⁺
c. SO₃²⁻
d. PF₃
6.
Among the following mixtures dipole-dipole as the major interaction is present in:
a.
benzene and ethanol
b. acetonitrile and acetone
c. KCl and water
d. benzene and carbon tetrachloride
7. The main axis of a diatomic molecule is Z. Atomic orbitals pₓ and Pᵥ overlap to
form which of the following orbital?
a. π-molecular orbital
c. δ-molecular orbital
b. σ-molecular orbital
d. no bond will form
8. The structure of IF₇ is:
a. pentagonal bipyramid
c. trigonal bipyramid
b. square pyramid
d. octahedral
9.
In which of the following molecule is a co-ordinate covalent bond present?
a. F₂
c. NH₃
b. O₃
d. CC1₄
142
UNIT 2
Types of Crystal
10. In which of the following compounds are 8 valence electrons present in every
atom?
a. IF₇
b. C₂H₄
c. SiF₄
d. KH
11. Molecules are held together in a crystal by:
a. hydrogen bonds
c. Van der Waal's attraction
b. electrostatic attraction
d. dipole-dipole attraction
12. Find the molecule with the maximum dipole moment:
a. CH₄
b. NH3
c. CO2
d. NF₃
13. Which of the molecules does not have a permanent dipole moment?
a. SO₃
b. SO₂
c. H2S
d. CS₂
14. The F-S-F bond angles in SF₆ are
.
a.
109°28'
b. 120° only
c. 90° and 120°
d. 90° and 180°
15. A neutral molecule having the general formula AB₃ has two unshared pair of
electrons on A. What is the hybridization of A?
a.
sp
b. sp²
c. sp³
d. sp³d
Part II: Answer the following questions
16. Write Lewis dot symbols for the following atoms and ions: Mg, Na, B, N, Br, Be,
Li⁺, Cl⁻, O², Mg²⁺ and N³⁻
17. List four major difference between sigma (σ) and pi (π) bonds.
18. Which one is stronger: σ-bond or π-bond? Why?
19. Explain why a BeH₂ molecule has a zero dipole moment although the Be-H bonds
are polar?
20. How can one non-polar molecule induce a dipole in a nearby non-polar molecule?
21. Describe the change in hybridization of an aluminum atom (if any) during the
reaction:
AICI₃
+
Cl
AICI₄⁻
22. Apart from tetrahedral geometry, another possible geometry for CH₄ is square
planar with the four H atoms at the corners of the square and C atom at its center.
Explain why CH₄ is not square planar?
23. Sketch the bond moments and resultant dipole moments in the following
molecules: H2O, PCl₃, NH₃, NF₃
24. Write the resonance structures for SO₂, NO₂ and NO3⁻ S
UNIT 2
143
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
3
Plasma
UNIT
Solid
Liquid
Gas
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
