Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to:
discuss the kinetic molecular theory and properties of the three physical
states of matter
explain the behavior of gases by using the variables volume, temperature,
pressure and number of moles
distinguish these terms: ideal gas, diffusion, evaporation, boiling,
condensation, vapour pressure, boiling point, molar heat of vaporization,
molar heat of condensation, melting, fusion, sublimation, melting point,
freezing point, molar heat of fusion, and molar heat of solidification
analyse the gas laws
develop skills in solving problems to which the gas laws apply
perform activities to illustrate gas laws
carryout experiments to determine the boiling points of liquids
demonstrate an experiment to show phase changes.
describe scientific enquiry skills along this unit: inferring, predicting,
classifying, comparing and contrasting, communicating, asking questions,
and making generalizations.
144
UNIT 3
Introduction
Start-up Activity
Form groups and discuss the following questions. Share your ideas
with the rest of the class.
1. During rainy season sometimes we observe ice rain. What is the source
of this ice rain (precipitation)? What makes it different from water?
2. If you put some water in an evaporating dish and gently heat for some
time, what kind of change do you observe?
3.1
Introduction
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
describe the physical states of matter
give examples for each of the three physical states of matter
compare and contrast the three physical states of matter.
Activity 3.1
Discuss the following questions in pairs and present your discussion to the class.
1. Why do substances exist in different physical states; for example, water
(liquid), sugar (solid), and CO2 (gaseous) states at room temperature?
2. What happens to ice if you place it in the open air for some time? Why?
From your previous lessons you will remember that all objects around us are called
matter. Matter is defined as anything occupying space and having mass, which is the
material of the Universe. It exists in three common states: gas, liquid and solid. For
example, the water that we use in our daily life can exist in three physical states of
matter. The three physical states of water are:
Steam (water vapor): gaseous state of water
Water: liquid state of water
Ice: solid state of water
Most solids change to liquids and most liquids change to gases as they
are heated. Liquids and gases are known as fluids because they flow freely.
Solids and liquids are referred to as condensed states because they have much higher
densities than gases.
UNIT 3
145
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
In our everyday life, we experience changes in the state of matter. That is, ice melts
and water freezes; water boils and steam condenses. Generally, the physical states
of matter can be changed to solids, liquids, gases, or plasma by varying temperature
and/or pressure.
Solid
A solid is rigid; it has a fixed volume and a fixed shape. Solids cannot be compressed.
Solids have higher densities than liquids because their particles are usually packed
closer than those in liquids. The tightly packed particles of solids are also highly
organized.
The particles of a solid, whether they are atoms, ions or molecules, only vibrate at a
fixed point with respect to the neighboring particles. As a result, its particles stay in
a fixed position. Metals, chalk, sand, soil, and stone are examples of solids.
Liquid
A liquid has a definite volume, but does not have a definite shape. It takes
the shape of its container. It is very slightly compressible and has the ability
to flow. In a liquid, particles vibrate about a point, and constantly shift their
positions. Water, ethanol, mercury, bromine, and oil are examples of liquids.
Gas
A gas has neither definite volume nor definite shape; it takes on the shape and
volume of its container. Gas is highly compressible because most of the volume of
a gas is composed of the large amounts of empty space between the gas particles.
For example, air, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen are gases.
Plasma
Plasma is the fourth physical state of matter that exists at a high temperature (million
degrees Celsius). At such high temperatures molecules cannot exist. Most or all of
the atoms are stripped of their electrons and thus, exist in their ionized form. This
state of matter, a gaseous mixture of positive ions and electrons, is called plasma. In
another word, plasma is an ionized gas. Because of the extreme temperatures needed
for fusion, no material can exist in the plasma state. Like gases, plasmas have no
fixed shape and a fixed volume. They are also less dense than solids or liquids. A
particle diagram of a solid, liquid, gas and plasma is given in Figure 3.1.
146
UNIT 3
Kinetic Theory and Properties of Matter
Melting
Vaporization
Ionization
+
Freezing
Condensation
Deionization
+
+
Solid
Liquid
Gas
Plasma
Figure 3.1: A particle diagram of a solid, liquid, gas and plasma
Exercise 3.1
1. Can nitrogen and oxygen exist as liquids and solids?
2. Compare and contrast the three states of matter: gas, liquid and solid.
3. How is plasma different from gas?
3.2
Kinetic Theory and Properties of Matter
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
state the kinetic theory of matter
explain the properties of matter in terms of the kinetic theory.
Activity 3.2
Form a group and perform the following tasks. Present your findings to the class.
1. Select any three different substances; one existing in the solid state,
the second in the liquid state, and the third in the gaseous state at room
temperature. Use the following table to explain the motion, distance, and
attraction between particles.
Substance
Motion of
Distance be-
Attraction between
particles
tween particles
particles
1
2
3
2. In which state of matter do the particles possess the highest kinetic
energy?
UNIT 3
147
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
3.2.1
The Kinetic Theory of Matter
The three states of matter in which substances are chemically the same but physically
different are explained by the kinetic theory of matter. The kinetic theory of matter
gives an explanation on the nature of the motion and the heat energy. According
to the kinetic theory of matter, every substance consists of a very large number of
very small particles called ions, atoms and molecules. The particles are in a state
of continuous and random motion with all possible velocities. The motion of the
particles increases with a rise in temperature.
Generally, the kinetic theory of matter is based on the following assumptions:
1. All matter is composed of particles that are constantly moving.
2. All particles have kinetic energy (movement energy) and potential energy.
Molecules in the solid phase have the least amount of energy, while gas
particles have the greatest amount of energy.
3. The difference between the three states of matter is the energy contents they
have and the motion of the particles. A change in phase may occur when the
energy of the particles is changed.
4. The temperature of a substance is a measure of the average kinetic energy of
the particles.
5. There are spaces between particles of matter. The average amount of empty
space between molecules gets progressively larger as a sample of matter
moves from the solid to the liquid and gas phases.
6. There are attractive forces between atoms/molecules, and these become
stronger as the particles move closer together. These attractive forces are
called intermolecular forces.
3.2.2
Properties of Matter
Activity 3.3
Attempt to answer the following question independently, and share your
ideas with a friend who sits next to you.
Compare and contrast the density and compressibility of a solid, liquid, and
gaseous forms of a substance using particle model diagrams.
148
UNIT 3
Kinetic Theory and Properties of Matter
As it has been earlier discussed, matter can exist as a solid, liquid, and gas. The
properties of these three states of matter are explained in terms of the kinetic
theory as follows:
Properties of Gases
From the kinetic molecular theory of gases, the following general properties of gases
can be summarized.
1. Gases have no fixed shape and fixed volume. They assume the volume and
shape of their containers.
2. Gases can be easily compressed. By applying pressure to the walls of a flexible
container, gases can be compressed; the compression results in a decrease of
its volume. This happens due to the large spaces between the particles of gases.
3. Gases have low densities compared to liquids and solids. Because the particles
of a gas are very far apart each other and the number of molecules per unit
volume is very small. A small mass of a gas occupies a large volume and hence
results in a very low density.
4. Gases exert pressure in all directions. Gases that are confined in a container
exert pressure on the walls of their container. This pressure is due to collisions
between gas molecules and the walls of the container.
5. Gases easily flow and diffuse through one another. A gas moves freely and
randomly throughout a given space.
Properties of Liquids
Liquids have the following properties:
1. Liquids have a definite volume, but have no definite shape. They assume
the shapes of their container. Lack of a definite shape for liquid substances
arises from low intermolecular forces of attraction between their particles as
compared to that of solids.
2. Liquids have higher densities than gases. Their density is a result of the close
arrangement of liquid particles. Thus, the particles are closer in liquid than
in their gaseous state. This accounts for the higher densities of liquids as
compared to gases.
3. Liquids are slightly compressible. The available free space between particles
in liquids is very little as a result, liquids resist an applied external force.
UNIT 3
149
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
4. Liquids are fluids. A fluid is a substance that can easily flow. Most liquids
naturally flow downwards due to gravitational force. But, the fluidity of liquids
is much slower than gases.
Properties of Solids
Solids have the following properties:
1. Solids have a definite shape and definite volume, due to the presence of the
strong force of attraction between the particles in a solid.
2. Solids generally have higher densities than gases and liquids. The particles
of solids are very close to each other, and thus, there is almost no free space
between the particles of solids. This closeness of particles makes solids to
have more particles (mass) per unit volume.
3. Solids are extremely difficult to compress because the high interparticle forces
of attraction between the particles of solids are very strong due to a very short
distance between them.
4. Solids are not fluids. Solids normally do not flow because particles of solids
are rigidly held in position by strong forces that restrict them.
Exercise 3.2
Arrange the three states of matter in terms of their increasing:
a. intermolecular force
c. compressibility
b. density
d. kinetic energy.
3.3
The Gaseous State
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
explain the assumptions of the kinetic molecular theory of gases
describe the properties of gases using the kinetic molecular theory
describe the behavior of gases by using the variables V (volume), T
(temperature), P (pressure) and n (number of moles)
state Boyle's law
perform an activity to show changes in volume and pressure of gases to
illustrates Boyle's law
apply Boyle's law in solving problems
150
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
state Charles' law
conduct an activity to show changes in volume and temperature of gases
to illustrate Charles' law
apply Charles' law in solving problems
state Gay-Lussac's law
use Gay-Lussac's law in solving problems
derive the combined gas law equation from Boyle's law, Charles' law, and
Gay-Lussac's law
use the combined gas law to calculate changes in volume, pressure or
temperature
define an ideal gas
derive an ideal gas equation from Boyle's law, Charles' law and
Avogadro's law
compare the nature of real gases with ideal gases
solve problems related to the ideal gas equation
define diffusion
state Graham's law of diffusion
carry out an activity to compare the rate of diffusion of two
different gases
apply Graham's law of diffusion in solving problems.
Activity 3.4
In pairs, discuss the following points and share your ideas to the whole class
Consider three water samples that are taken in containers: A, B, and C. The
three water samples are kept at different temperatures: 120 °C, 20 °C, and -10
°C, respectively, and under constant atmospheric pressure.
a. Which sample molecule has the highest kinetic energy?
b. Which sample has the greatest density?
c. Which sample has the most regular arrangement of molecules?
UNIT 3
151
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
3.3.1
The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases
The kinetic molecular theory is a simple model for understanding the behavior
of gases. This model predicts the correct behavior for most gases under many
conditions. Like other models, the kinetic molecular theory is not perfect.
Assumptions of the kinetic molecular theory of gases:
1. A gas is a collection of particles (molecules) in constant, straight-line motion.
2. Gas particles do not attract or repel each other, they do not interact. The particles
collide with each other and with the surfaces around them, but they bounce
back from these collisions like pool balls.
3. There is a lot of space between gas particles compared with the size of the
particles themselves. In other word, the volume of the particles is negligible
compared to the total volume of the gas. The molecules are so far apart, the total
volume of the molecules is extremely small compared with the total volume of
the gas. This assumption explains why gases are so easily compressed and why
they can mix so readily.
4. The average kinetic energy of gas particles is proportional to the temperature
of the gas in kelvins. This means that as the temperature increases, the particles
move faster and therefore have more energy. The mathematically expressed as:
KE = 1/2mv2 2
(3.1)
Where KE is kinetic energy, m is mass and V is velocity of gas molecules. According
to this formula different molecules have different velocities and, therefore, have
different kinetic energies.
Generally, the gaseous state is characterized by the following physical properties:
Gases are highly compressible.
Gases exert pressure equally in all directions.
Gases have much lower density than solids and liquids.
The volume and the shape of gases are not fixed. These take the volume and
shape of the container.
Gases mix evenly and completely.
152
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
Simplicity of gases is due to the fact that the forces of interaction between their
molecules are negligible. Their behavior is governed by similar general laws,
which were discovered as a result of their experimental studies. These laws have
relationships between measurable properties of gases. Some of these properties such
as pressure, volume, temperature and mass are very important. Interdependence of
these variables leads to the gas laws.
3.3.2
The Gas Laws
Activity 3.5
Discuss the following in terms of the gas laws with a partner who sits next
to you. Present your conclusion to the class.
a. The increase in pressure in a car tire on a hot day.
b. The loud noise heard when a light bulb shatters.
The gas laws are the result of various research conducted for several centuries on
the physical properties of gases. The first reliable measurement on the properties of
gases was made by Robert Boyle in 1662 (an Anglo-Irish scientist). The observation
of Boyle's and other scientists led to the development of the gas laws. The gas laws
express mathematical relationships between the volume, temperature, pressure, and
quantity of a gas.
Pressure: The pressure exerted by a gas sample is defined as the force per unit area
that results from the collisions of gas particles with surrounding surfaces.
Force
Pressure =
(3.2)
Area
Pressure is one of the measurable properties of gases. Thus, the pressure of a gas can
be expressed in unit of atmosphere, Pascal, torr, millimeter of mercury. The SI unit
of pressure is Pascal (Pa).
1 Pa = 1 N/m² and
1 atm = 760 mmHg = 76 cmHg = 760 torr = 101,325 Pa = 101.325 kPa
UNIT 3
153
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Volume: Volume is the space occupied by a substance. The SI unit of volume is
the cubic meter (m³). Volume is also expressed in cubic centimeter (cm³) and cubic
decimeter (dm³). Other common units of volume are milliliter (mL) and liter (L).
1 cm³ = =
1 dm³ = = 1x10⁻³ m³ = 1 L
A liter is equivalent to one cubic decimeter, as follows:
1 L = 1000 mL = 1000 cm³ = 1 dm³
Temperature: Temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of a body. Three
temperature scales are commonly used. These are °F (degrees Fahrenheit), °C
(degrees Celsius) and K (Kelvin). In calculations, the Kelvin scale is usually used.
The three units are inter-converted by Equations 3.3 and 3.4:
K = °C + 273
(3.3)
°C = (°F - 32) 5/9
(3.4)
Exercise 3.3
Convert the following:
a. 500 mmHg into atm, torr, and cmHg
b. 100 dm³ into mL, cm³, L, m³
c. 54 °C into K and °F.
Molar Volume and Standard Conditions: The conditions of a pressure of 1 atmosphere
and a temperature of 0 °C (273 K) are called standard temperature and pressure
(STP) for gases. At STP the volume of one mole of any gas is 22.4 liters. This
volume is known as the molar volume of gases.
i.
Boyle's Law
Activity 3.6
Independently, attempt to answer the following phenomenon, and share
your ideas with a friend who sits next to you.
Explain why a hydrogen gas weather balloon expands as it rises more in
the air. (Assume the temperature remains constant.)
154
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
The first quantitative experiments on gases were performed by Robert Boyle
(1662). His experiment helped to understand the relationship between the volume
and pressure of a fixed amount of a gas at constant temperature. On the basis of his
experiments, Robert Boyle concluded that, at constant temperature, the pressure of
a fixed amount of gas varies inversely with its volume. This is shown in Figure 3.2.
P = 1 atm
P=2 atm
P=4 atm
Figure 3.2: The relation between pressure and volume
Boyle studied the relationship between the pressure of the trapped gas and its volume.
He discovered that at constant temperature doubling the pressure on a sample of gas
reduces its volume by one-half, and tripling the gas pressure reduces its volume to
one-third of the original. Generally, the volume of a gas decreases, as the pressure
on the gas increases. Values of volume-pressure relationships are given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Pressure and volume data for a gas at constant mass and temperature
Pressure atm
Volume mL
PV
0.5
1200
600
1.0
600
600
2.0
300
600
3.0
200
600
4.0
150
600
5.0
120
600
6.0
100
600
Figure 3.3 (a and b) shows the graphical representation of the relationship
between p and v, using the data of Table 3.1
UNIT 3
155
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
1200
1200
900
a
900
b
Volume in mL
600
Volume in mL
600
300
300
0
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Pressure in atm
1/Pressure in atm
Figure 3.3: Graphs of Boyle's law, using Table 3.1 data: (a) V versus P and (b) V
versus 1/P
Generally, Boyle's law states that the volume of a fixed mass of gas is inversely
proportional to the pressure at a constant temperature. Mathematically this is written as:
Vα 1 / P 1
V = k (1) P 1 or PV = k
(3.5)
Where k is constant at a specific temperature for a given sample of gas.
This relationship is true because if the pressure increases, the volume decreases, but
the product PV is always equal to the same constant. Thus for two different sets of
conditions, we can say:
P₁V₁=k=P₂V₂ =
(3.6)
P₁V₁=P₂V₂
(3.7)
Where P1 and V₁ are the initial pressure and volume of the gas, and P₂ and V₂ are the
final volume and pressure.
156 UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
Experiment 3.1
The effect of pressure on the volume of gas
Objective: To observe the relationships between the volume and pressure of a
gas at constant temperature.
Apparatus: U-tubes, ruler, rubber tube, burette, glass tube.
Chemicals: Mercury
Procedure:
1. Join two tubes by a rubber tubing to give a U-arrangement as shown in Figure
3.4, and then partially fill these two tubes with mercury.
2. Put a ruler in the middle of the tube.
3. The first arm of the tube (A) contains air and is sealed by a tap.
4. By moving the second arm of the tube (B) up and down, the volume of air in
the first tube can be varied.
5. The pressure exerted on the air is obtained from the difference in height of
mercury in the two arms of the tube.
O=D
Open glass tubing
Reservior
B
Air
h
A
Ruler
Mercury
Rubber tubing
Figure 3.4: The effect of pressure on the volume of a gas at constant
temperature
UNIT 3
157
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Observations and analysis:
1. Plot a graph taking pressure on the vertical axis versus volume on the
horizontal axis and comment on the shape of the graph.
2. What can you conclude from this experiment?
Activity 3.7
Discuss the following activity in your group and present your discussion to
the class. Plot a graph of pressure, P, versus 1/V, using the following data.
Note: Calculate 1/V values from the given volume by yourself, and add the
values to a new row in your table.
Pressure (atm)
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
Volume (mL)
40
20
10
6.7
5
4
3.3
a. What does the graph look like?
b. What does the graph shows?
c. What can you conclude from the graph?
Example 3.1
Sulfur dioxide (SO₂), that forms acid rain, is found in the exhaust of
petrol and diesel vehicles, and power plants. Consider a 1.5 L sample of
gaseous SO₂ at a pressure of 5.6 kPa. If the pressure is changed to 15.0
kPa at a constant temperature, what will be the new volume of the gas?
Solution:
We are given: Initial conditions: P₁ = 5.6 kPa atm and V₁ = 1.5 L
Final conditions: P₂ = 150.0 kPa and V₂ = ? =
Use Boyles' law equation: P₁V₁ = P₂ V₂
Thus,
= 5.6 kPa X 1.5 L = 0.56 L
150kPa
158
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
Exercise 3.4
1. A certain gas occupies a volume of 10.0 m³ at a pressure of 100.0 kPa.
If its volume is increased to 20 m³, what would be the new pressure of
the gas assuming temperature remains constant?
2. A cylinder equipped with a moveable piston has an applied pressure of
4.0 atm and a volume of 6.0 L. What is the volume of the cylinder if the
applied pressure is decreased to 1.0 atm?
ii.
Charles' Law
Activity 3.8
Form a group and discuss the following activity. Present your discussion
to the class.
Have you ever wondered what makes popcorn 'pop'?
Following Boyle's findings, other scientists continued to study the properties of
gases. One of these scientists was Jacques Charles (a French physicist), who was
the first person to fill a balloon with hydrogen gas and who made the first balloon
flight. In 1787, Charles found that the volume of a gas at constant pressure increases
linearly with the temperature of the gas. That is, a plot of the volume of a gas versus
its temperature (K) gives a straight line. This behavior is shown for samples of
several gases in Figure 3.5.
He
6
5
CH4
4
V(L)
3
H2O
2
H2
1
N2O
73
173
273
373
473
573
0
T(K)
Figure 3.5: Plots of V versus T (K) for several gases
UNIT 3
159
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
The slopes of the lines in this graph are different because the samples contain
different numbers of moles of gas. But, the volumes of all the gases extrapolate to
zero at the same temperature, -273 °C.
On the Kelvin temperature scale this point, i.e., -273 °C, is defined as 0 K, which
leads to the following relationship between the Kelvin and Celsius scales:
K = °C + 273
(3.7)
At temperatures below 0 K, the extrapolated volumes of gases would become
negative. However, in reality a gas cannot have a negative volume, this implies that
0 K has a special significance. 0 K (-273 °C) is considered as absolute zero, which is
theoretically the lowest attainable temperature, but practically cannot be attainable.
The average kinetic energy of gas molecules is closely related to the Kelvin
temperature. The volume of a gas and Kelvin temperature are directly proportional
to each other. For example, doubling the Kelvin temperature causes the volume of
a gas to double, and reducing the Kelvin temperature by half causes the volume of
a gas to decrease by half. This relationship between Kelvin temperature and the
volume of a gas is known as Charles' law.
Charles' law states that the volume of a fixed mass of gas at constant pressure varies
directly with the Kelvin temperature.
This means,
V α T
k = VT
(3.8)
The value of T is the Kelvin temperature, and k is a constant. The value of k depends
only on the quantity of gas and the pressure. The ratio V to T for any set of volume-
temperature values always equals the same k. Charles' law can be applied directly to
volume-temperature problems using the relationship:
V₁ T₁ = V₂ T₂
(3.9)
160
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
Example 3.2
1. A sample of gas at 15 °C and 1 atm has a volume of 2.58 L. What
volume will this gas occupy at 38 °C and 1 atm?
Solution:
Given: Initial conditions: T1 = 15 °C = 15 + 273 = 288 K, V₁ = 2.58 L
Final Conditions: T2 = 38 °C = 311 K, V₂ V₂=?
By rearranging Charles' equation (Equation 3.9), V₂ can be calculated as:
V₂ = VIII V₁T₂ T1 = 2.58 288 L X K 311 K = 2.78 L
2. A sample of gas has a volume of 2.80 L at an unknown temperature.
When the sample is submerged in ice water at 0 °C, its volume decreases
to 2.57 L. What was its initial temperature (in kelvins and in Celsius)?
Solution:
Given: Initial conditions: T₁?, V₁ = 2.80 L
Final conditions: T2 = 0 = 273 K, V₂ 2 = 2.57 L
T1 = T₂V₁ V₂ = 273 2.57 ₺ K 2.80 ± = 297.43 K
in °C, 297.43 - 273 = 24.43 °C
Experiment 3.2
The effect of temperature on the volume of a gas
Objective: To observe the changes in volume of a gas as temperature changes.
Apparatus: Round bottomed flask, beaker, delivery tube and burner.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 3.6.
2. Warm the flask gently with a low Bunsen flame.
3. Cool the flask and note what happens.
4. Record your observation.
UNIT 3
161
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Air
Water
Round bottom flask
Beaker
Bunsen burner
Figure 3.6: Relationship between temperature and volume of a gas
Observations and analysis:
1. What do you observe from the experiment?
2. What is your conclusion from this activity?
Activity 3.9
Form a group and perform the following activity and present to the class.
Given the following data at a constant pressure:
Volume of nitrogen gas (L)
Temperature (K)
4.28 L
303
5.79 L
410
7.77 L
550
a. Draw a graph to show the relationship between volume and temperature.
b. Calculate the expected volume of the gas when the temperature reaches 700K.
c. Explain the relationship between temperature and volume.
162
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
Exercise 3.5
1. At constant pressure, by what fraction of its volume will a quantity of
gas change if the temperature changes from - -173 °C to 27 °C?
2. At what temperature will the volume of a gas be
a. halved,
b. doubled, and
c. tripled at constant pressure if the original temperature is 17 °C?
3. At 25 °C and 1 atm a gas occupies a volume of 1.5 dm³. What volume
will it occupy at 100 °C and 1 atm?
iii. Gay Lussac's Law
Activity 3.10
Form a group and discuss the following phenomena in terms of the gas
laws. Present your conclusion to the class.
a. Why does the pressure of car tires increase on a hot day, but decrease
on a cold morning?
b. Why do pressurized containers, such as deodorant cans or spray-paint
cans, have warning labels stating that the container must be kept
away from fire and stored in a cool environment?
Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (a French scientist) studied how the pressure and
temperature of a fixed amount of gas at constant volume are related. The relationship
that he established is called Gay-Lussac's law or the pressure-temperature law. It
states that at constant volume, pressure of a fixed amount of a gas varies directly
with the temperature. Mathematically:
PαT
k T P
(3.10)
The ratio P to T for any set of volume-temperature values always equals the same k.
=
(3.11)
UNIT 3
163
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Example 3.3
At a temperature of 25 °C, the pressure of the gas in a deodorant can is 3 atm.
Calculate the pressure of the gas when it is heated to 845 °C.
Solution:
Given: Initial conditions: T1 = 25 °C = 25 + 273 = 298 K, P₁ = 3.0 L
Final conditions: T2 = 845 °C = 1,118 K, P₂ =?
By rearranging, Equation 3.11, P₂ can be calculated:
P2 = P₁T₂ T1 = 3.0 atm 298 X K 1,118 K = 11.23 atm
Exercise 3.6
1. The pressure of a gas in a cylinder when heated to a temperature of
250 K is 1.5 atm. What is the initial temperature of the gas if its initial
pressure was 1.0 atm?
2. List some examples of items that we use in our everyday life that obey
Gay-Lussac's Law.
iv. The Combined Gas Law
A sample of a gas can undergo simultaneous changes in temperature, pressure, and
volume. In such cases, the three variables should be considered at the same time.
The three gas laws we have learned can be brought together into a single equation
known as the combined gas law. The combined gas law expresses the relationship
between pressure, volume, and temperature of a fixed amount of gas. Mathematically:
PVαT
PV T = k
(3.12)
Where k is a proportionality constant,
The ratio PV to T for any set of pressure, volume and temperature values always
equals the same k. Thus,
P₁V₁ T₁ = P₂V₂ T₂
(3.13)
164
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
Where P₁, V₁ and T₁ are the initial pressure, volume and temperature; P₂, V₂ and T2
are the final pressure, volume and temperature of the gas respectively.
Example 3.4
A sample of gas occupies 12.0 L at 240.0 °C under a pressure of 80.0 kPa.
At what temperature would the gas occupy 15.0 L if the pressure were
increased to 107.0 kPa?
Solution:
Given: Initial conditions: T1 = 240 °C = 513 K, P₁ = 80.0 kPa, and V₁ = 12.0 L
Final conditions: T2 =?, V₂ 2 = 15.0 L and P₂ = 107.0 kPa
By rearranging Equation (3.13) we solve for T2
T2 = P₂V₂T₁ P₁V₁ = 107 kPa 80.0 X 15 ± X 513 K = 857.67 K ≈ 858 K = 585 °C
kPa X 12±
Exercise 3.7
1. If a 50 cm³ sample of gas exerts a pressure of 60.0 kPa at 35 °C, what
volume will it occupy at STP (0 °C and 1 atm)?
2. A 280 mL sample of neon exerts a pressure of 660 torr at 26 °C. At what
temperature in °C would it exert a pressure of 940 torr in a volume of
440 mL?
V.
Avogadro's law
Activity 3.11
Form a group and discuss the following phenomena. Present your discussion
to the class. Suppose while you are playing a football in your school football
team, the ball becomes flat. Then, you fill the ball with air using a pump.
1. Why did the ball become strong enough?
2. What happened to the number of particles in the ball?
3. Which gas law can be obeyed? Explain.
UNIT 3
165
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
In 1811, Amedeo Avogadro (an Italian scientist) suggested that at the same
temperature and pressure, equal volumes of gases contain equal numbers of moles.
This observation is called Avogadro's law, shown as:
Vαn
Vₙ=k V k
(3.14)
Where V is the volume of the gas, n is the number of moles of gas particles, and k is
the proportionality constant.
This equation states that for a gas at constant temperature and pressure, the volume
is directly proportional to the number of moles (molecules) of gas. In other words,
equal numbers of molecules of different gases compared at the same temperature
and pressure occupy equal volumes.
For two samples of gas at the same temperature and pressure, the relation between
volumes and numbers of moles can be represented as:
V₁ n₁ = V₂ n₂
(3.15)
The volume occupied by a mole of gas at STP, is called the standard molar volume.
It is nearly constant for all gases. The standard molar volume of an ideal gas is
equal to 22.4 L per mole at STP. For an ideal gas: 1 mol gas = 22.4 L gas
Example 3.5
Suppose we have a 12.2 L sample containing 0.50 moles oxygen gas
(O₂) at a pressure of 1 atm and a temperature of 25 °C. If all this O2 were
converted to ozone (0₃) at the same temperature and pressure, what would
be the volume of the ozone?
Solution: The balanced equation for the reaction is:
30₂(g)
203 (g)
To calculate the moles of O₃ produced, we must use the appropriate mole
ratio: Mol of O₃(g) = X 2 3molO2 mol O3 = 0.33 mol
166
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
Then, to determine the olume of 0.33 mol O₃, use Equation 3.15.
V1 = V2 n₁ n₂
Where V₁ is the volume of n₁ moles of O2 gas and V₂ is the volume of n₂
moles of O₃ gas. In this case we have
n₁ = 0.5 mol
n₂⁻ = 0.33 mol
V₁ = 12.2 L
V₂ = ? =
Thus, V₂ = = 12.2 L mol 0.33 = 8.052 = 8.0L
Exercise 3.8
One mole of a gas occupies 27.0 L, and its density is 1.41 g/L at a particular
temperature and pressure. What is its molecular weight? What is the density
of the gas at STP?
vi. The Ideal Gas Equation
Activity 3.12
Form a group and discuss the following.
A balloon was in flated and finally burst when too much air was pumped into it.
1. Why did it burst when too much air is pumped into it?
2. What happens to the pressure, volume, temperature, number of moles,
and the balloon itself as it is inflated and finally bursts?
3. Can you derive an equation which describes these relationships?
Present your discussion to the class.
An ideal gas is a hypothetical gas that obeys the gas laws. Real gases only obey the
ideal gas laws closely at high temperature and low pressure. Under these conditions,
their particles are very far apart. The ideal gas law is a combination of Boyle's law,
Charles' law and Avogadro's law.
UNIT 3
167
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
We have considered the gas laws that describe the behavior of gases as revealed by
experimental observations:
Boyle's law: Vα P (at constant T and n)
Charles' law: VαT (at constant P and n)
Avogadro's law: V α n (at constant P and T)
This relationship indicates how the volume of gas depends on pressure, temperature
and number of moles.
Van- T P
V = Rn P T
(3.16)
Where R, is proportionality constant called the gas constant. By rearranging Equation
3.16, we obtain the ideal gas equation:
VP = nRT
(3.17)
Thus, the ideal gas equation describes the relationship of the four variables P, V, T
and n. An ideal gas is a gas whose pressure, volume and temperature behavior can
be completely explained by the ideal gas equation.
At STP (n = 1 mol, V = 22.4 L, T = 273 K (0 °C) and P = 1 atm), the values of R can
be calculated from the ideal gas equation:
R
= PV = 1 1 mol atm X X 22.4L 273 = 0.082 atm.L/mol.K
Example 3.6
What pressure, in atm, is exerted by 54.0 g of Xe in a 1.00 L flask at 20.0
°C? (Molar mass of Xe = 131.3 g/mol)
Solution: By rearranging Equation 3.16
P = Rn v Rn
But n = m/M, Where m is given mass and M is molar mass of a substance Thus,
P = R MV mT
V =
0.082 atm E/molk X 54 g X 193 = 9.88 atm
131.3 g/o X 1₺
mol
168 UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
At STP, 0.280 L of a gas weighs 0.400 g. Calculate the molar mass of the gas.
Solution:
Given: V = 0.280 L, m = 0.400 g, T = 273 K and P = 1 atm
So to solve the molar mass of the gas, we use the following formula:
M = R mT VP
0.082 mol atm K L X 0.400 0.280 L g X X 273 ¥ atm 31.98 mol g
=
Exercise 3.9
1. The density of a gas at a pressure of 1.34 atm and a temperature of
303 K is found to be 1.77 g/L. What is the molar mass of this gas?
2. A helium-filled weather balloon has a volume of 7240 ft³. How many
grams of helium would be required to inflate this balloon to a pressure
of 745 torr at 21°C? (1 ft³ = 28.3 L)
vii. Graham's Law of Diffusion
Activity 3.13
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. Present your
discussion to the class.
Why do helium-filled balloons deflate over time faster than air-filled
balloons? (Hint: A balloon has many invisible tiny holes.)
We have discussed that the gas molecules are in constant, rapid, random motion
and occupy quickly throughout any container. This spreading of gas molecules
throughout the container is called diffusion.
Thomas Graham (1805-869), a Scottish chemist, studied the rate of diffusion of
different gases. He found that gases having low densities diffuse faster than gases
that have higher densities. Based on his observations, in 1829, he postulated the
relationship between the density of a gas and its rate of diffusion, which is known as
Graham's law of diffusion.
UNIT 3
169
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Graham's law of diffusion states that, at constant temperature and pressure, the rate
of diffusion of a gas, r, is inversely proportional to the square root of its density, d, or
molar mass, M.
Mathematically it is expressed as:
r α Or r α VM
(3.18)
Where r is the rate of diffusion, d is the density and M is the molecular mass of the gas
For two gases (Gas 1 and Gas 2), their rates of diffusion can be given as:
r α 1 r 1 M,
(3.19)
r α 1/d2 Or r 1 M₂
(3.20)
By rearranging Equations 3.19 and 3.20 we obtainequation 3.21:
r₂ = Or = M₂ M₁
(3.21)
Where r₁, d₁ and M1 represent the rate of diffusion, density and molecular mass of
gas 1. r₂, d₂ and M2 represent the rate of diffusion, density and molecular mass of
gas 2.
Experiment 3.3
Determination of diffusion of gases
Objective: To compare the rate of diffusion of two different gases.
Apparatus: Porous pot, cork, delivery tube, U-tube, and beaker
Chemicals: Colored water, hydrogen and CO2.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 3.7.
2. Fit the porous pot with a cork and delivery tube.
3. Attach the delivery tube to a U-tube containing colored water.
4. Place the porous pot in a beaker of hydrogen gas.
5. Watch the change in the level of the colored water in the U-tube
170
UNIT 3
The Gaseous State
6. The pressure in pot increases as hydrogen diffuses in quicker than the air diffuses out
7. Repeat the experiment by putting the porous pot in beaker of carbon dioxide
Delivery tube
Level A
Level B
Pourous pot
Beaker
U-Tube
Air
Hydrogen
Coloured liquid
gas or CO2
Figure 3.7: The determination of diffusion of gases
Observations and analysis:
1. In which case did the pressure in the pot decreases?
2. How did you observe the changes in pressure?
3. Write your conclusions about the experiment.
Example 3.7
1. Which gas will diffuse faster, oxygen or carbon dioxide? What is the
relative rate of diffusion?
Solution:
The molecular weight of CO2 is 44 g/mol and that of O2 is 32g/mol.
Therefore, NH₃ diffuses faster than CO2.
Let the rate of diffusion of O2 be ro₂
Let the rate of diffusion of CO2 be rco₂
We can calculate the rate of diffusion using Equation 3.21
r₂ = M₂ M₁
rco₂ r₀₂ = M₀₂ CO2 = / / = 1.17
This means, rate of diffusion of O2 is 1.17 times that of CO2.
2. The rate of diffusion of methane (CH₄) is twice that of an unknown gas
What is the molecular mass of the gas?
UNIT 3
171
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Solution:
Let ľCH₄ and rx be the rates of diffusion of CH₄ and the unknown gas as
well as MCH₄ and Mₓ be the molecular masses of CH₄ and the unknown gas,
respectively. The rate of diffusion of CH₄ is two times faster than the unknown
gas. This can be written mathematically as rcH₄ = 2rₓ.
Now, substitute 2rₓ in place of rCH₄ and solve for Mx using Graham's law
(Equation 3.15)
= M₂ M₁
rx = M M Mₓ CH₄
By substituting 2rₓ in place of ľCH₄ we obtain
Tx = M M CHA Mₓ
thus, 2 = M M CHA
By rearranging this equation we obtain the value of Mₓ
Mₓ = 2² M CH₄ = 4 X 16 mol g = 64 g / mol
Therefore, the molecular mass of the unknown gas is 64.
The rate at which a gas diffuses is also inversely proportional to the time it
takes to move a certain distance. Mathematically:
rat α
(3.16)
If two different gases (gas 1 and gas 2) under the same conditions of
temperature and pressure diffuse through a porous container, then the time
required to diffuse for the two gases can be given by the following formula:
= t₁ = M₂ M₁
Where t₁ and t₂ are the time taken, r₁ and r₂ are the rates, M₁ and M₂ are
the molecular masses of gas 1 and gas 2, respectively.
172
UNIT
3
The Liquid State
Exercise 3.10
1. A sample of ethane, C₂H₆, diffuses at a rate of 3.6 X 10⁻⁶ mol/h. An
unknown gas, under the same diffuses at a rate of 1.3 X 10⁻⁶ mol/hr.
Calculate the molar mass of the unknown gas.
2. Which gas in each of the following pairs diffuses more rapidly, and
what are the relative rates of diffusion?
a. Kr and O₂
b. N₂ and acetylene (C₂H₂)
3.4
The Liquid State
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
explain the terms: evaporation, boiling, condensation, vapor pressure;
boiling point, molar heat of vaporization and molar heat of condensation
carry out an activity to demonstrate the concept of vapor pressure
carry out an activity to determine the boiling points of water and ethanol.
Activity 3.14
Discuss the following activities in your group and present to the class.
1. Why are some liquids volatile and others are not?
2. What is the relationship between altitude and boiling point of a liquid?
From your previous lessons you have learned that liquids have a definite volume,
but an indefinite shape. They take the shape of their containers to the level they fill.
Liquids are denser than gases, but less dense than solids.
As in a gas, particles in a liquid are in constant motion. However, the particles in a
liquid are closer together than those in a gas. The attractive forces between particles
in a liquid are stronger than between particles of a gas. This attraction between
liquid particles is caused by the intermolecular forces of attraction such as dipole-
dipole forces, London dispersion forces, and hydrogen bonding.
Liquids are more ordered than gases because of the stronger intermolecular forces
and the lower mobility of liquid particles.
UNIT 3
173
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
3.4.1
Energy Changes in Liquids
Activity 3.16
Form a group and discuss the following and present your discussion to the
class:
Why does a mirror (or glass window) get foggy (misty) when hot air is
breathed on it?
The process by which a liquid changes to a gas is known as vaporization or evaporation.
Evaporation is the process by which molecules on the surface of a liquid break away
and go into the gas phase (Figure 3.8). Molecules on the surface of a liquid are held
less tightly than those in the interior, so the most energetic molecule can break away
into the gas.
Figure 3.8: Evaporation of liquid
Evaporation is explained in terms of the energy that the molecules on the surface of
the liquid have. In an open container, evaporation continues until all of the liquid
enters the gas (vapor) phase (Figure 3.8). Most of the molecules that escape into
the vapor phase do not collide with the surface of the liquid and return to the liquid
phase. Instead, they will diffuse through the gas phase away from the container and
equilibrium cannot be established. Under these conditions, the liquid will continue to
evaporate until it has disappeared.
However, liquids in a closed container behave differently. The volume of the liquid
decreases for some time, and then, remains unchanged. This is because in closed
containers, the vapor cannot escape. As more molecules leave the liquid, more gaseous
molecules collide with the container walls, with each other, and with the liquid surface
and return to the original liquid state.
174
UNIT 3
The Liquid State
The process of when a vapor returns to the liquid state is called condensation.
Evaporation and condensation are opposing processes. Evaporation is a liquid turning
into a gas, and condensation is a gas turning into a liquid.
For instance, when liquid water is initially put into a closed container, more evaporation
happens than condensation because there are so few gaseous water molecules in
the space above the water (Figure 3.9a). However, as the number of gaseous water
molecules increases, the rate of condensation also increases (Figure 3.9b). At the
point where the rates of condensation and evaporation become equal (Figure 3.9c),
dynamic equilibrium is reached and the number of gaseous water molecules above
the liquid remains constant. The vapor pressure of a liquid is the partial pressure of its
vapor in dynamic equilibrium with its liquid.
a
b
C
Figure 3.9: Evaporation and condensation: (a) when water is first put into
a closed container, water molecules begin to evaporate; (b) Evaporation
continues, but condensation also begins to occur; and (c) Dynamic equilibrium:
rate of evaporation equals the rate of condensation
Evaporation
Liquid
Gas
Condensation
The rate of evaporation of a liquid can be affected by these factors:
temperature
intermolecular forces and
surface area of the liquid.
UNIT 3
175
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Temperature
An increase in temperature increases the average kinetic energy of the molecules and
thus increases the tendency to change into the gaseous state. Some liquids evaporate
readily at room temperature. Such liquids are said to be volatile. Volatile liquids have
relatively weak forces of attraction between particles. Liquids such as formaldehyde,
ethyl alcohol, mercury, and benzene are volatile liquids.
Liquids that do not vaporize easily at a given temperature are said to be nonvolatile.
They have relatively stronger attractive forces between their molecules. Liquids such
as motor oil, edible oil, glycerin, water, and molten ionic compounds are nonvolatile.
Vapor pressure
The partial pressure of the vapor above a liquid is called vapor pressure. The vapor
pressure of a liquid depends up on the temperature. At a given temperature, vapor
pressure is constant. The vapor pressures of liquids always increase as temperature
increases because the rate of evaporation increases with increasing temperature.
Intermolecular forces
Vapor pressure depends also on the intermolecular forces between the molecules of the
liquid. The stronger the intermolecular forces, the lower will be the vapor pressure of
the liquid because fewer molecules will have enough kinetic energy to overcome the
attractive force at a given temperature. For example, water and ethanol have relatively
low vapor pressure because the very strong hydrogen bonding in these liquids account
for their unusually low vapor pressures. However, liquids with low intermolecular
forces have high vapor pressures at room temperature. For example, diethyl ether,
a non-polar molecule with relatively weak dispersion forces, has a relatively higher
vapor pressure.
176
UNIT 3
The Liquid State
Surface area of the liquid
Evaporation occurs at the liquids surface, where it interfaces with the air surrounding
it. Liquid surface area is the amount of liquid that is exposed to the atmosphere (air).
As we previously discussed, liquids have no definite shape; instead, they take the
shape of containers in which they are contained. So, the number of liquid molecules
present at the surface increases as the surface area of the container (or the surface area
occupied by the liquid) increases. This, in turn, increases the number of molecules
that separate from the liquid surface and change into gases at a specific moment,
increasing the rate of evaporation. However, for liquids having the same surface area,
the rate of evaporation depends on the two factors: temperature and the strengths of
intermolecular attractions.
Boiling and Boiling Point
Activity 3.17
Discuss the following questions in a group and report your responses to the
whole class
1. Atmospheric pressure is usually higher at a lower altitude than at a
higher altitude. How does the kinetic-molecular theory explain this fact?
2. Ice melts normally at 0 °C. What happens to the melting point of ice in
the presence of impurities? Does it melt below 0 °C, above 0 °C or exactly
at 0 °C? Explain.
When heat energy is added to a liquid, it increases the kinetic energy of the molecules
and the temperature of the liquid increases. Heating a liquid always increases its
vapor pressure. When a liquid is heated to a sufficiently high temperature under a
given applied (usually atmospheric) pressure, bubbles of vapor begin to form below
the surface. If the vapor pressure inside the bubbles is less than the applied pressure
on the surface of the liquid, the bubbles collapse as soon as they form. On the other
hand, if the temperature is raised sufficiently, the vapor pressure is high enough that
the bubbles can persist and rise to the surface, and burst, releasing the vapor into
the air. This process is called boiling. In short, boiling is the change of a liquid to
bubbles of vapor that appear throughout the liquids.
UNIT 3
177
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
It is the conversion of liquid to vapor within the liquid as well as at its surface.
During evaporation, only molecules at the surface escape into the vapor phase. It is
the formation of vapor bubbles within the liquid itself that characterizes boiling and
distinguishes it from evaporation.
If the temperature of the liquid is increased, the equilibrium vapor pressure also
increases. Finally, the boiling point is reached. The boiling point of a liquid is the
temperature at which its vapor pressure equals the external atmospheric pressure.
The normal boiling point is the temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid
is equal to exactly one atmosphere.
For instance, water boils at 100 °C at 1.0 atmospheric pressure and thus, its normal
boiling point of water is 100 °C. Nevertheless, the boiling point of water at 0.83 atm
is 95 °C. Generally, when the pressure exerted on a liquid is varied, the boiling point
of a liquid also varies.
Note that as heat energy is added to vaporize a pure liquid at its boiling point, the
temperature remains constant until the liquid is completely changed to vapor. Then,
the temperature begins to rise after the liquid is completely changed to vapor.
178
UNIT 3
The Liquid State
Experiment 3.4
Observing the vapor pressure of a liquid
Objective: To observe the vapor pressure of a liquid.
Apparatus: Erlenmeyer flask, rubber bung, U-tube and burner.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 3.10.
2. Add about 100 mL of water into the Erlenmeyer flask and put a stopper.
Heat the flask to expel the air above the water in the flask.
3. Half fill the U-tube with water.
4. Connect the U-tube to Erlenmeyer flask and note the water level in the two
arms of the U-tube.
5. Heat the flask gently and observe the water level changes in the arms of the
U-tube.
Erlenmeyer flask
U-tube
Water
Bunsen burner
Figure 3.10: Determination of vapor pressure
Observations and analysis:
What do you observe? Give an explanation for the observation.
UNIT 3
179
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Experiment 3.5
Determining of boiling points
Objectives: To determine the boiling point of water and ethanol.
Apparatus: Test tube, stopper, thermometer, beaker, burner, clamp, stand and base.
Procedure:
1. Half fill the test tube with a sample of pure water and add some porcelain chips.
2. Take a rubber stopper and pierce a thin opening on the side of the rubber
stopper to allow the vapor to escape.
3. Fit the thermometer with the rubber stopper and insert it in the test tube.
4. Put the test tube in a beaker containing oil as shown in Figure 3.11.
5. Heat the oil in beaker gently and record the temperature at which the water
boils.
6. Repeat the experiment by replacing the water sample by ethanol.
Thermometer
Test tube
Stand
Beaker
Oil
Wire gauze
Tripod stand
Bunsen
burner
Figure 3.11: Determination of boiling point
Observations and analysis:
1. What is the boiling point of water and ethanol that you obtained from these
experiments?
2. Does the temperature from the thermometer reading increase after the water
and ethanol started to boils?
3. Explain why the thermometer was not put into the liquid.
4. What is the purpose of adding porcelain chips?
180
UNIT 3
The Solid State
Boiling of a liquid requires a certain amount of heat energy to break the forces of
attraction between the molecules. The amount of heat energy necessary to bring
about the vaporization of a fixed amount of a liquid at a fixed temperature to the
gaseous state is called the heat of vaporization. For example, the heat of vaporization
per mole of water at 298 K and 1 atmosphere is 44.0 kJ. This is called the molar heat
of vaporization (ДНᵥₐₚ of water. The molar heat of vaporization is the amount of
heat needed to convert 1 mole of a liquid at its boiling point to a gas. It is equal to the
amount of energy that is released when 1 mole of vapour condenses to liquid at the
condensing point of a vapour. Condensation is the change of a gas to a liquid at the
boiling point of the liquid. During condensation heat is released. Thus, the amount
of heat realised when 1 mole of a gas is converted to a liquid at its condensation
point is called the molar heat of condensation (AHcond).
Molar heat of vaporization and molar heat of condensation are equal
in magnitude but opposite in sign:
ДН vap = ДН cond
Note that vaporization is an endothermic process whereas condensation is an
exothermic process.
Exercise 3.11
Discuss the following questions:
1. What is the difference between evaporation and boiling?
2. What are the effects of impurities on the boiling point of liquids?
3. Why does the boiling point of liquid decrease as altitude increases?
3.5
The Solid State
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
describe phase changes
explain the terms melting, fusion, sublimation, melting point, freezing
point, molar heat of solidification
explain temperature changes associated with phase changes
determine melting point of ice
demonstrate an experiment to show the phase changes from ice to liquid
water and then to water vapor.
UNIT 3
181
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Activity 3.18
Form a group and discuss the following points. Present your discussion to
the class.
1. When the crystals of iodine are warmed, they disappear into vapors
without being changed into liquid.
2. When ethyl alcohol is taken in an open container it disappears after
sometime.
The temperature at which a pure liquid changes to a crystalline solid, or freezes, is
called the freezing point; it is identical to the melting point. The melting or freezing
occurs at the temperature where the liquid and solid are in dynamic equilibrium.
When a solid is continuously heated the ordered crystalline structure of solids will
be disturbed. As a result, particles gradually get freedom of motion and melting (or
fusion) take place. Melting is the process of converting solid into the liquid. The
temperature at which a crystalline solid changes to a liquid or melts is called the
melting point.
On the other hand, when a liquid is cooled, its molecules come closer to one another
and thus, the intermolecular forces of attraction between them get stronger. As a
result, its particles arrange themselves into a regular pattern and then converted to a
solid. This process is called freezing or solidification. For instance, ice melts at 0 °C
and water freezes at 0 °C. Ice and water coexist in equilibrium at 0 °C as follows:
Melting, 0 °C
Ice
Water
Freezing, 0 °C
Unlike boiling points, melting points are affected only by large pressure
changes. Note that both the melting point and the boiling point are characteristics
of physical properties of a substance and can be used to help identify it.
The amount of heat needed to convert one gram of solid to liquid at the melting point
is called heat of fusion. The molar heat of fusion or molar enthalpy of fusion (AHfus)
is the quantity of heat needed to convert one mole of a solid at its melting point to the
liquid state. For example, the molar heat of fusion of ice is 6.01 kJ at 0°C. This is the
182
UNIT 3
The Solid State
amount of energy needed to break the attractive forces in the solid, ice, at its melting
point. Melting requires the supply of energy; therefore, it is an endothermic process.
During the process of solidification, the amount of heat liberated is exactly equal to
the heat of fusion. The heat liberated is called the heat of solidification or heat of
crystallization.
The molar heat of crystallization (AHcryst) is the quantity of energy that is removed
from one mole of a liquid to convert it to the solid state at its freezing point.
AH cryst = AH fus
Some solids have significant vapor pressure and thus, evaporate directly from the
solid to the vapor state without passing through the liquid state. This process is
called sublimation, i.e., the change of solid to vapor. The opposite of sublimation
is deposition that is the change of vapor to solid. The process can be expressed as
follows
Submlimation
Solid
Vapour (gas)
Deposition
Like vaporization, the process of sublimation requires an input of energy to overcome
intermolecular attractions. The enthalpy of sublimation, H sub' is the energy required
to convert one mole of a substance from the solid to the gaseous state. Sublimation
is an endothermic process. The reverse of sublimation is called deposition, a
process in which gaseous substances directly change into the solid state, bypassing
the liquid state. Whereas, during deposition heat energy is released. The
enthalpy change during deposition is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to
sublimation. The enthalpy of deposition, ДН dep' is the energy released when one
mole of a substance from the gaseous state change to solid. The heat (enthalpy) of
sublimation is related to the enthalpies of fusion and vaporization by:
UNIT 3
183
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Exercise 3.12
1. What is the difference between melting and solidification?
2. What could happen to temperature during a phase change?
Heating curve
A heating curve is a plot of the temperature versus the amount of heat added
(Figure 3.12). It is commonly used to show the relationship between phase changes
and enthalpy for a given substance. There are two main observations that we can
learn from the heating curve: regions where the temperature increases as heat is
added and plateaus where the temperature stays constant. It is at plateaus that a
phase change occurs.
Gas
Vaporization
Temperature
Liquid
Condensation
Solid
Melting
Freezing
Heat energy
Figure 3.12: A heating curve
184
UNIT 3
The Solid State
Experiment 3.6
Demonstration of phase changes
Objective: To show the phase changes from ice to water and then to water vapour
Apparatus: Beakers, thermometer, glass rod, burner, clamp stand, tripod stand
and wire gauze.
Procedure:
1. Take a 250 mL beaker and half-filled with the dry crushed ice given by your
teacher.
2. Place the beaker on a wire gauze, which is placed on a tripod stand.
3. Suspend a thermometer from the clamp stand such that the bulb of the
thermometer is completely surrounded by ice as shown in Figure 3.13.
4. Heat the ice cubes and stir continuously for uniform heating.
5. Record the temperature (T₁) when ice starts melting.
6. Heat continuously till ice melts completely. Record this temperature (T₂).
7. Continue heating, record at the temperature (T₃) when water begins to boil.
8. Continue to heat the water for at least 3 minutes after the water begins to boil,
record the temperature (T₄) after 3 minutes
Thermometer
Glass rod
Clamp Stand
Beaker
Ice
Wire gauze
Tripod stand
Bunsen
burner
Figure 3.13: Phase changes from ice to water and then to water vapour
UNIT 3
185
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Observations and analysis:
1. At any time did the temperature seem to rise at or near a constant rate?
2. When is the temperature change slow?
3. When is the temperature change fast?
4. Is there difference between T₁ and T₂ as well as between T₃ and T₄?
Exercise 3.13
1. Draw a cooling curve.
2. What is the relationship and difference between a heating curve and a
cooling curve?
186
UNIT 3
The Solid State
CHECKLIST
KEY TERMS
Absolute zero
Heating curve
Atmospheric pressure
Ideal gas equation
Avogadro's law
Kelvin temperature
Boiling
Kinetic molecular theory of
Boiling point
gases
Boyle's law
Liquids
Charles' law
Melting
Collision
Melting point
Combined gas law
Molar heat of condensation
Condensation
Molar heat of fusion
Evaporation
Molar heat of sublimation
Fluid
Non-volatile liquid
Freezing
Normal boiling point
Freezing point
Properties of gases
Gas constant
Solidification
Gas laws
Standard temperature and
Gases
pressure (STP)
Graham's law
Sublimation
Heat of condensation
Vapor pressure
Heat of vaporization
Volatile liquid
UNIT 3
187
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
UNIT SUMMARY
Matter is anything that has mass and occupies space.
Matter exists in one of the three states: a solid, a liquid or a gas.
Solids have a definite volume and a definite shape.
A liquid has a definite mass but doesn't have a definite shape.
A gas has neither a definite volume nor a definite shape.
Plasma is a gaseous mixture of positive ions and electrons.
Gases and liquids are fluids whereas solids are not.
According to Boyle's law at fixed temperature the volume of a fixed mass of gas
is inversely proportional to the pressure.
Charles' law states that at constant pressure the volume of a fixed mass of gas is
directly proportional to the temperature.
According to Gay-Lussac's law the pressure of a fixed amount of a gas varies
directly with the temperature.
Combined gas law states that the ratio PV to T for any set of pressure, volume
and temperature values always equals the same k.
Avogadro's stated that at the same temperature and pressure, equal volumes of
gases contain equal numbers of moles.
The ideal gas law is a combination of Boyle's law, Charles' law and Avogadro's
law.
At constant temperature and pressure, the rate of diffusion of a gas, r, is inversely
proportional to the square root of its density, d, or molar mass, M.
When energy is supplied to a solid, it melts and changes to a liquid, the particles
move faster. Application of additional energy will make the liquid to boil and
changes to a gas.
Gaseous particles are much more widely spaced and move much faster than in
a liquid and a solid.
Phase changes can be illustrated as here:
188
UNIT 3
The Solid State
Sublimation
Melting
Vaporization
Plasma
Freezing
Condensation
Solid
Liquid
Gas
Deposition
Energy is released when a less ordered phase is converted to a more ordered
phase, as indicated in the follows
Phase Change
Physical Process
Energy Change
Fusion (melting)
Solid
Liquid
Energy is absorbed.
Vaporization
Liquid
->
Gas
Energy is absorbed.
Sublimation
Solid
Gas
Energy is absorbed.
Freezing
Liquid
Solid
Energy is released.
Condensation
Gas
Liquid
Energy is released.
Deposition
Gas
Solid
Energy is released.
UNIT 3
189
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
REVIEW EXERCISE
Part I: Write what each of these refers to:
1. They have a definite shape and a definite volume.
2. Their molecules are highly disordered.
3. The motion of their molecules is highly restricted.
4. They can be easily compressed.
5. They have a tendency to flow.
6. They can take the shape of their container.
7. They can move in all direction at high speed.
8. They can easily diffuse through each other.
9. They can sublime.
10. They have less density relative to the other states.
Part II: Complete the following statements:
11. Liquids and gases have no definite
.
12. The freezing point of a liquid is the same as
.
13. The temperature at which a crystalline solid is directly converted to a gas is
called
.
14. The lowest attainable temperature is
.
15. "At the fixed temperature and pressure, equal volumes of different
gases have equal numbers of molecules." This statement is postulated
by
.
Part III: Multiple Choice Questions:
Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
16. Which of the following would take up the entire shape of the container it is
enclosed within?
a. Gas
b. Liquid
c. Solid
d.
both a and b
17. If a gas expands at constant temperature, it indicates that:
a. Number of the molecules of gas increases
b. Kinetic energy of molecules decreases
c. Pressure of the gas increases
d. Kinetic energy of molecules remains the same
190
UNIT 3
The Solid State
18. A sample of oxygen occupies 47.2 L under a pressure of 1240 torr at 25 °C.
What volume would it occupy at 25 °C if the pressure were decreased to 730
torr?
a. 27.8 L
b. 32.3 L
c. 29.3 L
d. 80.2 L
19. A sample of nitrogen occupies 5.50 liters under a pressure of 900.0 torr at 25.0
°C. At what temperature will it occupy 10.0 liters at the same pressure?
a. 542 °C
b. c. 269 °C
c. 45.5 °C
d. d. 144 °C
20. A quantity of gas has a volume of 25 L at 17 °C and 3 atm of pressure. To what
volume must the gas be increased for a gas to be under STP conditions?
a. 79.7L
b. 26.6 L
c. 70.6.0 L
d. 75.0 L
21. What is the molecular weight of a pure gaseous compound having a density of
4.95 g/L at -35 °C and 1020 torr?
a. 24 g/mol
b. 72 g/mol
c. 120 g/mol
d. 85 g/mol
22. Ifhelium (He) diffuses through a porous barrier at a rate of 4.0 moles per minute,
at what rate (in moles per minute) would oxygen (O₂) gas diffuse?
a. 1.4
b. 2.0
c. 0.7
d. 0.5
23. What will happen water when freezes?
a. Water changes from a gas to a liquid state
b. Water changes from a liquid to a solid state
c. Water changes from a solid to a gas state
d. Water changes from a gas to a plasma state
24. What is sublimation?
a. When a solid turns into a gas
b. When a gas turns into a liquid
c. When a gas turns into a solid
d. When a solid turns into plasma
25. What eventually happens if energy is continually removed from a liquid?
a. It boils
c. It evaporates
b. It freezes
d. It condenses
UNIT 3
191
CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
Part IV: Solve the following problems
26. What will be the minimum pressure required to compress 500 dm³ of air at 1 bar
to 200 dm³ at 30 °C?
27. A vessel of 120 mL capacity contains a certain amount of gas at 35 °C and 1.2
bar pressure. The gas is transferred to another vessel of volume 180 mL at 35 °C.
What would be its pressure?
28. Using the ideal gas equation (i.e., pV = nRT), show that at a given temperature
density of a gas is proportional to gas pressure p.
29. 34.05 mL of phosphorus vapor weighs 0.0625 g at 546 °C and 0.1 bar pressure.
What is the molar mass of phosphorus?
30. If 0.500 mole of nitrogen gas occupies a volume of 11.2 L at 0 °C; what volume
will 2.00 mole of nitrogen gas occupy at the same temperature and pressure?
31. What mass of helium in grams is required to fill 15.0 L balloon to a pressure of
1.1 atm at 25 °C?
32. A sample of a certain gas has a volume of 1.25 L at -125s °C and 5.0 atm.
The gas is compressed at 50.0 atm to a volume of 325 mL. What is the final
temperature of the helium gas in °C?
33. If 140 cm³ of methane diffuse into air in 72 seconds, how long will it take 210
cm³ of sulphur dioxide to diffuse under the same conditions?
34. The temperature of 2.5 L of a gas initially at STP is raised to 250 °C at constant
volume; calculate the final pressure of the gas in atmosphere.
35. What total gas volume at 520 °C and 880 torr would result from the decomposition
of 33 g of potassium bicarbonate according to the equation:
2KHCO₃(s)
K₂CO₃( (g) + H₂O(g)
192
UNIT 3
40
UNIT
4
A molecules
Number of molecules
30
B molecules
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
t (s)
CHEMICAL KINETICS
