
Biology
Biology
Biology
Student Textbook
Student Textbook
Grade 9
Student Textbook
Grade 9
6 Grade
Sooool
SOUC+
CREAM
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
ISBN 978-99990-0-008-6
FDRE
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
HASININ EDUCATION ARLSINIM
Ministry of Education
MOE
ANLSINIM
ALSININ
EDUCATION
CATTIN
Ministry of Education
9
"789999"000086">
Take Good Care of
This Textbook
*
Student Biology Textbook
This textbook is the property of your school.
Grade
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
I.
Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic,
old newspapers or magazines.
2.
Always keep the book in a clear dry place.
3.
Be sure your hands are clearn when you use the book.
4.
Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5.
Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6.
Never tear or cut out any picture or pages.
7.
Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8.
Pack the book carefully when you pleace it in your
school bag.
9.
Handle the book with care when passing it to another
person.
10.
When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its
back. Open only a few pages at a time. Press lightly along
the bound edge as you turn the pages. This will keep the
cover in good condition.
Biology
Student Textbook
Grade 9
Writers:
Zufan Bedewi, Ph.D.
Zelalem G/mariam, Ph.D.
Editors:
Kedir Woliy, Ph.D. (Content Editor)
Girma Moti, MA (Curriculum Editor)
Temesgen Daniel, Ph.D. (Language Editor)
Illustrator:
Simachew Ayenew, MSc
Designer:
Tesfamichael Getu, Ph.D.
Evaluators:
Berhanu Tesfaye, MA, MEd
GebreHana Zeleke, MSc
REFULL
UPA
FLACAT
AUASININ
EDUCATION
SHAWASSA UNIVERSITY
FDRE Ministry of Education
Hawassa University
First Published August 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education, under the General Education
Quality Improvement Program for Equity (GEQIP-E) supported by the World Bank, UK's Department for International Develop-
ment/ DFID-now merged with the Foreign, Common wealth and Development Office/FCDO, Finland Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
the Royal Norwegian Embassy, United Nations Children's Fund/UNICEF), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and Danish
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through a Multi Donor Trust Fund.
© 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education. All rights reserved.
The moral rights of the author have been asserted. No part of this textbook reproduced, copied in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form or by any means including electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior
written permission of the Ministry of Education or licensing in accordance with the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia as
expressed in the Federal Negarit Gazeta, Proclamation No. 410/2004 - Copyright and Neighboring Rights Protection.
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the many individuals, groups and other bodies involved - directly or indirectly - in pub-
lishing this Textbook. Special thanks are due to Hawassa University for their huge contribution in the development of this textbook
in collaboration with Addis Ababa University, Bahir Dar University and Jimma University.
Copyrighted materials used by permission of their owners. If you are the owner of copyrighted material not cited or improperly
cited, please contact the Ministry of Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (P.O.Box 1367), Addis Ababa Ethiopia.
Photo credit: cover page, p.1,, 19, 44, 74, 103, 137 Unsplash, 2022
Printed by:
GRAVITY GROUP IND LLC
P.O.Box 13TH Industrial Area, Sharjah
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Under Ministry of Education
Contract no. MOE/GEQIP-E/LICB/G-01/23
ISBN:978-99990-0-008-6
Table of Contents
Unit 1: Introduction to Biology
1
1.1 Definition of Biology
1
1.2 Why do we study Biology?
2
1.3. The Scientific Method
2
1.4. Tools of a Biologist
5
1.4.1. Laboratory tools of biologist
5
1.4.2. Field tools
10
1.5. The Light Microscope
10
1.5.1. The parts and function of the light microscope
11
1.5.2 Handling and using a light microscope
13
1.6. General Laboratory Safety Rules
14
Unit 2: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
19
2.1 Characteristics of living things
19
2.2 Taxonomy of living things
21
2.2.1 Principles of classification
21
2.2.2. Taxonomic hierarchies in biological classification
22
2.3 Relevance of classification
24
2.4 Linnaean system of nomenclature
25
2.5 Common Ethiopian animals and plants
26
2.6 The five-kingdom system of classification
28
2.6.1. Kingdom Monera
30
2.6.2. Kingdom Protista
31
2.6.3. Kingdom Fungi
33
2.6.4. Kingdom Plantae
35
2.6.5 Kingdom Animalia
36
2.7 Renowned Taxonomists in Ethiopia
39
Unit 3: Cells
44
3.2. Cell theory
45
3.3. Cell structure and function
46
3.4 Types of cells
53
3.5. Animal and plant cells
54
3.6 Observing cells under a microscope
56
3.7 The cell and its environment
59
3.7.1 Passive transport
59
3.7.2 Active transport
68
3.8. Levels of Biological Organization
68
Unit 4: Reproduction
74
4.1 Introduction to reproduction
74
4.2 Asexual reproduction
75
4.3 Types of asexual reproduction
76
4.3.1 Fission
76
4.3.2 Fragmentation
76
4.3.3 Budding
77
4.3.4 Vegetative propagation
78
4.4 Sexual reproduction in Humans
81
4.5 Primary and secondary sexual characteristics
81
4.6 Male reproductive structures
84
4.7. Female reproductive structures
86
4.8 The Menstrual cycle
88
4.9 Fertilization and pregnancy
90
4.10 Methods of birth control
92
4.11 Sexually transmitted infections (STIs): Transmission and prevention
97
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
105
5.1 What is food?
105
5.2 Nutrition
106
5.3 Nutrients
106
5.4 Balanced diets
110
5.5 Deficiency diseases
112
5.6 Malnutrition
115
5.7. Substance abuse
117
5.8. Infectious and noninfectious diseases
127
5.8. 1. Infectious diseases
127
5.8. 2 Non-infectious diseases
136
5.9 Renowned Nutritionists in Ethiopia
136
Unit 6: Ecology
139
6.1 Ecology
139
6.1.1 Definitions of Ecological Terms
139
6.1.2. Biotic and abiotic components
140
6.1.3. Ecological levels
143
6.1.4. Ecosystems
144
6.1.5 Biomes
145
6.1.6 Ecological succession
155
6.2. Ecological relationships
157
Unit 1: Introduction to Biology
Sections
Learning competencies
1.1 Definition of Biology
Define Biology
1.2 Why do we study Biology?
Explain why Biology is studied?
1.3 The scientific method
Plan a biological investigation using the scientific
1.4 Tools of a Biologist
method
1.4.1 Laboratory tools
Identify some common tools of a Biologist
1.4.2 Field tools
Utilize a microscope
1.5. Handling and using of light Microscope
Execute general laboratory safety rules
1.5.1 Parts and function of light microscope
1.5.2 Handling and using microscope
1.6. General Laboratory Safety Rules
1.1 Definition of Biology
Objectives
Key Terms
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Biology: came from two
define Biology
Greek words bios means life,
explain the relation of biology and other subjects
and logos meaning study.
Biology is the scientific study of life or living things.
What does it mean to be "alive"?
It seems very difficult to objectively define life in a simple sentence.
Activity 1.1: THINK-PAIR-
But, we recognize life mainly by common characteristics shared by
SHARE
living systems.
Write down the common
properties of living things
Living things are composed of one or more cells, they can grow,
that distinguish them from
reproduce, they transmit genetic information to their offspring, they
non-living things and
need the energy to accomplish work, they can maintain relatively
compare your answer with
constant internal conditions (homeostasis) and they are capable of
other students.
evolutionary adaptation to the environment etc.
What is a scientific study?
Biologists study about living things using a scientific method that
involves asking questions, suggesting possible answers; and testing for
the validity of the answers through experimentation. This scientific
study follows the study of structures and processes that we can verify
observe and measure, either directly or indirectly with the help of
tools and technology, such as microscopes.
Grade 9 Biology
1
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Activity 1.2: Group
What relationships does Biology have with other fields of natural
work
sciences?
Make a group of students
and discuss how the
The study of biology is a point of merging information and tools
knowledge of biology
from all natural sciences. For example information about naturally
can be applied in the fields
occurring elements in living organisms, chemical bonding, molecules,
of agriculture, medicine,
acids ,bases and other related things can be studied using the tools and
food processing, food
principles of chemistry. Other scientific concept like conversion of
preparation, preparation of
radiant energy into organic molecules by photo-synthesis is studied
beverage etc. and present it
with the knowledge of chemistry and Physics.
to your class.
1.2 Why do we study Biology?
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain why biology is studied
give examples of biological application
Attention
Human beings have an inborn curiosity about the natural world
Application of Biology in our
that leads them to study about living organisms and their habitats.
day to day life:
Studying biology helps to understand how living things work, how
Wine-making, the
they function and interact with the environment. Biology touches our
brewing, the baking of
bread and the production
everyday life in many ways. For example, biologists have discovered
of cheese all depend on
drugs that are used to treat different human diseases. Many biologists
fermentation processes
are working on problems that critically affect our lives, such as how
brought about by yeasts,
our animals and plants body work, how ecosystems work, how
other fungi and bacteria,
advancements in genetics and cell biology are transforming to medicine
or enzymes from these
and agriculture, as well as the use of forensics biology to investigate
organisms.
crime, Furthermore, studies how ecology is helping societies evaluate
Antibiotics, such as
environmental issues, such as global warming, how fermentation is
penicillin, are produced by
used to produce alcoholic drinks such as beer and wine. In addition,
mould fungi or bacteria.
biological studies are used in treating patients suffering from AIDS,
The production of
tuberculosis, and some types of cancer.
industrial chemicals such
as citric acid or lactic acid
1.3. The Scientific Method
needs bacteria or fungi
to bring about essential
Objectives
chemical changes.
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Sewage disposal depends
on bacteria in the filter
explain about scientific method
beds to form the basis
explain about the meaning of hypothesis
of the food chain that
practice about formulating hypothesis
purifies the effluent.
practice doing scientific experiment and drawing a bar graph
Discovery of the structure
Biology is a science of inquiry.
of DNA and forensic
analysis of DNA samples
What comes to your mind when you hear the word science?
from crime scenes.
Biologists are always curious about why things happen or how things
2
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
happen. By asking questions and seeking science-based responses
known as the scientific method, they come up with new theories to
explain new findings. The scientific method involves a series of steps
that guide scientists through such scientific investigations. Biologists
study the living world by posing questions about it. The general steps
of the Scientific methods are:
Observation
The scientific study begins with careful observations (often a problem
to solve) that leads to a question. The observations can be made either
directly (e.g. using your sense organs) or indirectly using scientific
tools such as microscopes.
Asking Questions
The observations usually lead the scientist to ask questions (inquiry).
Forming of a hypothesis
A hypothesis is proposed scientific explanations (possible answers)
for a set of question (s).To solve a problem, one can propose several
hypotheses. Scientific hypotheses should be testable.
Testing the hypothesis
Hypothesis can be tested through experimentation. Any scientific
experiment must have the ability to be duplicated because the "answer"
the scientist comes up with (whether it supports or rejects the original
hypothesis) can't become part of the scientific knowledge unless other
scientists can perform the same experiment and achieve the similar
results. If a hypothesis is not supported by experimental data, one can
propose a new hypothesis.
Making conclusions about the findings
Scientists consider their original hypotheses and ask whether they
could still be right in light of the new information gathered during the
experiment. If so, the hypotheses can remain as possible explanations
for how things work. If not, scientists reject the hypotheses and try
to come up with alternate explanations (new hypotheses) that can
explain what they've seen.
Communicating the findings
When scientists complete some work, they write a paper that explains
exactly what they did and the results they obtained. Then, they submit
the paper to a scientific journal in their field. In addition, the findings
will be printed in scientific journals and assist teachers and students
Key Terms
in the field.
Hypothesis: a proposed
Example of a hypothesis testing in everyday life
scientific explanation
Suppose you want to use your torch (hand lamp) to find a missing pen
Grade 9 Biology
3
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
in your bedroom. When you switch the torch on, it is not working.
The following flow chart will illustrate hypothesis testing for a torch
that doesn't work.
Observation: The torch does not work.
Question: Why the torch does not work?
Hypothesis 1: The bulb burnt out or
Hypothesis 2: The bulb is improperly screwed in.
Experiment 1: Replacing the bulb
Experiment 2: Reinstalling the bulb
Result 1: The torch does not work (the first hypothesis is rejected).
Result 2: The torch works (the second hypothesis is accepted).
Figure 1.1. Application of the scientific method to common problems in
our surroundings
Activity 1.3: Application of Scientific Method
Objective: To determine the importance of temperature for seed germination,
1. Form a group
2. Germinate bean seeds at different temperatures like:
Group one in room temperature;
Group two in colder place like outside your room or in refrigerator;
Group three in hotter place like inside the kitchen; and
3. Then give your possible hypothesis for the differences in germination.
4. Measure the times of germination and length of the seedlings for the different groups
5. Draw a bar graph based on the result of your experiment using X axis for measurement of time
/hour of germination (1st day of germination, 2nd day of germination, 3rd day of germination
etc.) and at Y axis indicate the length of the germinated plants. (You can measure the length of
your germinating plants using ruler).
6. Interpret the results and conclude the result.
7. Report your result to your friend in your class.
4
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
1.4. Tools of a Biologist
Objectives
Activity 1.4. Class work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Recall what you learn in
your grade seven general
identify the major tools of biologists
science lesson and write
describe the functions of the identified biologist tools
down the names of the
tools used by biologists
Biologists use different types of tools in the laboratory and field for
and compare your answer
with your partners.
scientific investigations. Some of the tools are used for measuring,
some are used for observation and some are used for culturing micro-
organisms.
1.4.1. Laboratory tools of biologist
Hand lens
Most cells cannot be seen with the naked eye. A hand lens has a higher
magnification than our naked eye. It consists of a convex lens fixed
within a circular metallic loop and is attached to a metallic or wooden
handle.
The main function of hand lens is to provide an enlarged image of the
object placed under it. But hand lens is not sufficient to observe the
detail in cells. There is a need for providing high magnifications tools
such as microscope.
Frame
convex lens
Handle
Figure 1.2 Hand lens
Activity 1.5: Laboratory Activity
Attention
Objective: To study the magnification and focusing of radiation
The important function of
using hand lens
microscope is magnification
Materials hand lens, Pieces of paper
and resolution.
1. Draw a dot on the piece of the paper.
Magnification is the number
2. Observe the dot using a hand lens.
of times larger an image
is, than the real size of the
3. What happened? Did the dot get bigger than the original size?
object. Resolution can be
Why?
defined as the ability to
4. Bring the hand lens to where the sun light is available.
distinguish between two
5. Put the piece of paper under the hand lens and stay for some
separate points.
minute.
6. What happened to the paper? Why?
Grade 9 Biology
5
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
The Microscope
One of the most important tools of the biologist is a microscope. A
microscope is an instrument used to study objects that are too small
to be seen with a naked eye. The microscope magnifies the image of
small objects making them visible to the human eye. For example,
microscopes are used to observe the shape of bacteria, fungi and
parasites.
There are several kinds of microscopes. The major types are:
light microscope and
electron microscope
A light microscope is called light microscope because it uses a beam
Figure 1.3. Light microscope
of light to view specimens. There are two types of light microscopes,
Simple light microscope which consists of a single lens while a
Key Terms
compound light microscope consists of two or more glass lenses.
Microscope: an instrument
used to observe and study
Activity 1.6 Classwork
objects that are too small
How many lens does hand lens have?
to be seen by the naked
Discuss with your friend next to you.
eye. It magnifies the
image of small objects
Light microscope: the
A compound light microscope is the most common microscope used
microscope uses a beam of
in biology. It consists of two lens systems (a combination of lenses) to
light to view specimens
magnify the image of an object up to 2000x. Each lens has a different
Electron microscopes: the
magnifying power. A compound light microscope with a single eye-
microscope uses a beam of
piece is called monocular; one with two eye-pieces is said to be
electrons (instead of a beam
binocular.
of light) and electromagnets
(instead of glass lenses)
Electron microscopes on the other hand use a beam of electrons
to enlarge the image of an
(instead of a beam of light) and electromagnets (instead of glass lenses)
object
to enlarge the image of an object. These microscopes provide a higher
magnification than light microscopes and are used for observing
extremely small micro-organisms such as viruses.
Glass slides and cover slips: The microscope slides are used to
support an specimens being examined under the microscope.
The cover slips are the small square or circle shaped thin glass sheets
that are used to cover specimens on the glass slide to protect from
further addition of any chemical or dirt and it is also used to protect
the microscope and prevent the slide from drying by locking the
moisture. Cover slides provide better view under the microscope.
Figure 1.4. Glass slide and
Although the tool most closely associated with a biologist is the
cover slides
microscope, there are several common tools used by biologists in the
laboratory and on field.
6
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Autoclave: is the equipment used to sterilize (kill micro-organisms)
different biological samples. An autoclave sterilizes contaminated
materials including culture media, and bacterial spores by exposing
them to high temperatures and highly pressurized steam.
Attention
Culturing is the procedure used to grow microorganisms in a
controlled environment. Many microorganisms reproduce very
quickly. Culturing of micro-organisms also have important function
Figure 1.5. Autoclave
like in medicine (Penicillin) and for food (beverage) preparation.
Wine and beer making uses culturing on a large scale, as it does in
cheese making, bio-fuel production, and many other endeavors.
There are many ways of killing microorganisms, including chemical
disinfectants, flame, dry or wet heat, ultraviolet light, and ionizing
radiation such as X-rays or gamma rays. The problem is, some bacteria
form spores, which are resistant to chemical disinfectants, including
bleach. In these situations, it is very important to use autoclaving
which kill microorganisms as well as their spores.
Incubator: is a device used to maintain a specific environment
for culturing. An incubator is an instrument that maintains the
temperature best suited for the growth of different types of micro-
Figure 1.6. A Bacteriological
organisms.
incubator
Petri dishes: are flat dishes with a matching cover of a slightly larger
diameter. They are available in glass and plastic form. Petri dishes
are used with gelling culturing media, such as agar, and placed in the
autoclave to sterilize it.
Figure 1.7. Petri dishes
Culture tubes: are available in a huge range of sizes, shapes, materials,
and so on. They are used to culture micro-organisms. Culture tubes
may be used with solid (gel) culturing media or with liquid (broth)
culturing media, and then placed in the autoclave for sterilization.
Figure 1.8. Test tubes
Flasks: is an apparatus having a flat bottom and a long narrow neck,
which allows easy mixing of the solution without spilling out the
content it is also used to gently heat the content inside with a gentle
swirling motion of the flask It is essentially a large-volume culture
tube that is used only with broth media and flasks are used to produce
large populations of micro-organisms. They are available in a variety
of shapes and sizes.
Figure 1.9. flasks
Grade 9 Biology
7
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Balance: is useful for making up solutions accurately, weighing
specimens, and so on.
.........................
Figure 10. Balance
Dropper: A dropper consists of a glass tube that has a small opening
at one end and is attached to a vacuum rubber bulb at the other end. A
dropper is used when it is required to control the amount of solution
being added to a reaction.
Figure 1.11. Dropper
Tongs
Tongs are metallic scissors-shaped laboratory instruments. It is used
to Lifting or picking up hot objects such as heated crucible, beakers,
dishes, or flasks.
Figure 1.12. Tongs
Dissecting Tool Kit
Dissecting Tool Kit is used to dissect animals such as frogs, fetal pigs,
mice, etc. It consists of all the necessary tools required to carry out
the process of dissection such as a catheter, groove probe, scalpel,
surgical scissors (straight and curved), mayo scissors (straight and
curved), dissecting forceps (with and without teeth), dissecting pin,
Figure 1.13 dissecting kit
etc.
Dissecting pan
Dissecting pan is equipment is used as a pan on which the specimen is
kept while it is being dissected to study its internal organs.
Figure 1.14 dissecting pan
8
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Crucible
Crucible is a small container made up of ceramic or metal which is
able to withstand high temperatures, and therefore, it is generally
used to melt elements.
Figure 1.15. Crucible
Beaker
Beaker is a cylindrical glass container used for making up solutions,
holding hot or cold water or ice baths, and so on.
PLATE
Figure 1.16. Beakers
Hotplate
Figure 1.17 Hot plate
Hotplate is useful for heating solutions, making up an agar culturing
medium, and so on.
pH meter is used to measure the pH (acidity or basicity) of substances.
5.88
Thermometer is an instrument that measures the temperature of
substances.
Figure 1.18. pH mete
Figure 1.19. Thermometer
Forceps are used to hold or pick up small objects. They are available
in a variety of shapes and sizes.
Figure 1.20. Forceps
Spatula
A spatula is used for mixing substances into a solution, stirring the
Figure 1.21. Spatula
solution, and scrapping objects. It is shaped like a spoon
Wash Bottles
Wash bottles which are mainly used to rinse various laboratory
materials. Wash bottles are flexible in nature that allows the user
to adjust the water pressure as per the need by squeezing the bottle
100ml
250ml
500ml
18
accordingly.
Figure 1.22. Wash bottles
Grade 9 Biology
9
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Bunsen burner or alcohol burner
This apparatus produces a single open flame and it is used for heating
and sterilization purposes in the various experiments conducted in
labs.
Figure 1.23. Bunsen burner
1.4.2. Field tools
Insect nets -It is insect collecting nets which is composed of some
Figure 1.24. Insect net
sort of net bag made of cloth or fine mesh that is attached to a wire
loop, which is attached to a wooden or metal pole.
Fishing net is a net used for fishing. Nets are devices made from fibres
woven in a grid-like structure. Some fishing nets are also called fish
traps. Fishing nets are usually meshes formed by tying a relatively thin
thread.
1.5. The Light Microscope
Figure 1.25. Fish net
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
handling the microscope
use the microscope
Most microscopes have several different powerful lenses attached
to them, allowing the viewer to inspect the content at more than
100 times its actual size. Biology as modern science would not exist
without the microscope, and good microscopes are essential for day-
to-day activities for most biologists. In addition to their importance,
microscopes are extremely expensive, therefore it is very important
to know the function of all structures of microscope and handle the
device properly before we are using it in the laboratory.
When we observe an image under light microscope, light rays are
focused on to the image on a microscope slide. This Light which
transmitted through the specimen is then focused by two types of
lenses known as eye and objective lens. The enlarged produced by
these two lenses. A compound light microscope magnification is the
product of eye and objective lenses, x10 eyepiece and x40 objective,
the total magnification is x400.
10
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Activity 1.7: Classwork
Fill the following table by calculating the exact magnification.
Eye lens magnification
Objective lens magnification
Total lens magnification
X5
X500
X10
X40
X100
X1000
Activity 1.8: Practical Activities
In this section, you will learn how light microscope magnifies objects by eyepiece and objective
microscope.
Objective: To study focusing of a light microscope
Materials needed for this activity: a microscope, microscope slides, cover slips
A. Take a piece of paper and make sure it is transparent
B. Write letter C or P on the paper
C. Put the paper on the stage of microscope
D. Use low power objective move the paper from side to side till you get a clear focus/image
E. Draw the letter that you observe. What difference have you seen between the letter on the paper
and the image under the microscope? Why?
F. Replace/move the low power objective with middle power objective
G. What do you see? What makes this difference?
1.5.1. The parts and function of the light microscope
Microscopes are generally made up of structural parts for holding and
supporting the microscope and its components and the optical parts
which are used for magnification and viewing of the specimen images.
This section define the parts of a microscope and the functions they
perform to enable the visualization of specimens.
Eyepiece
Eyepiece is the part found at the top of the microscope and is used
to look through the microscope. It is also named as the ocular. Its
standard magnification is 10x with an optional eyepiece having
magnifications from 5X to 30X.
Eyepiece tube
Eyepiece tube is the eyepiece holder. It carries the eyepiece just above
the objective lens. In some microscopes such as the binoculars, the
eyepiece tube is flexible and can be rotated for maximum visualization.
Grade 9 Biology
11
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Activity 1.9: Group
Objective lenses
work
Objective lenses are major lenses that further magnify the specimen at
Look at the picture on the
different intensities with multiple objective lenses. Mostly they have a
figure 1.26.
magnification power of 4X-100X.
Write the parts of the
microscope parallel to the
Arm
number and discuss in
Arm is a holder connected to all components that function as a support
groups about the function of
for the microscope so that the microscope can be used properly.
each parts.
Body tube
Body tube connects the eyepiece to the objective lenses.
Nose piece
Nose piece is rotating mount that holds many objective lenses.. It is
1
movable hence it allows to change the magnification.
2
The Adjustment knobs
The Adjustment knobs are knobs that are used to focus the microscope.
3
4
There are two types of adjustment knobs i.e. fine adjustment knobs
5
and coarse adjustment knobs.
6
7
Fine adjustment: regulate the distance between object and
9
8
objective, to achieve the necessary sharpness. The fine focus
10
11
moves the stage only minimally.
12
Coarse adjustment: Brings specimen into general focus. Coarse
adjustment also moves the stage to adjust the difference between
the object and the objective. The function of the coarse focus is to
Figure 1.26. The parts of the
capture the exact distance roughly and quickly.
light microscope
Stage
Stage is the section in which the specimen is placed for viewing.
Stage clip
Stage clip acts as a holder for the object plate and ensures that it doesn't
fall out of place accidentally.
Aperture
Aperture is a hole on the microscope stage, through which the
transmitted light from the source reaches the stage.
Microscopic illuminator
Microscopic illuminator is the microscopes light source, located at the
base. It is used instead of a mirror. It captures light from an external
source of a low voltage of about 100v.
Condensers
Condensers are lenses that are used to collect and focus light from the
illuminator into the specimen. They are found under the stage next to
the diaphragm of the microscope. They play a major role in ensuring
12
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
clear sharp images are produced with a high magnification of 400X
and above.
Diaphragm
Diaphragm is also known as the iris. It is found under the stage of the
microscope and its primary role is to control the amount of light that
reaches the specimen. It's an adjustable apparatus, hence controlling
the light intensity and the size of the beam of light that gets to the
specimen.
Base
Base is the very bottom part. Base serves to accommodate all parts of
the light microscope.
1.5.2 Handling and using a light microscope
Be very careful when removing the Microscope from the cabinet.
Carry the microscope properly, always grip the microscope by
the arm and put your hand beneath its base. Hold the microscope
upright at all times. Do not bump it against anything.
Make sure that the slide is clean and dry before putting it on the
stage.
Put the slide on the stage, with the most promising region exactly
in the middle of the hole in the stage that the light comes through.
Always focus on low power (4X objective) first even if eventually
you need high power magnification.
Focus with the larger coarse-focusing knobs first, then when you
have nearly got the image in focus make it really sharp using the
smaller fine-focusing knobs.
If you want to increase the magnification, move the slide so the
most promising region is exactly in the middle of the field of view
and then change to a higher magnification lens.
Use immersion oil only with the 100X objective (oil immersion
lens) in place.
Use only one drop of oil.
Always focus by moving the lens and the specimen further apart,
never closer to each other.
Never touch the surfaces of the lenses with your fingers or
anything else.
Lower the stage and then remove the slide when you are done.
Always clean the microscope when you are done. (use a lens
paper and the alcohol)
Always place the 4X objective over the stage and be sure the stage
is at its lowest position before putting the microscope away.
Grade 9 Biology
13
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Always turn off the light before putting the microscope away.
Always return the microscope to the correct cabinet.
Always place the oculars toward the back of the cabinet
Always wrap the cord correctly before putting the microscope
away.
1.6. General Laboratory Safety Rules
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain about laboratory safety rules
identify the major laboratory safety rules
Safety is the condition of being protected from harm or other danger.
Safety can also refer to the control of recognized hazards in order to
achieve an acceptable level of risk. Laboratory safety is important
before we do any activities in the laboratory:
working carefully in the laboratory,
dealing with minor problems before they become major problems,
keeping safety constantly in mind are some of the safety rules.
Activity 1.10
Figure 1.27. Dress and safety for the laboratory
Look at the picture on
the figure 1.27 and
Important general laboratory safety rules are
recall what you learned in
1. Following the instructions
your grade seven general
science subject to answer
It is critical to read and listen the laboratory procedure and be familiar
the following questions.
with all the steps, from start to finish. It is very important to know
Discuss in groups.
how to use all of the lab equipment before you begin.
1. Why goggles and
2. Knowing the location of safety equipment
laboratory coats used?
It is mandatory to have a fire extinguisher and first-aid kit readily
2. Why is hair tied back?
in the laboratory. It's important to know the location of the safety
3. List some safety rules
equipment and how to use it. It's a good idea to periodically check
14
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
equipment to make sure it is in working order. Review lab safety signs
and look for them before starting an experiment.
3. Dressing for the laboratory
Strong
Sharp Object
It is important to wear protective cloths including a laboratory coat,
Magnetic Field
safety goggles, gloves, hearing protection, long pants, a long-sleeve
shirt, and leather shoes or boots that fully cover your feet (NO sandals).
4
Wear a disposable respirator mask when you handle chemicals that
are toxic. The dressing procedure should be based on the nature of
Corrosive
Electrical
Substance
Hazard
the experiment.
4. Never eat or drink in the laboratory.
Don't eat or drink in the science laboratory. It is forbidden to store
food or beverages in the same refrigerator that contains experiments,
Biohazard
Laser
chemicals, or cultures.
Hazard
5. Never taste or sniff chemicals.
Avoid tasting or smelling chemicals or biological cultures. Tasting or
SSS
smelling some chemicals can be dangerous or even deadly. The best
Hot Surface
Cold Hazard
way to know what's in a container is to label it and read before use,
so get in the habit of making a label for glassware before adding the
chemical.
6. Act responsibly in the laboratory.
Toxic
Flammable
Never randomly mixing chemicals to see what happens. It may result
Material
Material
an explosion, fire, or release of toxic gases.
7. Cleaning the experiment area in the laboratory and storing the
waste properly.
Radiation
Explosive
Every laboratory session should begin and end with your glassware,
Hazard
Material
chemicals, and laboratory equipment clean and stored properly.
Figure 1.28. Signs for general
laboratory safety rules
8. Handling chemicals properly
Wear a disposable respirator mask when handle chemicals that are
toxic. Never allow laboratory chemicals to contact your bare skin.
9. Knowing what to do with laboratory accidents
If someone burn or if he exposed to chemical immediately flood the
burned area with cold tap water for several minutes to minimize the
damage done by the burn.
10. All laboratory personnel should place emphasis on safety and
chemical hygiene at all times.
Never leave containers of chemicals open. All containers must have
appropriate labels. Unlabelled chemicals should never be used.
Grade 9 Biology
15
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Unit Summary
Biology is the scientific study of living things.
Living organisms interact with themselves and the environment at all levels of biological
organizations.
Biological inquiry depends on a scientific method. Scientists follow a method while performing
scientific experiments and writing up the results.
By following the scientific method carefully, scientists make sure that their conclusions are based
on observations and that other scientists can repeat their experiments.
The steps for scientific method includes: observations, questions, hypothesis, experiment,
conclusion (result) and communication with other Scientists.
Biologists use different types of tools in the laboratory and field. Some of the tools are used for
measuring, some are used for observation and some are used for culturing micro-organisms. Of
all the tools, the most important scientific tools of the biologist is a microscope. A microscope is
an instrument that is used to see very small objects by a process called magnification.
Laboratory safety is mainly important before we do any activities of the laboratory. Working
carefully in the laboratory, dealing with minor problems before they become major problems,
keep safety constantly in mind, and chances of any problems you have will be very minor ones.
16
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Review Questions
I. Choose the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which of the following is not a property of life?
a. Populations of organisms rarely change over time.
b. Living things exhibit complex but ordered organization.
c. Organisms take in energy and use it to perform all of life's activities.
d. Organisms reproduce their own kind.
2. Which of the following is the correct procedure of scientific method?
a. Experiment conclusion application Question observation
b. Question observation experiment analysis prediction result
c. Observation question hypothesis prediction, experiment results conclusion
d. Observation question opinion conclusion hypothesis
3. Hypothesis in biology is best described as
a. possible explanation of an observation.
b. an observation that supports a theory.
c. a general principle that explains some aspect of life.
d. an unchanging statement that correctly predicts some aspect of life.
4. Which of the following is not the correct method of handling chemicals?
a. wearing a disposable respirator mask when handling chemicals that are toxic
b. never allow laboratory chemicals to contact your bare skin
c. never put chemicals open
d. return and pour the unused (left over) chemicals to its original container
II. Write short answer for the following questions
5. Write the main difference between light and Electron microscope.
6. Write the function of the following common laboratory tools.
Types of tools
Function
Flasks
Test tubes
Wash bottle
Dropper
Test tube rack
Spatula
Dissecting Pan
Wash bottle
Mortar and pestle
Grade 9 Biology
17
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
7. Look at the following laboratory safety signs and write their meaning.
8. Why does a microscope have several objective lenses?
9. What will happen to the field of view in a microscope as you close the diaphragm? Explain your
answer.
10. Why should you always focus a microscope by moving the objective lens away from the specimen?
11. Explain the importance of adding oil immersion when using high power objective? How?
12. List at least three field tools used by biologists.
18
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 2: Characteristics and
Classification of Organisms
Content
Learning competencies
2.1. Characteristics of living things
State the characteristics of living things
2.2. Taxonomy of living things
Classify living things based on taxonomic prin-
2.2.1. Principles of classification
ciples
2.2.2. Taxonomic hierarchies in biological
classification
Argue for or against the importance of classifi-
2.3. Relevance of classification
cation
2.4. Linnaean system of nomenclature
Describe the system of Linnaean nomenclature
2.5. Common Ethiopian animals and plants
Classify common Ethiopian animals and plants
2.6. The five-kingdom system of classification
based on the taxonomic categories.
2.6.1. Kingdom Monera
2.6.2. Kingdom Protista
List the characteristic features of the five king-
2.6.3. Kingdom Fungi
doms
2.6.4. Kingdom Plantae
Appreciate the works of renowned taxonomists
2.6.5 Kingdom Animalia
in Ethiopia
2.7. Renowned taxonomists in Ethiopia
2.1 Characteristics of living things
Objectives
Activity 2.1: Reflective
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discussion
state the characteristics of living things.
If somebody places an object
in front of you and asks you
whether it is alive, what
would you do?
Living things have variety of shapes and forms. Thus, biologists study
life in many different ways. Biologists often live with wildlife, collect
Would you poke it to see if it
reacts?
fossils, or listen to whales. For example, they count how many times
a hummingbird's wings beat per second. What makes something
Would you watch it closely
to see if it moves or breathes?
"alive"? Anyone could deduce that a galloping horse is alive and a car
is not, but why? We cannot say, "If it moves, it's alive" because a car
Would you dissect it to look
at its parts?
can move, and gelatin can wiggle in a bowl. They certainly are not
alive. Although we cannot define life with a single sentence, we can
come up with a series of characteristics shared by living systems.
Grade 9 Biology
19
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
What are the characteristics of living things?
Activity 2.2: Field
Observation
Some of the properties that are shared by all living things are listed
below:
Discuss what makes living
things different from non-
All living things are made up of one or more cells: Those made up of
living. Go outside your
one cell, such as bacteria are termed 'unicellular' and those made up
village or your school
of more than one cell, such as plants are termed 'multi-cellular'.
compound and sort the
things you observe into
All living things require energy: All organisms use a source of energy
living and non-living. Based
for their metabolic activities. For example, every muscle in your body
on your observations, write
is powered by the energy you obtain from your diet. Some organisms
a short report and present to
use energy from the sunlight to make their foods through the process
your classmates.
of photosynthesis. Such organisms, for example plants, are known as
producers or autotrophs. Other organisms cannot make their own
food but consume others. Such organisms are known as consumers
or heterotrophs.
All living organisms respond to stimuli: organisms can detect or
sense stimuli (change) in the internal or external environment and
make appropriate responses.
All living things can grow: Growth is a permanent increase in size
and mass due to an increase in cell number or cell size or both.
Even bacteria and single-celled creatures show an increase in size.
Multicellular organisms which increase the number of cells in their
bodies become more complicated and change their shape and size.
All living things can reproduce: Reproduction is the process that
makes more of the same kind of organism. Single-celled organisms
may simply keep dividing into two. However, multicellular plants and
animals may reproduce sexually or asexually.
All living things can excrete: Excretion is the removal of the
metabolic wastes produced in cells as a result of chemical reactions
(metabolism). For example, respiration and other chemical reactions
in the cells produce waste products such as carbon dioxide. Living
organisms expel such substances from their bodies in various ways.
All living things display ordered complexity: All living things
are both complex and highly ordered. The levels of organization in
biological systems begin with atoms and molecules and increase in
complexity. Your body is composed of many different kinds of cells
each containing many complex molecular structures. Many non-
living things may also be complex, but they do not exhibit this degree
of ordered complexity.
Most living things maintain homeostasis: Most organisms maintain
relatively constant internal conditions that are different from their
environment. Homeostasis is the regulation of an organism's internal
20
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
conditions to maintain stability. For example, your body temperature
remains stable despite changes in outside temperatures.
Reproduction
All living things possess adaptations that evolve overtime: All
Growth
Excretion
& Dev't
organisms interact with other organisms and their environment in
Response
Ordered
ways that influence their survival, and as a result, organisms evolve
Living
Complexity
Things
adaptations to their environments (Fig.2.1).
Metabolism
Homeostasis
Self Assessment 2.1
Cellular
Adaptation
Structure & Composition
1. Is it possible to define life in a simple sentence? If your answer
is no, why not? Give a short explanation.
Figure 2.1. Characteristics of life
2. How are living things different from the non-living things?
2.2 Taxonomy of living things
2.2.1 Principles of classification
Activity 2.3: Reflective
Discussion
Objectives
This section explains how
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
biologists have organized the
study of living things. This
classify living things based on taxonomic principles,
organization makes it easy to
tell which organisms share
Why do biologists classify living things?
characteristics and which are
related to each other.
Organizing items not only makes them easier to find but can also
1. How organized are you?
make them easier to understand. One tool biologists use to organize
and understand living organisms is classification. Classification is the
2. Do you organize your
clothes or books in some
process of grouping things based on their similarities. The science of
way?
naming, identifying and classifying organisms is known as taxonomy.
3. Discuss the advantages
Scientists who study taxonomy are called taxonomists. Biologists
of being organized.
classify organisms into different categories mostly by judging the
degrees of their apparent similarities and differences. These include
the external and internal structures of the organism as well as where
Key Terms
the organism lives. Taxonomists also consider the genetic makeup
of organisms to reveal their evolutionary relationships to other
Identification: identifying
organisms. The assumption is that the greater the degree of physical
organisms using
characteristic feature
similarity between them, the closer their biological relationship is.
They try to identify and classify organisms based on a number of
Nomenclature: Aspect
of taxonomy that deals
features (e.g., morphological, physiological, molecular, behavioural,
specifically with the naming
and/or ecological characters).
of organisms
Taxonomy: The science
of naming and classifying
species.
Grade 9 Biology
21
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.2.2. Taxonomic hierarchies in biological classification
Activity 2.4: Problem
Objectives
solving
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Read a book or search in
describe taxonomic hierarchies
the Internet on biological
classification. Why do
biologists need to organize
living things in hierarchies?
Thousands of years ago, the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384-322
BC) developed the first widely accepted biological classification
systems. He used simple morphological characters to classify plants
into trees, shrubs and herbs. He also divided animals into two groups
-those which had red blood and those that did not have. Though it
was useful for a while, Aristotle grouped some organisms that had
very little in common. For example, he grouped birds, bats, and flying
insects because they could fly. Later on in the 1700s, a Swedish Botanist
Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778), who is also known as the father of
taxonomy, introduced a taxonomic hierarchy of classification. He was
the first person to propose an orderly system for classifying organisms.
Taxonomic hierarchy is the process of arranging various organisms
into successive levels of the biological classification either in a
decreasing or an increasing order. In the Linnaean classification
system, all organisms are placed in a ranked hierarchy. The kingdom
is ranked the highest followed by Phylum (division), class, order,
family, genus, and species (Fig. 2.2). Each rank in a taxonomic
hierarchy is termed taxon (plural, taxa). Linnaeus' developed a two
Kingdom system of classification. He classified all living organisms
under kingdoms Plantae and Animalia that included all plants and
animals, respectively. This system did not distinguish between the
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, unicellular and multicellular organisms;
and photosynthetic (green algae) and non-photosynthetic (fungi)
organisms.
At the broadest level, biologists divide the diversity of life into three
domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Domain is the rank above
kingdom. Every organism on Earth belongs to one of these three
domains. The first two domains, Bacteria and Archaea, identify two
very different groups of organisms that have prokaryotic cells, relatively
small and simple cells that lack a nucleus or other compartments
bounded by internal membranes. Archaea are prokaryotic as their
cells have no nucleus and membrane bounded organelles. Their range
of size is similar to that of bacteria. Many Archaea inhabit extreme
environments. Bacteria are prokaryotic as their cells have no nucleus.
They are all small organisms that vary in size between that of the largest
virus and the smallest single-celled eukaryote. The major differences
22
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
of bacteria and archaea includes the chemical composition of the cell
wall and cell membrane; the use chlorophyll for photosynthesis by
Key Terms
bacteria but not by archaea, methane generation, and sensitivity to
Bacteria: is the most diverse
some antibiotics. Eukaryotes have relatively large and complex cells
and well-known group of
that contain a nucleus and other membrane-enclosed compartments.
single-celled organisms that
They are grouped into the domain Eukarya. The domaineukarya
lack a nucleus.
includes groups such as protists, fungi, plants and animals. Have a great
Classes: is a taxon of similar
diversity of forms: there are unicellular, colonial and multicellular
orders.
organisms.
Eukaryotic cells: cells with
a nucleus and membrane-
bound organelles.
Attention
Family: is a taxon of similar
genera.
Archaea
Bacteria
Eukarya
Genera: is a taxon of similar
species.
Cells with no
Cells with no nucleus
Cells with a nucleus and
membrane-bound
DNA exists as a circular
membrane-bound organelles.
Kingdoms: is a taxon of
organelles.
'chromosome'.
DNA in the nucleus arranged
similar phyla (plural for
DNA exists as a circular
as linear chromosomes with
No membrane-bound
'chromosome'
histone proteins
phylum).
organelles are present
Ribosomes are similar to
Ribosomes are different from
Orders: is a taxon of similar
Ribosomes are similar
bacteria.
both bacteria and archaea
to archaea
families.
Cell wall does not
There are unicellular,
Cell wall contains
contain peptidoglycans
colonial and multicellular
Phylum: is a taxon of
Cells divide by binary
peptidoglycans
organisms
similar classes. (Plant
fission
Cells divide by binary
Cell division is by mitosis
Are unicellular/ colonial
fission,
Many different ways of
taxonomists use the taxon
Are unicellular/ colonial
reproducing asexually and
division instead of phylum).
sexually.
Prokaryotic cells: are
unicellular organisms
without a separate nucleus.
Species: unique type of
Homo sapiens
organism
Bi-pedal and higher
Taxon: is a group of
SPECIES inteligence
organisms that share a
Homo
unique set of traits.
Hominids with large brain
GENUS
& upright posture
Similarity increases
Hominidae
Primates with relatively flat
FAMILY
faces & binocular vision
Primata
ORDER
Mamals with forward lookng
eyes & grasping fingures
Mammalia
Self Assessment 2.2
CLASS
Body covered with hair/fur.
Mammary glands are present
1. What is taxonomic
Chordata
PHYLUM
Animals with a notochord or
hierarchy?
vertebral column(Back bone)
2. List some of the
Animalia
KINGDOM
taxonomic hierarchies
that you know.
Figure 2.2. Taxonomic hierarchy
Grade 9 Biology
23
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Attention
Have you ever asked yourself what a species is? What are the characteristic features of a species? The
smallest natural group of organisms is the species. A species can be defined as a group of organisms that
can reproduce to produce fertile offspring. Members of a species also often resemble each other very
closely in appearance, unless humans have taken a hand in the breeding programs. All cats belong to the
same species but there are wide variations in the appearance of different breeds. There are many other
definitions of species; for example, phylogenetic species, morphological species, evolutionary species,
systematic species, recognition species etc. However, for a biological species, members could reproduce to
produce fertile offspring. Members of a species also often resemble each other very closely in appearance.
2.3 Relevance of classification
Objectives
Activity 2.5: Investigating
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
1. Why and how do
describe the relevance of classification
human beings classify
organisms?
2. Visit a library in your
What are the relevancies of biological classification?
school or public library
The applications of classification are manifold: identification of
in your village, and write
harmful and beneficial organisms, reduce energy and time to
on the importance of
biological classification
study organisms, and help us understand the relationship between
and present your results
organisms, etc. Classification gives biologists a framework that allows
to your classmates.
them to study the relationships between organisms. For example, this
framework allows biologists to study the relationship between birds
and dinosaurs. Biologists have found that the bones of some dinosaurs
have large internal spaces. So do the bones of birds. Because of these
findings, some biologists believe that dinosaurs are more closely
related to birds than to reptiles.
Taxonomy can also be a useful tool for scientists who work in such
areas as agriculture, forestry, and medicine. Taxonomy can also help
the economy. For example, taxonomists can discover new sources
of lumber, foods, medicines, and energy. For example, a taxonomist
might know that a certain species of tree contains chemicals that make
good disinfectants (e.g., Shiferaw/ Moringa- Moringa stenopetala). It
is possible that a closely related plant species could have the same
useful substances. So instead of having one source of chemicals, there
may be two or more sources.
Self Assessment 2.3
1. For which of the following purposes could taxonomy be used?
a. to determine whether a plant is safe to be planted in a schoolyard
b. to find a new source for medicine that comes from plants
c. to determine how closely related two species animals
d. all of the above
24
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.4 Linnaean system of nomenclature
Objectives
Activity 2.6: Inquiring and
researching
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Did you know Carl
describe the system of Linnaean nomenclature
Linnaeus?
explain how organisms are given scientific names.
List the major contributions
write scientific names properly and give examples.
of Carl Linnaeus to the
Science of taxonomy.
How did Carl Linnaeus classify living organisms?
Linnaeus was a Swedish naturalist who initially graduated in medicine
but became interested in plants. He travelled in Scandinavia, England
and Eastern Europe, discovering and naming new plant species.
In 1735 he published his Systema Naturae, in which he accurately
described 7700 plant species and classified them. He further grouped
species into genera, genera into classes, and classes into orders. He
also classified over 4000 animals, but rather less successfully into
mammals, birds, insects and worms.
Linnaeus refined and popularized the binomial system of naming
organisms, in which the first name represents the genus and the second
name the specific epithet. This system is still the official starting point
for naming or revising the names of organisms.
Binomial nomenclature
Species must be named in such a way that the name is recognized
all over the world. For example, maize is named Bekolo in Amharic,
Boqqollo (Badallaa) in Afan Oromo and Baddela in Sidaamu Afoo
and corn in American English etc. If you are not aware of these
names, it could lead to confusion. If the botanical name, Zea mays,
is used, however, there is no chance of error. As you all might know
our country is endowed with cultural and linguistic diversities and
each would have different names for the same species. As a result, it
would be difficult for a person to know the names given by the 80 plus
ethnolinguistic groups in Ethiopia. Similarly, there are over thousands
of languages in the African continent and beyond.
Therefore, the Latin form of the name allows it to be used in all over
the world irrespective of language barriers. The similarity in size,
shape, behaviour and colour makes it difficult to differentiate one
species from the other. Again, the use of the scientific name avoids
such confusion.
The binomial system of naming species (introduced by Linnaeus) is
an internationally agreed system in which the scientific name of an
organism is made up of two parts showing the genus and the species.
Grade 9 Biology
25
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Binomial means 'two names'; the first name gives the genus and the
Self Assessment 2.4
second gives the specific epithet. A genus (plural, genera) consists of
1. What is a binomial
a group of similar species. The specific epithet sometimes describes
a characteristic of the organism. For example, Enset, false banana,
nomenclature?
Ensete ventricosum and Banana, Musa acuminate, belong to the same
2. Write the scientific
family (Musaceae). In writing a scientific name, the first letter of name
names of the following
of the genus is a capitalized letter and the specific epithet always starts
organisms: house fly,
with a small letter, for example, the scientific name of human beings is
mouse, dog, cat & goat.
Homo sapiens. The scientific names are underlined when handwritten
or italicized when printed.
2.5 Common Ethiopian animals and plants
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
classify common Ethiopian animals and plants based on the
taxonomic categories.
write the scientific names of common Ethiopian plant and
animals species
use dichotomous keys to identify unknown organism
Ethiopia is endowed with high biological diversity (biodiversity)
due to its geographical location, topographical diversity and diverse
climatic features. The country is a hot spot for a diversity of wild plant
and animal species with a high degree of endemicity. Furthermore,
Ethiopia is a primary centre of diversity for field crops such as noug
(Guizotia abyssinica), tef (Eragrostis tef) and the Ethiopian mustard
(Brassica carinata). Besides, field crops such as barley, sorghum,
durum wheat, finger millet, faba bean, chickpea, lentil, and cowpea
have wide diversity in Ethiopia. Also Ethiopia has served as a gateway to
domestic animals from Asia to Africa and its diverse ecology favoured
diversification of these resources. The scientific and common names
of some plants and animals in Ethiopia are presented in table 1.
Activity 2.7:Inquiring and Researching
Read books and/or search in the Internet for the scientific and the
local names common Ethiopian plants and animals species. Present
your report to your classmates.
26
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Table 1: Scientific names of some common plants and animals
in Ethiopia
Common
Taxon
name
Kingdom
Phylum/
Class
Order
Family
Genus
Scientific
Division
Name
Elephant
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Proboscidea
Elephanti-
Loxodonta
Loxodonta
dae
africana
Ethiopian
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Carivora
Canidae
Canis
Canissimensis
Wolf
Gelada
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Primate
Cercopithe-
Thero-
Theropithecus
cidae
pithecus
gelada
Lion
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Carivora
Felidae
Panthera
Panthera leo
Walia
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Artiodactyla
Bovida
Capra
Capra walie
Ostrich
Animalia
Chordate
Ave
Struthioni-
Struthion-
Struthio
Struthio
formes
idae
camelus
Watled
Animalia
Chordate
Ave
Pelecani-
Threskior-
Bostrychia
Bostrychia
Ibis
formes
nithidae
carunculata
Enset
Plantae
Angio-
Monocylo-
Zingiberales
Mussaseae
Ensete
Ensete ventri-
spermata
doneae
cosum
Maize
Plantae
Angio-
Lilospida
Cyperales
Poacea
Zea
Zea mays
spermata
Noug
Plantae
Angio-
Eudicots
Asterales
Asteraceae
Guizotia
Guizotia ab-
spermata
yssinica
Tef
Plantae
Angio-
Lilospida
Cyperales
Poacea
Eragrotes
Eragrstos tef
spermata
Wheat
Plantae
Angio-
Lilospida
Cyperales
Poacea
Triticum
Triticum aes-
spermata
tivum
Dichotomous keys
Activity 2.8: Inquiring and
Researching
How do biologists use dichotomous keys?
You may have come across
Dichotomous keys are used to identify unfamiliar organisms. They
organisms that you did not
simplify the process of identification. Each key is made up of pairs of
recognize and could not
contrasting features (dichotomous means two branches), starting with
classify. How do you solve
quite general characteristics and progressing to more specific ones.
this problem?
By following the key and making appropriate choices it is possible
to identify the organism correctly. Figure 2.3 shows an example of a
Self Assessment 2.5
dichotomous key that could be used to place an unknown vertebrate
1.Make a field visit in
and unknown invertebrate in the correct class. Item 1 gives you a
your village and or your
choice between two alternatives. If the animal is poikilothermic
school compound and
(cold-blooded), you move to item 2 and make a further choice. If it is
ask the names of twenty
a homoiothermic (warm-blooded), you move to item 4 for your next
common Ethiopian
choice. The same technique may be used for assigning an organism to
animals and plants. Write
its class, genus or species. However, the important features may not
their scientific names
always be easy to see and you have to make use of less fundamental
(species names) along
characteristics.
with their local names.
Grade 9 Biology
27
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Has Legs
2
1
No les
5
Poikilothermic
2
1
Homoiothermic
4
More than six legs
3
2
Six legs
4
Has fins but no limbs
Fish
2
Has four limbs
3
Short, flattened gray body
Woodlouse
3
Long brown/yellow body
Reptile
3
Has no scales on body
Amphibian
Has four limbs
Reptile
4
Pincers on last segment
Earwig
Hard wing covers
Beetle
Has feathers
Bird
4
Has fur
Mammal
5
Body segmented
Earthworm
Body not segmented
6
Has a shell
Snail
6
No shell
Slug
Figure 2.3. Vertebrate (left) and invertebrate keys
2.6 The five-kingdom system of classification
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list the characteristic feature of the five kingdoms,
describe the kingdoms of the Monera, Protista and Fungi
and give examples of organisms from each one.
describe the kingdom Plantae and explain its major taxa,
giving examples.
discuss features the kingdom Animalia and explain its major
taxa, giving examples.
group animals into vertebrates and invertebrates and
explain the differences between them.
Why did we come up with the five kingdoms?
Classification of organisms into plants and animals was easily done
and understood, but a large number of organisms did not fall into
either category. Hence the two kingdom classification used for a long
time was found inadequate. Besides, gross morphology a need was
Activity 2.9: Cooperative
also felt for including other characteristics like cell structure, nature
Learning
of cell wall, mode of nutrition, habitat, methods of reproduction,
What is the largest group
evolutionary relationships, etc.
of organisms recognized by
biologists? How many such
Whittaker (1969) proposed a five kingdom classification to solve
groups should there be?
the pitfalls of the two kingdom system of classification. The main
Most biologists used to favor
criteria for classification used by him include cell structure, body
the adoption of two groups.
organization, mode of nutrition, reproduction and phylogenetic
What are these two groups?
relationships. Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme consists of animals,
plants, fungi, monera and protists(Fig.2.4). It is still not easy to fit all
28
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
organisms into the five-kingdom scheme. For example, many protista
with chlorophyll (the protophyta) show important resemblances to
Attention
some members of the algae, but the algae are classified into the plant
kingdom.
Viruses are not included
in any kingdom - they are
Fungi
not considered to be living
Plantae
Animalia
organisms because they
Basidiomycota
Arthropoda
lack key characteristics of
Spermatophyta
living things. Viruses are
Annelida
Molluses
Pteridophyta
Vertebrate
particles that are not alive.
Ascomycota
/
Nematoda
They cause diseases and
Protochordata
infections. Viruses are made
Bryophyta
Dictyosteliidae
Platyhelminthes
Echinodermata
up of nucleic acids, either
Charophyta
Chaetognatha
DNA or RNA, surrounded
Oomycete
Phaeophyta
by a protein coat. They
Chlorophyta
Coelenterata
are smaller than the tiniest
Rhodophyta
Porifera
bacterium. Most biologists
COMMITR
agree that viruses are not
alive because they don't
Ciliophora
Rhizopoda
Protista
grow, develop, or carry
Cyanophyta
out respiration. All viruses
Bacteria
replicate, or make copies of
Monera
themselves. However, viruses
need the help of living cells
to copy themselves. In order
Figure 2.4. The five kingdoms of life
to copy itself, a virus must
enter a living cell. The cell
in which a virus replicates is
Self Assessment 2.6
called the host cell.
1. Do you agree or disagree with the classification of algae as a
plant? Explain.
2. Do you suggest an alternative category or group for organisms'
such as algae and the likes?
Activity 2.10: Debate
Debate on why it is difficult for biologists to develop a rigid classification scheme? Do you think
the Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme has solved the classification problems biologists are trying to
answer for generations?
Procedure:
1. Divide members of your classmates into three groups.
2. Members of group 1 support the idea that Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme has solved the
classification problems.
3. Members of group 2 are against the idea that Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme has solved the
classification problems.
4. The third group will be the audience.
5. Let members of group 1 and 2 present their position each in five minutes, and
6. Let students from group three ask questions both groups.
Grade 9 Biology
29
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Activity 2.11: Collaborative
2.6.1. Kingdom Monera
Learning
Objectives
What do you think about
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
when you hear the word
bacteria? You probably think
describe the kingdom Monera and give example of organisms
about germs or something
describe importance of Monera
that is bad for you. Did you
What are Monera?
know that some bacteria
are actually helpful? For
Monera includes eubacteria and archaebacteria. Eubacteria (true
example, some bacteria
bacteria) have strong cell walls. They exist in various shapes and
help with human digestion,
forms (Figs 2.5 and2.6). Some eubacteria are heterotrophs; otherscan
while other bacteria help
make their food (autotrophs). Some autotrophic bacteria make their
produce cheese, yogurt, and
own food the way plants do; they are photosynthetic. Others make
sourdough bread. However,
other bacteria cause diseases
energy by chemical reactions; chemosynthetic. The eubacteria live
in humans, for example
in most habitats, except the most extreme. Some eubacteria cause
Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
diseases, like strep throat and pneumonia. Most eubacteria, however,
causes tuberculosis, and
are harmless and helpful.
Haemophilus ducreyi,
Spherical
Rod-shaped
Spiral
chancroid. Discuss the major
distinguishing features of
kingdom Monera
Key Terms
Cocci
Bacilli
Spirillum
Archaebacteria: a group of
Figure 2.5. Examples major groups of Monera
microorganisms considered
to be an ancient form of life
Archaebacteria (Archaea) have very different cell walls than bacteria,
that evolved separately from
but like bacteria, archaebacteria make their own food. They are
the bacteria
chemosynthetic and photosynthetic. Archaebacteria live in extreme
Chemosynthetic: synthesis
environments. They live in such places as swamps, deep-ocean hot-
food using chemical
water vents and seawater evaporating ponds. The environments in
reaction.
which the archaebacteria live often have no oxygen (Fig 2.5).
Eubacteria: true bacteria
Monera
Eubacteria
Archaebacteria
True bacteria)
Heterotropic
Autotropic
Halophiles
Thermoa-
Methanoges
bacteria
bacteria
(Salty areas)
cidophiles
(Marshy areas)
(hotsprings)
Chemoautotrophs
Photoautotrophs
Sulphur bacteria)
(Cyanobacteria)
Figure 2.6. Some representative of taxa of kingdom monera
30
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Attention
Activity 2.12: Collaborative
Learning
Most people tend to think of bacteria in terms of illness and disease.
Classify the following
However, there are actually only a few disease-causing bacteria
statements into useful
compared to the number of harmless and beneficial bacteria. In
versus harmful relating to
fact, we could not survive without bacteria. Bacteria cause diseases
the importance of bacteria:
in plants, animals, and humans. Disease causing bacteria enter the
endospores germinate in
human body through openings such as the mouth. Bacteria are
human lungs, cause infection
carried in air, food, and water. Sometimes bacteria enter the body
in humans, provide nitrogen
through skin wounds. There are two ways bacterial diseases harm
in a usable form for plants,
people. First, the growth of bacteria can interfere with the normal
flavor food, oxygen is a
function of body tissues. Second, the bacteria can release a toxin that
byproduct of making food
directly attacks the host.
and Create toxins.
Important characteristics of monera:
Simple prokaryotic unicellular organisms
Self Assessment 2.7
Lack a well-defined nucleus or any membrane bound organelles
If someone tells you that
Most have a rigid cell wall
bacteria are bad, how would
Have various modes of nutrition. Could autotrophs or heterotrophs
you respond?
Known as decomposers and mineralizers in the biosphere
2.6.2. Kingdom Protista
Objectives
Activity 2.13: Collaborative
Learning
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
You have learned that all
describe the kingdom Protista and give examples of
organisms
life is organized into five
describe importance of Protista
kingdoms. Without using
your notes, name all five
kingdoms. Some of the
What are protists?
organisms you will learn
about in this section are
There is no such thing as a typical protist. Kingdom protista contains
plantlike, and some are
the most diverse organisms of all the kingdoms (Figs. 2.7 and 2.8).
animal-like. Still others have
There are single-celled (unicellular) protists as well as many-celled
characteristics like fungi.
(multicellular) protists. Some are microscopic, others are very large.
Some of them were placed
Some can make their own food, some cannot. Protists have only
in different kingdoms before
one thing in common-they are all eukaryotes. That means most of
they were finally classified
their metabolic processes (chemical reactions) take place inside their
as Kingdom Protista. As you
membrane-bound organelles. Other than that, organisms classified
read this sub-section keep
in mind how much variety
as protists are quite different from each other. Some protists, called
there is in the world of
protozoans, seem to be like animals except that they only have one
Protista.
cell. Others, called algae, seem to be like plants except they do not
have roots, stems, or leaves. Algae are photosynthetic and autotrophic.
Unicellular algae are the basis of aquatic food chains and produce
much of the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. Still, other protists seem to
be like fungi except that they do not have the same kind of cell walls
that fungi have.
Grade 9 Biology
31
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Paramecium
Amoeba
Euglena
Cilia
Pseudopod
Flagellum
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.7. Examples major groups of protists
Classification
of Protista
Phylum
Phylum
Protozoa
Bacillariophyta
(e.g. Diatoms)
Algae belongs to classes:
Phylum
Phylum
Phylum
Phylum
Chlorophyta
Phaeophyta
Rhodophyta
Cyanophyta
(e.g. Green
(e.g. Brown
(e.g. Red
(e.g. Blue
algae)
algae)
algae)
green algae)
Rhizopoda
Flagellata
Ciliata
Sporozoa
(e.g.
(e.g. Euglena)
(e.g.
(e.g.
Amoeba)
Paramecium)
Plasmodium)
Figure 2.8. Some representative taxa of kingdom Protista
Self Assessment 2.8
Activity 2.14: Reflective discussion
1. What are the
You probably come into contact with algae every day. Diatoms are a
characteristic features of
type of algae whose remains become a powdery, porous rock called
protists?
diatomite. Diatomite is highly absorbent. It is used in pet litter and
2. Write the single
to clean up chemical spills. It also is used as an abrasive in household
common feature to all
cleaners. It is even added to paint to add sparkle. Now that you know
that diatomite is absorbent, sparkling, and abrasive, see if you can
protists.
imagine some additional uses for it. Discuss the additional application
and present to your classmate.
32
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.6.3. Kingdom Fungi
Objectives
Activity 2.15: Peer
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
conferencing
describe the kingdom fungi and give example of organisms
So far, you have studied
describe the importance of fungi
bacteria, and protists. In
this section, you will learn
What are fungi?
about the kingdom Fungi.
Fungus is the singular of
Fungi are eukaryotic organisms that include micro-organisms such as
fungi. Mushrooms are types
yeasts, moulds and mushrooms.
of fungi. Think about places
you have seen mushrooms
Except for unicellular yeasts, fungi are filamentous multicellular
growing. What do those
organisms.
places have in common?
Were they hot, dry, cool, or
Their bodies consist of long, slender thread-like structures called
damp? Did the mushrooms
hyphae. Hyphae play an important role in how they obtain food.
appear suddenly or grow
slowly over time?
Fungi possess a cell wall that is made up of chitin and polysaccharides.
Like animals, fungi are heterotrophic in nutrition. But unlike animals,
fungi do not ingest (eat) their food. Instead, a fungus absorbs nutrients
from the environment outside of its body. Many fungi accomplish
this task by secreting powerful enzymes into their surroundings,
digest compounds from a wide range of sources, living or dead.
These enzymes break down complex molecules into smaller organic
compounds that the fungi can absorb into their bodies and use (Figs
2.9 and 2.10).
Figure 2.9. Examples of fungi
Most fungi absorb soluble organic matter from dead substrates and
hence are called saprophytes (decomposers). Decomposer fungi
break down and absorb nutrients from non-living organic material,
such as fallen logs, animal corpses, and the wastes of living organisms.
Grade 9 Biology
33
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Fungi cannot make their own food. They are heterotrophs. Fungi use
Key Terms
a process called extracellular digestion to obtain nutrients. This means
Mutualism: symbiotic
food is digested outside a fungus's cells and then the digested food
relationship in which
is absorbed. For example, some hyphae of a fungus will grow into
both species benefit.
an orange. They release digestive enzymes into the orange that break
down the large organic molecules into smaller molecules. These small
Parasitism: symbiotic
molecules are absorbed into the hyphae and move into the flowing
relationship in which
cytoplasm.
one organism benefits at
the expense of another.
Fungi can also live with different living as parasites or mutualists.
Parasitic fungi absorb nutrients from the cells of living hosts. Some
Symbiosis: permanent,
parasitic fungi are pathogenic, causing diseases in humans (Example:
close association between
Candida albicans cause rush and Tinea pedis cause athlete's foot),
two or more organisms
animals and plants. Mutualistic fungi also absorb nutrients from a
of different species.
host organism, but they reciprocate with actions that benefit the host.
For example, mutualistic fungi that live inside certain termite species
use their enzymes to break down wood, making food available for
termites. Fungi can also live as symbionts in association with algae as
lichens and with roots of higher plants as mycorrhiza.
Attention
Fungi can reproduce either asexually by vegetative means
Some fungi cause food
(fragmentation, fission and budding), asexual reproduction through
to spoil, others cause
spores formation and sexually. The various spores are produced in
diseases, and some are even
distinct structures called fruiting bodies.
poisonous. However, fungi
are important and beneficial.
Yeast (saccharomyces service) is a very important fungus used for
Without fungi, the world
making injera rise and allows us to make alcohol (Tej, Tella, Beer etc.).
would be overrun with huge
amounts of waste, dead
organisms, and dead plants.
Thanks to many fungi, some
bacteria, and protists, the
Kingdom mycota
organic material is broken
down and recycled into the
Sexual reproduction not
Sexual reproduction
identified
identified
raw materials that other
living organisms need.
Fungi imperfecti or
Primitive Fungi
Advanced Fungi
DUETRROMYCETES
OOMYCOTA
EUMYCOTA
e.g. Cercospora Fusarium
(Mycelium Asptate)
(Mycelium Septate)
PHYCOMYCETES
ZYGOMYCETES
ASCOMYCETES
BASIDIOMYCETES
(Algal Fungi)
(Conjugation Fungi)
(Sac Fungi)
(Club Fungi)
e.g. Phytophthora
e.g. Mucor rhizophus
e.g. Yeast candida
e.g. Puccinia agaricus
albugo
Self Assessment 2.9
1. What are the
characteristic features of
fungi?
Figure 2.10. Some repressive taxa of kingdom fungi
34
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.6.4. Kingdom Plantae
Objectives
Activity 2.16: Reflective
Discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Think of all the things
describe the kingdom Plantae and give example of organisms
that plants provide for us.
describe characteristic features of major divisions of plants
They are an important
give examples of flowering plants
source of food. They also
provide oxygen through
What are plants?
photosynthesis. Some plants
are valuable sources of
Kingdom Plantae includes all eukaryotic, and multicellular
medicine. What are some
autotrophic organisms.
other things that plants
provide?
Plants make their own food through the process of photosynthesis.
Plants have chloroplast and chlorophyll pigment, which is required
for photosynthesis. Photosynthesis also provides oxygen in the
atmosphere.
Some parasitic.
Nearly all live on land.
Sexual reproduction predominates.
They do not move from place to place; they are stationary.
Their cells contain a rigid cell wall made up of cellulose.
They reproduce asexually by vegetative propagation or sexually.
There are over 250 000 species of plants. These include flowering
plants, mosses, ferns, and coniferous plants (see figs 2.11 and 2.12).
Activity 2.17: Inquiring and
Researching
Name or think of at least
five different plants. You
Ferns
might think of flowers,
bushes, shrubs, ferns, trees,
and grasses to name a few.
They are all plants, yet
they look different from
each other. As in the other
kingdoms you have studied,
Mosses and
Gymnosperms
Angiosperms
the plant kingdom has
Warts
divisions based on shared
Figure2.11. Examples of major groups of plants
characteristics. If you were
to place plants in divisions,
Self Assessment 2.10
what characteristics would
you use? Hint: Look at figure
1. What are the characteristic features of plants?
2.12 to find useful features to
classify plants.
Grade 9 Biology
35
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
plantae
(Embryophyta)
Bryophyta
Pteridophyta
Spermatophyta
(Amphibians of plant
(True root, stem and leaves,
(Seed producing, Vascular
kigdom, non vascular)
vascular tissue present)
tissue present)
Gymnospermae
Angiospermae(seeds
(naked seeded plants, seed
enclosed in ovary
not enclosed in ovary)
wall)
Dicotyledons
Monocotyledon
(embryo with two
single cotyledon
cotyledon)
in the embryo)
Activity 2.18: Interviewing
Key Terms
Ask a botanist about the
Angiosperms: Most diverse seed plant group. Only group that
economic, medicinal and
makes flowers and fruits.
ecological uses of plants
Bryophyte: is the common name for three lineages of plants:
(e.g., food, medicinal,
mosses, liverworts, and horn-worts.
ornamental, horticultural,
Dicots: Most diverse groups of angiosperms; members have two
cultural, spiritual, aesthetic,
seed leaves, branching leaf veins.
music and arts etc.).
Embryophyta: land plants; photosynthetic species that protect and
nourish the embryo on the parental body
Gymnosperm: Seed plant that does not make flowers or fruits; for
example, a conifer.
Monocots: Highly diverse angiosperm group; includes plants such
as grasses that have one seed leaf and parallel veins.
Seed plant (spermatophyte): Plant that produces seeds and pollen;
an angiosperm or gymnosperm.
Vascular plant: Plant having specialized tissues (xylem and phloem)
that transport water and sugar within the plant body.
2.6.5 Kingdom Animalia
Activity 2.19: Investigating
Objectives
Think about all the animals
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
you are familiar with. They
list the characteristic feature of the animal kingdom,
may be pets, animals in
describe characteristic features of invertebrates and
nature, or captive animals
vertebrates
such as in a circus or zoo.
list the common class of animals
This section explains what
all animals have in common.
What is an Animal?
List the characteristics you
know about that all animals
Kingdom Animalia includes all multicellular, heterotrophic,
share.
eukaryotic organisms. Constructing a good definition of an animal
36
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
is not straightforward, as there are exceptions to nearly every criterion
for distinguishing animals from other life forms. However, several
characteristics of animals, when taken together, sufficiently define
them.
Animals differ from both plants and fungi in their mode of nutrition.
Unlike plants, animals are not photosynthetic. Animals consume food
obtained from other organisms (i.e. they are heterotrophs). But unlike
fungi, most animals do not feed by absorption; instead, animals ingest
their food and then use enzymes to digest it within their bodies.
In contrast to plants and fungi, however, animals lack the structural
support of cell walls. Instead, animal cells are held together by structural
proteins, the most abundant being collagen, which is found only in
animals.
Many animals have two types of specialized cells not seen in other
multicellular organisms: muscle cells and nerve cells. In most animals,
these cells are organized into muscle tissue and nervous tissue,
respectively, and are responsible for moving the body and conducting
nerve impulses.
The ability to move and conduct nerve impulses underlies many of the
adaptations that differentiate animals from plants and fungi, making
muscle and nerve cells central to what it means to be an animal.
Most animals reproduce sexually.
Animals are very diverse. They are generally classified into two groups
based on the presence or absence of backbone as invertebrates (animals
with no backbone) and vertebrates (animals with a backbone (Fig. 2.13
-2.15).
Vertebrates
Invertebrates
Mammals
Fish
Porifera
Platyhelminthes
Annelida
Echinodermata
Birds
Reptiles
Cnidaria
Mollusca
Arthropoda
Amphibians
Arachnida
Cruslacea
Insecta
Myriapoda
Figure 2.13. Major groups of animals
Grade 9 Biology
37
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Activity 2.20: Collaborative Learning Groups
What are the two largest groups of animals recognized by biologists/
zoologists? Make a field visit in your school compound or village
and try to classify the animals you see/know into invertebrates or
vertebrates. (Hint: you could use a dichotomous key)
Invertebrates
(Without Backbone)
Annelid
Arthropod
Cnidaria
Echinoderm
Mollusk
Porifera
worms
Jointed legs
Stinging cells
Spiny-Skinned
Soft Bodied
Sponges
Two body openings
Jointed legs
Tantacles with
Bodies in 5 parts
Soft body with
No body opening
Simple nervous
More than one body
Stinging cells
Coverd in spikes or
external & internal
No Muscles,Nervers
system
setion
One body opening
spines
shells
of organs
Exoskeleton
Live in water
External skeleton
Have a foot of
Live in water
made on time
tentacles
Most have shells
Figure 2.14. Major groups of invertebrates
Key Terms
Anatomy: the study of internal structure, as revealed by dissection.
Invertebrates: are animals without a backbone.
Morphology: is the study of the form or outward appearance of
organisms.
Vertebrates: are animals with a backbone.
Self Assessment 2.11
Activity 2.21: Interviewing
1. What are the
Make internet search or ask a biologist about medically or
characteristic features of
agriculturally important insects (e.g., grasshopper, tsetse fly,
animals?
mosquito, honey bee, etc.) and list their importance (Hint:
2. What are the differences
economic, pollination, pest, aesthetic, music and arts, cultural,
between invertebrates
and vertebrates?
spiritual, vector, etc.).
38
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
VERTEBRATE CLASSIFICATION
Activity 2.22: Collaborative
Learning
Read a book or search on
Internet about important fish
AMPHIBIAN
FISH
REPTILES
species, mammals, and birds.
Thin and humid skin.
They live underwater
* The longest lived species on
Transformation through
They breateh throughout
the planet.
Then list their economic,
out their life cycle.
gills.
* Cold-blooded animals.
They change their breathing
Some of them have scales
Body covered with scales or
medicinal, aesthetic,
method (lungs, gills, skin).
covering their bodies.
shell.
They are born from eggs.
Fins help them to move
They can not chew.
cultural, spiritual, and/or
Cold-blooded animals.
under the water.
They are born from eggs.
They live on the ground and
Cold-blooded animals.
* They live on the ground or
ecological importance.
water.
They are born from eggs
in the water.
BIRDS
MAMMALS
Body covered with feathers.
They are bom alive from
They usually have porous
the mothers.
lightweigh bones to allow
They breathe through
them to fly.
lungs.
They live flying or on the
They live in the water, the
ground.
air and on the ground.
They have wings to fly.
They have their body
Their mouths are toothless
covered by fur.
beaks.
Warm-blooded.
Warm-blooded animals.
They are hatched from eggs
Figure 2.15. Major groups of vertebrates
2.7 Renowned Taxonomists in Ethiopia
Objectives
Activity 2.23: Collaborative
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Learning
Appreciate the works of renowned taxonomists in Ethiopia.
Do you know any renowned
Ethiopian taxonomist? If you
know one, please write the
name and the contribution
As stated in section 2.5 of this textbook, Ethiopia is known for high
of the renowned Ethiopian
degree speciesdiversity and endemcity. However, only few studies
taxonomist.
have been done to identify, name and classify the biodiversity at
different levels (e.g., gene, species, and ecosystem). Among the factors
that led to inadequate level of studies done in Ethiopia in the field of
biodiversity could be due to the few number of scientists educated
and trained in taxonomy despite the country's rich biodiversity.
Yet, as the result of efforts made over the past six decades, our country
has trained and educated a couple of renowned taxonomists that
contributed the publication of volumes of books on the Flora of
Ethiopia, for example. Among these scientists are Dr. Mesfin Taddese,
Professor Sebsebe Demissew, Professor Ensermu Kelbessa and
Professor Silesh Nemomissa to mention a few of them. In addition,
there are few other zoologists like Professor Abebe Getahun; who
contributed to the field of animal taxonomy. Below, we will discuss
briefly the contributions made by some distinguished Ethiopian
taxonomists to the scientific community in general and Ethiopian
society in particular.
Grade 9 Biology
39
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
ORD
Professor Sebsebe Demissew
Professor Sebsebe Demissew has participated in several successful
research projects universities in Europe and Africa. He has published
books and articles on the vegetation and plants of Ethiopia and
Africa. He is a member of national and international professional
organizations and has served as Chair of the Biological Society of
Ethiopia, Secretary-General of the Association for the Taxonomic Study
of the Flora Tropical Africa (AETFAT) in addition to being a Council
member of the International Association for Plant Taxonomy. He has
also served as a director of Flora of Ethiopia and Gulelle botanical
Garden.
Unit review
The characteristics of living things are movement, respiration, sensitivity, growth,
reproduction, excretion, nutrition, etc.
Classification is a way of sorting organisms into a meaningful order, traditionally using
morphology and anatomy, but recently also using DNA (molecular).
The science of naming, identifying and classifying organisms is known as taxonomy.
Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778), who is also known as the father of taxonomy, introduced a
taxonomic hierarchy of classification.
The taxonomic hierarchies are domains, kingdom, Phylum (division), class, order, family,
genus, and species
The three domains are archaea, bacteria and eukarya (i.e. protists, fungi, plants and animals)
Classification gives biologists a framework that allows them to study the relationships
between living and extinct organisms.
Taxonomy can be a useful tool for scientists who work in such areas as agriculture, forestry,
and medicine.
The binomial system is an internationally agreed system in which the scientific name of an
organism is made up of two parts showing the genus and the specific epithet.
In writing a scientific name, the first letter of name of the genus is a capitalized letter and
the specific name always starts with a small letter, for example, the scientific name of human
beings is Homo sapiens. The scientific names are underlined when handwritten or italicized
when printed.
40
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Ethiopia is endowed with high biological diversity (biodiversity) due to its geographical
location, topographical diversity and diverse climatic features. The country is a hot spot for
a diversity of wild plant and animal species with a high degree of endemicity
Dichotomous keys are used to identifying unfamiliar organisms. Dichotomous means two
branches, so the user is given a choice of two possibilities at each stage.
Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme consists of animals, plants, fungi, monera and protoctista
Monera (bacteria and archaea): do not typically have a nucleus or endomembrane system,and
they do not reproduce sexually. Members of both groups typically have cell walls.
Protists do not have a specific defining trait; they are a collection of many eukaryotic groups.
Most protists are single-celled, but there are multi-celled and colonial species. Life cycles
vary like nutrition; some species are autotrophs, others are heterotrophs.
Fungi are heterotrophs that secrete digestive enzymesto break down organic material,
then absorb the released nutrients. Some live as single cells; others grow as a multi celled
mycelium. All have cell walls with chitin.
Bryophytes: have no vascular tissues, seedless,
Gymnosperms: Vascular tissue present, "naked" seeds
Angiosperms: Vascular tissue present, Seeds form in a floral ovary that becomes a fruit and
monocots, dicots, and relatives
Animals are very diverse. They are generally classified into two groups based on the presence
or absence of backbone as invertebrates (animals with no backbone) and vertebrates (animals
with a backbone).
The invertebrates includes: sponges, flat worms, round worms, annelida, Mollusca,
Arthropoda (e.g., Insects, Arachnids, Crustacea & Myriapods).
The vertebrates includes: fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, & mammals.
Dr. Mesfin Taddese, Professor Sebsebe Demissew, Professor Ensermu Kelbessa, Professor
Abebe Getahun and Professor Silesh Nemomissa are few of the renowned Ethiopia
taxonomists.
Grade 9 Biology
41
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Review Questions
Part One: Say true if the statement is correct or false if the statement is wrong.
1. Archaea have very different cell walls from bacteria.
2. Classification is the process of grouping things based on their similarities.
3. Ethiopia is a primary centre for Eragrostis tef and Guizotia abyssinica.
4. Gymnosperm are seed plant that does not make flowers or fruits
5. Linnaeus' developed a four Kingdom system of classification.
6. Some autotrophic bacteria make their own food the way plants do and they are
chemosynthetic.
7. The Greek philosopher Aristotle (384-322 BC) developed the first widely accepted biological
classification systems.
8. Fungi can reproduce either by vegetative, asexual reproduction through spores formation
and sexually.
9. Many animals have two types of specialized cells not seen in other multicellular organisms.
10. Unicellular algae are the basis of aquatic food chains and produce much of the oxygen in
Earth's atmosphere.
Part Two: Choose the best answer among the given alternatives.
1. A process by which an organism produces offspring is called
A. reproduction
B. homeostasis
C. development
D. inheritance
2. Bacteria that serve as decomposers are
A. photoautotrophs B. chemoautotrophs C. photoheterotrophs D. chemoheterotrophs
3. All fungi
A. are multicelled
B. are heterotrophs C. form flagellated spores D. all of the above
4. Most fungi obtain nutrients from
A. nonliving organic matter B. living animals C. living plants D. photosynthesis
5. Fungal infections are most common in
A. plants
B. mammals
C. insects
D. birds
6.
is the transmission of DNA to offspring.
A. reproduction
B. homeostasis
C. development
D. inheritance
7. Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya are three
A. famalies
B. kigdom
C. classes
D. domain
42
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
8. Organisms require
and
to maintain themselves, grow, and reproduce.
A. DNA; energy B. nutrients; energy C. food; sunlight D. DNA; cells
Part Three: Think critically and answer the following questions.
1. How do viruses affect human health?
2. What are the major groups of vertebrates?
3. What ecological roles do bacteria play?
4. What ecological roles do fungi play?
5. Write the ecological and economic importance of insects
6. What structural and functional features do bacteria and archaea share?
7. How are plants important?
Grade 9 Biology
43
Unit 3: Cells
Contents
Learning Competencies
3.1. What is a cell?
Define a cell
3.2. Cell theory
Outline the contributions of Theodor Schwann and
Matthias Schleiden to the development of the cell
3.3. Cell structure and function
theory
3.4. Types of cells
Compare and contrast the structures of plant and
3.5. Animal and plant cells
animal cells
3.6. Observing cells under a microscope
Differentiate between eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cells
3.7. The cell and its environment
Make temporary slides of plant and animal cells
3.7.1. Passive transport
Observe and draw animal and plant cell parts under
3.7.2. Active transport
the microscope
3.8. Levels of Biological Organization
Conduct substances across animal and plant cells
experiments about the movement of substances
across animal and plant cells (osmosis, diffusion)
Construct with examples the different levels of bio-
logical organization
3.1. What is a cell?
Recall
Objectives
Recall grade seven general
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
science lesson:
Unit 4: cell as the
explain how living things are composed of cells
basis of life
identify unicellular organisms from multicellular organism.
Activity 3.1: Group work
Cell is the smallest and the basic unit of living things. All living things
are composed of cells. Some of these living things consist of a single
1. Why do we study about
cell and are called unicellular organisms.
cell?
For example, paramecium is a unicellular organism. Most of the
2. List some important
biological activities take
unicellular organisms are invisible with naked eyes, but there are
place in the cell
some exceptions like chicken egg cells which can be seen with naked
3. Discuss in groups about
eyes. The other groups of living things such as plants and animals
the unicellular and
including humans which consist of many cells are called multicellular
multicellular organisms
organisms. The body of multicellular organisms is composed of many
cells of specialized types which work cooperatively. For example, in
44
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
the case of human body, everything you do, every action and every
Key Terms
thought are possible because of the processes that occur at the cellular
level. Each activity of our body is a result of the cooperative work of
Cell: is the smallest and
muscle cells for movement, nerve cells for gathering information and
the basic unit of living
brain cell for interpretation of message to action.
things. All living things
are composed of cells.
Attention
Unicellular organisms:
living things consist of a
Most cells are very small and are, therefore, visible only with a
single cell
microscope but an ostrich egg is a single cell with about 6 inches in
Multicellular organisms:
diameter and weighing about 1.36 kg; nerve cells in your body can
groups of living things
stretch several feet long, and nerve cells in giant squid can be more
composed of many cells
than 30 feet long!
3.2. Cell theory
Objectives
Activity 3.2 : Group work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discuss in group about the
describe cell theory,
cell theory
name scientists who played a role in the discovery of the cell
theory.
An English scientist, Robert Hooke was the first to observe cells and
to use the word cell for structures in living organisms. He did this
in 1665 after examining thin slices of plant material cork. He was
surprised by the regular appearance of the structure, which is 'pore
like' regular structures that Hooke called 'cells'. Each cell appeared to
be an empty box surrounded by a wall. Hooke had discovered and
described a cell, without realizing that it is the fundamental unit of all
living things.
After Hooke discovered cells in the first half of the seventh century,
other early Dutch Microbiologist Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632-
1723) used his lenses in building numerous microscopes, some with
magnifications approaching 300X. In 1674 he likely observed protozoa
Figure 3.1. Drawing of cork cells
for the first time and several years' later he observed bacteria. Those
published by Hooke
"very little animalcules" he was able to isolate from different sources,
such as rainwater, pond and well water, and the human mouth and
intestine. Leeuwenhoek is universally acknowledged as the father of
Attention
microbiology because, he discovered micro-organisms like protists
English natural philosopher
and bacteria.
Robert Hooke was the first
to observe cells in 1665,
More than 150 years later, German scientists, Matthias Schleiden and
naming the shapes he saw in
Theodor Schwann were the first to explain the basic views of what we
cork cellulae (Latin, "small
now call cell theory.
rooms") They are known to
us as cells.
In 1838, German botanist Matthias Schleiden, a botanist stated that
Grade 9 Biology
45
Unit 3: Cells
all plants are made up of cells, and a year in 1839, another German
zoologist Theodor Schwann reported that all animals are made up of
cells. The two German biologists, established cells as the natural unit
and function in living things, the entire animals and plants are made
up of these cells. Then a German pathologist, Rudolf Virchow (1856)
established the idea that cells arise only by the division of existing
cells. Based on the above discoveries, the principle of cell theory is
developed. The cell theory states that:
1. Living organisms are composed of one or more cells.
2. Cells are the smallest unit of life
3. Cells arise only by the division of a pre-existing cell.
Cells vary considerably in size and shape but they share certain
common features:
Every living cell is surrounded by a membrane, which separates
the cell contents from everything else outside.
Cells contain genetic material which stores all of the instructions
needed for the cell's activities. Many of these activities are chemical
reactions, catalysed by enzymes produced inside the cell.
Cells have their own energy release system that powers all of the
cell's activities, So cells can be thought of as the smallest living
structures - nothing smaller can survive.
3.3. Cell structure and function
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
identify the main structure of a cell,
state that the cytoplasm of all cells contains most organelles
like the nucleus, ribosomes, and rough endoplasmic
reticulum,
describe the function of the structure of a cell, and
list the main structure of a cell.
Cells have different structures which have different functions.
The organization of cells varies between different organisms. In
multicellular organisms, some cells have the same shape and same
function but other cells have different shapes and different functions.
For example, in the human body, the shape and function of nerve
cells are different from that of muscle cells.
46
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.3: Self-test
1. Read books and/or search the Internet for the function of the structure of a cell. Present your
report to your classmates.
2. Complete the following table based on your search
Function
Cell Structure
Control all activity of the cell
Control the transport of material into and out
of a cell
The place where protein is synthesized
Packaging of the materials in a cell
Produce energy
Dendrites
Axon
Muscle fiber
Cell body
Nucleus
Myelin sheath
Figure 3.2 Nerve cell
Cell
Activity 3.4: Group work
Nucleus
Make a group of five
Stripes caused by arrange-
ment of actin and myosin
students, examine Fig
3.2 and 3.3 carefully and
discuss the structures and
functions of the cell.
Figure 3.3 Muscle cells
Cells look like one another in certain important ways. One important
similarity between plant and animal cells is the presence of common
cell structures. The major structures these cells have in common are:
1. Nucleus
2. Cytoplasm, and
3. Cell (plasma) membrane.
Grade 9 Biology
47
Unit 3: Cells
In addition to the above structures, there are many tiny structures in
the cytoplasm called organelles. An organelle is a distinct structure
within a cell having a specific function. Some of these organelles have
a membrane, while others without membrane.
Cell Wall
Cell Membrane
Golgi Vesicles
Golgi
Ribosome
Apparatus
Smooth ER
Chloroplast
(No Ribosomes)
Vacuole
Nucleolus
Membrane
Nucleus
Raphide
Rough ER
Crystal
(Endoplasmic
Druse
Reticulum)
Crystal
Large Central
Vacuole
Mitochondrion
Amyloplast
Cytoplasm
(starch Grain)
Fig. 3.4 Structure of typical plant cell
Activity 3.5: Think-pair-share
What is the difference between the cell wall and cell membrane?
Answer the question in relation to their function, discuss in pair and
share your answer with the other classmate.
Cell wall
Cell wall is a rigid structure of a plant cell that provides structural
support and gives shape to the cell. It is found external to the cell
membrane. Fungal cells, some Protista cells such as algae and bacterial
cells also have cell walls. Animal cells have no cell wall.
Cell membrane
Cell membrane is an outer covering that separates the cell's interior
from its surrounding environment. Cell membrane is a very thin
selectively permeable structure. Cell membrane controls what enters
into and leaves a cell. It controls the entry of organic molecules, ions,
water, and oxygen into and out of a cell. Wastes, such as carbon dioxide
Attention
also leave a cell by passing through a cell membrane.
Cell membrane is semi-
Cytoplasm
permeable (selectively
Cytoplasm is a thick fluid-filled region in the cell containing cell
permeable) because it
organelles. The fluid material of the cytoplasm consists of 70 to 80
chooses what can go in and
percent water with different organic (proteins, carbohydrates) and
out of the cell
inorganic (ions such as sodium, potassium, calcium) molecules
48
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
dissolved in it. It is also the site where several chemical reactions such
Activity 3.6: Homework /
as protein synthesis take place.
Individual assignment
Nucleus
Using the Internet or books
as a source of information,
Nucleus is the largest organelle surrounded by the double-membrane.
study the relationship
Inside a nucleus, there are thread-like structures called chromosomes
between chromosomes,
that contain a very long molecule of DNA ( Deoxyribonucleic acid).
chromatin, and DNA.
The nucleus determines what the cell will be, for example, a blood cell,
a liver cell, a muscle cell or a nerve cell. The nucleus also controls cell
division. Within a nucleus there is a darker area called the nucleolus,
this is the site where new ribosomes are made.
Ribosomes
Attention
Ribosomes are small cellular structures that are found in large numbers
in all cells. The function of ribosomes is to synthesize proteins. They
Most cells contain one
are found either freely in the cytoplasm or attached to the rough
nucleus but there are
endoplasmic reticulum.
interesting exceptions.
For example, both the
Endoplasmic Reticulum
mature red blood cells of
mammals and the sieve tube
The endoplasmic reticulum is a complex system of interconnected
elements of the phloem of
double membranes. They contain fluid-filled spaces between the
flowering plants are without
membranes which allow materials to be transported throughout the
a nucleus. Both lose their
cell. There are two distinct types of the endoplasmic reticulum
nucleus as they mature. The
individual cylindrical fibers
Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum
of voluntary muscle consist
It gets its name from the dotted appearance of its surface. These
of a multinucleate sack.
dotted structures on it are the ribosomes. Proteins can be made
Fungal mycelia also contain
by these ribosomes. Proteins can be made and stored in the rough
multinucleate cytoplasm.
endoplasmic reticulum and transported around the cell in the small
sacs called vesicles.
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
This is endoplasmic reticulum without ribosomes. It is important in
the manufacturing of lipids.
Nucleus
Smooth ER
Rough ER
Figure 3.5. The Rough and Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum
Grade 9 Biology
49
Unit 3: Cells
Vesicles
Activity 3.7: Group work
Vesicles are a small stack-like collection of the membranous sac. They
What makes rough
store and transport and ship materials where they need to go. For
endoplasmic reticulum
example, a protein made by the rough endoplasmic reticulum may
rough?
be placed inside a transport vesicle and shipped to the Golgi bodies,
where it would be modified and tagged for shipment elsewhere. These
vesicles are found in the cell by fusing with the Golgi apparatus.
Golgi apparatus (Golgi body, Golgi complex)
Attention
Golgi apparatus is a smooth, concave, membranous structure.
Golgi apparatus is an
The Golgi apparatus with the vesicles functions in the collection,
organelle named by its
packaging, and distribution of molecules within the cell or even
discoverer (Italian scientist
outside the cell.
Camillo Golgi) who first
described this structure in
Proteins and lipids manufactured on the rough and smooth
1898.
endoplasmic reticulum are transported into the Golgi apparatus and
You can think of the Golgi
modified as they pass through it. These modified proteins and lipids
apparatus as a detailing
are then packaged into vesicles that pinch off from the Golgi apparatus.
facility that receives ship
These vesicles then diffuse to other locations in the cell, distributing
newly manufactured cars
(proteins), puts on the
the newly synthesized molecules to their appropriate place.
finishing touches, stores
Mitochondria
the completed cars, and
then ships them out when
Mitochondria are relatively large organelles found in the cells. It has
needed. Products made
a double membrane; the outer one controls the entry and exit of
in the ER reach the Golgi
materials. The inner membrane forms many folds on which some of
apparatus in transport
the chemical reactions of respiration take place and the site for the
vesicles.
synthesis of much energy. Mitochondria are often described as the
'powerhouse' of the cell since they are the sites of respiration.
Porin
Outer membrane
Inter-membrane space
IIIIS
Inner membrane
Matrix
Cristae
Activity 3.8: Group work
Why do you think some
metabolically active cells
such as muscle cells contain
Ribosome
thousands of mitochondria?
Circular DNA
Discuss in groups of three
ATP synthase
to five students and present
Electron Transport
what you have discussed to
Chain
your classmates.
Figure 3.6: Mitochondria
50
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Lysosomes
Attention
Lysosomes are little membrane-bound packages of digestive enzymes.
They contain digestive enzymes which can be used to digest bacteria
Lysosomes are involved
or other cells taken into the cell It is also break down unwanted or
in the breakdown of the
damaged organelles within the cell.
contents of 'food' vacuoles.
Digestive
For example, harmful
Enzymes
bacteria. Any foreign matter
or food particles are taken
Lysosome
up into these vacuoles is
Plasma membrane
then broken down by the
Digestion
digestive enzymes. This
occurs when lysosomes fuse
Food vacuole
with the vacuole.
Lysosomes also destroy
Figure 3.7: Lysosome
damaged organelles in this
Vacuoles
way.
Phagocytosis came from two
These are organelles that consist simply of a single membrane with
Greek words phagein which
fluid inside. Many plant cells have large vacuoles that occupy more
means to eat, and kytos is
than half of the cell volume. Vacuoles are small in the case of animal
vessel referring here to the
cell. Vacuoles perform a variety of functions in different kinds of cells.
cell.
Food vacuole found in some animals to digest food and in the case
of some unicellular organisms there is a contractile vacuole which is
function is to expel excess water. For example, amoebas and many
other unicellular eukaryotes have food vacuole in order to eat smaller
organisms or food particles, by a process called phagocytosis. Many
unicellular protists living in fresh water have contractile vacuoles
that pump excess water out of the cell, thereby keeping a suitable
concentration of ions and molecules inside the cell.
Chloroplasts
Chloroplasts are also double membrane-bounded organelles that
occur in the cell of green plants, mostly in the cells of the leaves.
Activity 3.9: Individual
assignment
They are the site for photosynthesis. They contain a green pigment
Make Internet search or
called chlorophyll that can trap the sunlight energy for the synthesis
refer books and list some
of carbohydrates.
unicellular eukaryotes which
have food vacuole and
contractile vacuole.
Energy
Sugars
Figure 3.8: Chloroplast trapping
sunlight energy to synthesize
Chloroplast
sugar
Grade 9 Biology
51
Unit 3: Cells
Centrioles and microtubules
The cytoplasm of cells consists of small cylindrical fibres called
microtubules that have a variety of roles, including moving
chromosomes during cell division. In addition, animal cells have
structures called centrioles that anchor to micro-tubules during cell
division.
Cilia and flagella
Cilia and flagella are the most common organelles for locomotion in
unicellular organisms.
Cilia are short, hair-like structures. Cilia are used for locomotion. It
can also be used to create a current in the fluid next to the cell. For
example, cilia occur in large numbers on the lining (epithelium) of
the air tubes serving the lungs (bronchi).
Flagella are long, thread-like structures, present in lesser number.
Flagellum extends from the plasma membrane and enables an entire
cell to move. When present, the cell has just one flagellum or a few
flagella. When present, cilia are smaller and many.
Figure 3.9. Cilia and Flagella
Cilia
Flagella
Key Terms
Organelles: small structures found in plant and animal cells. Some examples of organelles are: nucleus,
mitochondria, vesicles, and Endoplasmic reticulum.
Cytoplasm: is a thick fluid-filled region in the cell containing cell organelles. It is also the site where
several chemical reactions such as protein synthesis take place.
Nucleus: is the largest organelle which contains DNA and control all activity of the cell.
Ribosomes: are small cellular structures that are found in large numbers in all cells. The function of
ribosomes is to synthesize proteins
Rough endoplasmic reticulum: contains the protein synthesizing machinery called ribosome.
Vesicles: are small stack-like collections of the membranous sac. They store and transport and ship
materials in the cell.
Mitochondria: is the sites of respiration to produce energy.
Lysosomes: contain digestive enzymes which can be used to digest bacteria or break down unwanted
substance in the cell.
Chloroplast: are the site for photosynthesis, which contain a green pigment called chlorophyll that can
trap the sunlight energy.
52
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
3.4 Types of cells
Objectives
Activity 3.10: Group
work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Make a group of three to
describe the difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotic
five students and discuss
cells
the structures commonly
give examples of the two types of cell.
found in Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic cell, the common
Based on cell structure and cellular organization, cells are grouped
cell structures found in
into two types. These are Prokaryotic cells and Eukaryotic cells.
both prokaryotic cells and
eukaryotic.
Prokaryotic cells are usually much smaller than eukaryotic cells. They
have a much simpler structure and are thought to be the first cells
Give examples organisms
which have prokaryotic cells
to have evolved. Prokaryotic cells such as bacterial cells don't have
and eukaryotic
membrane-bound organelles or a nucleus. Eukaryotes such as plants
and animals cells, in contrast, have membrane-bound organelles and
a nucleus.
Prokaryotic cells
Prokaryotes are different from eukaryotic cells because of the
absence of a nucleus and other membrane-bounded organelles. These
Prokaryotic cells are generally much smaller than eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic organisms are unicellular. The cell wall acts as an extra
layer of protection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and prevents
dehydration.
Eukaryotic cells
Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a nucleus and other membrane-
bound organelles. For example, each organ in an animal's body is
specialized to perform a particular role, each organelle in a eukaryotic
cell has a distinctive structure and function. Prokaryotic organisms
are unicellular but eukaryotic organisms are usually multicellular.
Attention
The term Eukaryotic is derived from the Greek eu, true, and karyon, kernel, referring to the nucleus.
Thus Eukaryotic cells are cells with a "true nucleus".
Similarly, the term Prokaryotic is derived from the Greek pro means before and karyon means
nucleus; "before nucleus", reflecting the earlier evolution of prokaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells are
usually between 10 and 100 micro meters (mm) wide, while prokaryotes are between 1 and 10 m The
term Eukaryotic is derived from the Greek eu, true, and karyon, kernel, referring to the nucleus. Thus
Eukaryotic cells are cells with a "true nucleus".
Similarly, the term Prokaryotic is derived from the Greek pro means before and karyon means nucleus;
"before nucleus", reflecting the earlier evolution of prokaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells are usually
between 10 and 100 micro meters (mm) wide, while prokaryotes are between 1 to 10 mm in size.
Grade 9 Biology
53
Unit 3: Cells
A
B
Cell Wall
Capsule
Cell Membrane
Cell wall
Golgi Vesicles
Golgi
Plasma membrane
Ribosome
Apparatus
Cytoplasm
Smooth ER
Chloroplast
plasmid
(No Ribosomes)
Vacuole
pili-
Nucleolus
Membrane
Nucleus
Raphide
Rough ER
Crystal
(Endoplasmic
Druse
Reticulum)
Bacterial Flagellum
Crystal
Large Central
Ribosomes
Vacuole
Mitochondrion
Nucleoid (Circular DNA)
Amyloplast
Cytoplasm
(starch Grain)
Figure 3.10. A. Structure of a typical prokaryotic cell structure
(Example, Bacteria cell) B. Structure of a typical eukaryotic cell
(Example, plant cell)
Table 3.1 Comparison of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
Structure
Eukaryotic cells
Prokaryotic cells
Organelles
Membrane-bound organelles
No Membrane-bound organelles
(for example, nucleus, ER)
Ribosomes
relatively large
relatively small
Chromosomes
DNA arranged in long strands, asso-
DNA present, not associated with pro-
ciated with proteins
teins, circular plasmids may also
be present
Cell wall
always present in plant cells, made
always present, primarily made of Peptido-
of cellulose, never
glycan
present in animal cells
Cilia and flagella
sometimes present
some have flagella, but these have a differ-
ent structure from those in eukaryotic cells
3.5. Animal and plant cells
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list the structures of plant and animal cells, and
describe the differences in structure between plant and
animal cells.
Animal and plant cells have certain features in common like cell
membrane, nucleus, cytoplasm, mitochondria, and Golgi apparatus.
The animal and plant cell structures have also some differences. For
example, cell wall, chloroplast and large permanent vacuoles are
54
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
found in plant cells while centriole and lysosome are found only in
animal cells.
In addition, plant cells are usually larger and are more easily visible
under alight microscope than animal cells. The plant vacuole is
surrounded by a membrane and contains fluid. The fluid in the
vacuole is a solution of pigments, enzymes, sugars and other organic
compounds (including some waste products), mineral salts, oxygen
and carbon dioxide. Vacuoles help to regulate the osmotic properties
of cells (the flow of water inwards and outwards). Chloroplasts are
found in the green parts of the plant, mainly in the leaves.
A
Cell (Plasma) Membrane
Mitochondria
Chromatin
Nucleolus
Peroxisome
Rough Endoplasmic
Nucleus
Reticulum
Ribosomes
Vacuole
Smooth Endoplasmic
Centrosome
Reticulum
Golgi Apparatus
Microtubules
Golgi Vesicle
Lysosome
Cytoplasm
A
Endoplasmic
Reticulum
Nucleus
Golgi Apparatus
Chloroplast
Nucleolus
Vacuole
Peroxisome
Mitochondria
Ribosome
Cell Membrane
Amyloplast
Cell Wall
Cytoplasm
Fig. 3. 11. A. Animal cell as seen with an electron microscope
B. Plant cells as seen with an electron microscope
Grade 9 Biology
55
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.11: Self-test
Fill the following table by saying 'present' or 'absent' based on the
structure of animal and plant cell.
Features
Plant Cell
Animal Cell
Cell wall
Cell membrane
Nucleus
Chloroplasts
Vacuole
Mitochondria
Rough and smooth
endoplasmic reticulum
Golgi bodies
Ribosomes
Lysosome
3.6 Observing cells under a microscope
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
draw the cell structures as seen under the light microscope,
and
label the cell wall, cell membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus of
the cell.
A microscope is an instrument that can be used to observe small
objects, even cells. The image of an object is magnified through at
least one lens in the microscope. This lens bends light toward the eye
and makes an object appear larger than it actually is.
56
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.12: Laboratory Activity
In unit one, you have been introduced to the microscope. In this section, you will learn how to
observe the structure of plant and animal cells under a light microscope.
Objective: To study the structure of plant cells under a light microscope
For this activity, you will need:
a microscope
3
Two drops on slide
2
1
Pull inner
Place layer in
microscope slides
centre of slide
layer off
lodine
cover-slips
forceps
a mounting needle
a pipette
a lamp
5
Observe & draw
a piece of onion skin
4
Slowly lower
iodine solution
cover
Method
1. Using forceps, peel a piece of epidermal tissue from the inner side of an onion bulb
2. Place the epidermal tissue on a glass microscope slide.
3. Using a scalpel, cut out a 1cm square of tissue (discarding the rest) and arrange it in the
center of the slide, Observe the onion cell.
4. Then, add two to three drops of iodine solution for staining. (What do you think the reason for
staining? What additional structure can you see in this cell, which could not see in animal cell?
Which cellular structure is more visible following staining? Why?)
5. Using forceps, a mounting needle or a wooden splint, support a coverslip with one edge resting
near to the onion tissue, at an angle of about 45°.
6. Gently lower the coverslip over the onion tissue, trying to avoid trapping any air bubbles. (Air
bubbles will reflect light when viewing under the light microscope, obscuring the features you
are trying to observe).
7. Leave the slide for about 5 minutes to allow the iodine stain to react with the specimen.
8. The iodine will stain the cell
9. Place the slide onto the microscope stage, select the lowest power objective lens and focus on
the specimen.
10. Increase the magnification using the other objective lenses.
11. Make a large drawing of one cell and label the following parts: cell wall cell membrane,
cytoplasm, nucleus. What is the difference between staining and unstaining onion epidermal ell?
Grade 9 Biology
57
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.13: Laboratory Activity
Objective: To study the structure of animal cells under a light microscope
For this activity, you will need:
a microscope
microscope slides
cover slips
forceps
a mounting needle
a pipette
a lamp
cotton bud
absolute alcohol
methylene blue dye
Cheek cell
Method
1. Rinse your mouth with water to remove any fragments of food.
2. Take a cotton bud from a freshly opened pack.
3. Rub the cotton bud lightly on the inside of your cheek and gums to collect some cheek cells in
saliva.
4. Rub the cotton bud onto the center of a clean microscope slide, to leave a sample of saliva.
5. Repeat if the sample is too small.
6. Then drop the cotton bud into a container of absolute alcohol (why do we use alcohol in this
procedure?).
7. Add two to three drops of methylene blue dye. (What do you think the reason for staining
by methylene blue? Which cellular structure is more visible following staining? Why?) Using
forceps, a mounted needle or wooden splint, support a cover slip with one edge resting near to
the cheek cell sample, at an angle of about 45°.
8. Gently lower the cover slip over the tissue, trying to avoid trapping any air bubbles. (Air
bubbles will reflect light when viewing under the light microscope, obscuring the features you
are trying to observe.)
9. Leave the slide for a few minutes ( Why do we stay for a few minutes?)
10. Place the slide onto the microscope stage, select the lowest power objective lens and focus on the
specimen.
11. Increase the magnification using the other objective lenses.
12. Make a drawing of one cell and label the following parts: cell membrane, cytoplasm, nucleus.
13. Place your used slide in laboratory disinfectant or autoclaving before washing. Why do we
disinfect the used slides?
Note: This technique which involves studying the epithelial cells taken from the inside of the cheek
needs some safety rules because of the very small risk of transmitting the AIDS virus. However,
appropriate precautions should be applied to treat contaminated items
58
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
3.7 The cell and its environment
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define the terms diffusion and osmosis,
describe the importance of diffusion and osmosis for the
transport of gases and solutes, and
describe the importance of active transport.
The Cell membrane
As previously mentioned, the cell membrane is a selectively (semi)
Attention
permeable structure that controls what enters and leaves cells.
Thinking of the plasma
Activity 3.14 Think-pair share
membrane as your school
guard, who is always
1. If the cell membrane is to lose its selectivity, what do you
standing at the entrance of
think will happen to the cell? Discuss in pairs and share your
the school gate and control
answers with your classmates.
who and what enters and
2. List some of the substances which leave and enter the cell
leaves the school, which is
a good way of remembering
the cell membrane's
function.
Cells need food materials to get energy or to build up its cell structures.
Cells also need salts and water, which play a part in chemical reactions
in the cell. Cells also need to remove unnecessary substances such as
carbon dioxide.
The structure of a cell known as cell membrane is semi-permeable,
Key Terms
it controls the entering of necessary substances and the removal of
unnecessary ones. Materials can pass through the cell membrane either
Diffusion: is the net
passively by diffusion and osmosis or actively by active transport.
movement of molecules or
ions from a region of high
3.7.1 Passive transport
concentration to a region of
low concentration
Passive transport is the movement of substances down a concentration
gradient. This movement is from an area of high concentration to an
Osmosis: is the diffusion
area of lower concentrate on with-out the need for input of energy.
of water molecules
from a region of their
higher concentration
Attention
(dilute solution) to a
region of their lower
You can think of passive and active transport like rolling a ball on
concentration(concentrated
a hill. Imagine that the hill is made of molecules; the lower part
solution)
of the hill has few molecules, while the upper part of the hill has
lots of stacked molecules. If you want to roll a ball downhill (or let
Active transport: is
the movement of ions
molecules flow from where they're piled up to where they're not),
you don't have to use any energy. If you want to roll the ball uphill
or molecules across the
(or push molecules from where they're in low concentration to where
cell membrane, against a
they're in high concentration), you have to put in some energy.
concentration gradient,
using energy.
Grade 9 Biology
59
Unit 3: Cells
Diffusion
This is the movement of molecules from a region of high concentration
to a region of low concentration down the concentration gradient.
Diffusion is a passive transport of molecules; the molecules need
only spread themselves, or diffuse, across the membrane. The
diffusion of gases and solutes is important for any activity of the cell.
For example, oxygen is important for respiration and get into the cell
by diffusion.
Activity 3.15: Think- Pair -Share
Discuss in pair what will happen in the following situations, Dis-
cuss with your friend and share your idea with the other class-
mates.
1. When some odor, like incense stick is placed in one part of
our home
2. When tea bag is dipping in a glass of hot water
Extracellular Fluid
(a) If a drop of colored
ink is dropped into a
beaker of water
Lipid bilayer
(plasma membrane)
Cytoplasm
(b) its molecules dissolve
Time
Figure 3.13 Diffusion through a semi-permeable membrane of cell.
Factors influencing the rate of diffusion:
Concentration gradient: the higher the difference in the
concentration of a substance on either side of a membrane, the
(c) and diffuse
faster it will tend to diffuse from higher concentration to lower.
Temperature: increase in temperature causes an increase in the
kinetic energy that molecules and ions possess enabling them to
move faster.
Mass of the molecule: heavier molecules move more slowly;
.
(d) Eventually, diffusion
results in an even distri-
therefore, they diffuse more slowly while lighter molecules diffuse
bution of ink molecules
throughout the water.
faster.
Distance travelled: the farther the distance that a substance must
Figure 3.12. Diffusion of
molecules.
travel, the slower the diffusion rate.
60
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Surface area: The greater the surface area, the faster the total
diffusion is Cells that are involved in rapid absorption, such as those
in the kidney or the intestine, often have their 'free' surface membrane
formed into hundreds of tiny projections called microvilli which
increase the absorbing surface.
Cells increase their surface area
by in-foldings of the membrane
like these microvilli
Figure. 3. 14 Microvilli on the surface of small intestine
Activity 3.16: Group Work
Select one student for this activity, follow the instruction below and
discuss your findings with your classmates.
Objective: To study the diffusion of perfume odour from high
concentration towards the lower concentration.
For this activity, you will need: Bottle of perfume
Method
1. Ask your friend to spray some perfume on the front side of
your class.
2. Another student should counting number as the smell of the
perfume diffuse through the classroom
3. Each student should hand up when he/she smell the odor of
the perfume.
4. You'll see a wave of hands moving from the front to the back
and sides of the class as the molecules spread out by diffusion.
5. Discuss, how different students smell the odor of the perfume
at different times, how long it takes to reach the student in the
last row?
6. Repeat the activity by increasing the concentration of the
perfume and compare the time with the previous one
7. Do you get a different result when you increase the
concentration of the perfume?
Grade 9 Biology
61
Unit 3: Cells
Osmosis
Activity 3.17: Think- Pair
-Share
Osmosis is a special case of diffusion. Like other substances water can
Discuss with your friend
also move passively through cell membrane. It moves from a region
and share your idea with
of high concentration of water molecules (lower solute concentration)
the other classmates why
to a region of lower concentration of water molecules (higher solute
this happen in the following
concentration).
situations
1. Feeling thirsty after having
Activity 3.18: Think- Pair -Share
salty food.
Think about osmosis in terms of the solutes. Why do you think water
2. Swelling of resins and
moves toward the area with the greatest concentration of solutes?
other seeds when they are
Discuss with your friend and share your idea with the other classmates.
soaked in water
3. If you put a potato into
pure water, it swells up
The movement of water is affected by the concentration of substances
over time.
(solutes) dissolved in the water. Basically, water moves from areas
where there is more water to areas where less water is.
1
Partially Permeable Membrane
Key Terms
2
Hypertonic solution:
a solution with a high
concentration of solute
Solute
and a low concentration of
Molecule
water.
Water
Hypotonic solution:
Molecule
a solution with a low
A
B
A
B
concentration of solute and
Figure. 3. 15 Osmosis
high concentration of water.
1. Before osmosis: two solutions are separated partially permeable
Isotonic solution: when
membrane. B has a higher solute concentration than A. The
the cell and its surroundings
soluble molecules are too large to pass through the pores in the
have equal solute and water
membrane but the water molecules are small enough.
2. As the arrows in diagram A indicate, more water molecules moved
from A to B than from B to A, so the net movement has been from
A to B, raising the level of the solution in B and lowering in A.
The movement of water into and out of the cell depends on the type of
solution found in the cell surrounding (Environment found outside
the cell).
Attention
When a cell is in a hypertonic solution, water moves out of the cell,
Application of osmosis in
causing the cell to shrink or plasmolysed. In an isotonic solution,
day to day life
water diffuses into and out of the cell at the same rate, with no change
People have used osmosis
in cell size. In a hypotonic solution, water moves into the cell and
to preserve food like meat
pressure are applied to the plasma membrane causing turgidity of
and fish through salt
the cell. The strong cell wall of plant cells can resist this pressure to
preservation.
keep the cell from rupturing. This is not the case with animal cells as
animal cells lack cell wall.
62
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.19: Group work
Discuss in groups how our society uses the principles of osmosis for
the preservation of meat in the rural area where the refrigerator is
not available.
Osmosis in Plant cells
Cytoplasm
Osmosis in plants is very important to bring strength and rigidity to
Vacuole,
the plant cell. If a plant cell is surrounded by water or a solution more
dilute than its contents (hypotonic solution), water will pass into the
Cell Wall
vacuole of the plant. The vacuole will expand and press outwards
on the cytoplasm and cell wall. Then, the rigid cell wall expands
A. Cell placed in dilute solution or
water absorbs water by osmosis and
and exert the pressure back, preventing the cell from taking in too
becomes turgid
much water and bursting. The plant becomes very turgid, due to the
pressure of water pressing outwards on the cell wall.
Turgor pressure is necessary for plants to retain their upright
posture and the extended state of their leaves. In contrast, if a plant
cell is surrounded by water or a solution less dilute than its contents
(hypertonic solution), plant cells lose water and there will no longer
be any water pressure pressing outwards against the cell walls, the
B. Cell placed in concentrated solution
plasma membrane shrinks pulls away from the cell and the cell get
losses water by osmosis and becomes
faccid
plasmolysed. The plasmolysed cell wilts and eventually dies.
In this figure 3.16 A. shows that if the water concentration of the
solution surrounding the plant cell is too high, the cell swells and
turgid. B. If it is the concentration water in both is the same C. If the
solution surrounding the cell is too high, the plant cell plasmolysed.
C. Excessive loss of water by osmosis
causes the cell to become plasmolysed
Fig. 3.16. Osmosis in plant
Wilted
Turgid
Figure 3.17. The effect of osmosis in plant leaf
Without adequate water, the plant on the left has lost turgor pressure,
visible in its wilting. Watering the plant (right) will restore the turgor
pressure.
Grade 9 Biology
63
Unit 3: Cells
Osmosis in Animal Cells
The excessive uptake or loss of water by animal cells causes damages
to cells. The survival of an animal cell, thus, depends on its ability to
balance water uptake and loss.
In the case of animals particularly vertebrates, the concentration
of water in the blood is monitored by the brain and adjusted by
the kidneys. The regulation of water flow is by keeping the blood
concentration within narrow limits, the concentration of the tissue
fluid remains more or less constant.
The animal cell should be surrounded by fluid or blood plasma which
has the same concentration of water as the cell contents; there is no
net flow of water into or out of the cells. If not balanced, osmosis
can cause a serious problem in the animal cell. For Example, if the
surrounding solution has a high concentration of water (hypotonic)
than the cells, water will move into the cells by osmosis.
Water entering the cell will make the cell swell up. Animal cells
have no cell wall and the membrane has little strength, water would
continue to enter and the cells will eventually burst. This process
is called hemolysis of the cell which can occur in red blood cells.
Conversely, if the surrounding solution has a low concentration of
water (hypertonic) than the cells, water will pass out of the cell by
osmosis and the cell will shrink.
a
b
C
red cell
red cell bursts
remains normal
red cell shrinks
pure water or dilute solution with same
concentrated
solution (low
concentration as
solution (high
concentration of
red cell
concentration of
solute molecules)
solute molecules)
net movement of
water molecules
Fig. 3.18. (A) Shows that if the water concentration of the solution
surrounding the red blood cell is too high, the water moves to the cell
and the cell swells and bursts. (B) If the water concentration in red
blood cell and the surrounding solution is the same. (C)If the water
concentration of the solution surrounding the red blood cell is low,
the water moves from the cell to the surrounding solution and the cell
shrinks
64
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Hypertonic
Isotonic
Hypotonic
Activity 3.20: Group work
1. Make a group of five
students and discuss the
conditions that derive
us to drink water after a
heavy physical exercise?
Human Red cell
2. A farmer cultivates a
crop pant and he applies
too much chemical
H2O
fertilizers to the soil,
H2O
H,O
H,O
does this affect the
crop plant? What could
happen the crop plant?
Why?
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
Plant cell
Plasmolyzed
Flaccid
Turgid
Fig.3.19 Osmosis in plants and animal cell
Activity 3.21: Homework /Individual assignment
Using information from the internet or book, discuss how animals
living in freshwater regulate osmosis and how they protect their
body from bursting?
Osmosis in Ameba
Unicellular protozoans such as amoeba have contractile vacuoles.
Contractile vacuole are membranous structures which controls the
intracellular water balance by accumulating and expelling excess
water out of the cell, allowing cells to survive under hypotonic stress
as in pond water participate in osmoregulation of the cell and prevent
the bursting of cells.
The unicellular protozoans which dwell in freshwater consume excess
water, with the help of contractile vacuoles they drain excess water
out. It also helps them to protect the cell in the absence of cell wall.
Without these vacuoles, they might take in too much water, swell and
burst out.
Grade 9 Biology
65
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.22: Laboratory Activity
Osmosis in plant cells
Objective: To Investigating osmosis in plant cells
For this activity, you will need:
Potato,
salt solution,
Balance
1. Observing osmosis in potatoes:
prepare equal sized potato cubes and measure the weight
make a salt solution
bring another bottle and put pure water in it
put the potato cubes in pure water and salt solution. Speculate what will happen?
After 1hour observe their difference in size, weight, and conclude.
2. Observing osmosis in onion cell
Objective : To study plasmolysis using onion cell.
Epidermal strips are useful material for observing plasmolysis. Colored sap makes the observation
easier. Suitable sources are the inner surfaces of the fleshy storage and leaves of red onion bulbs.
Place the strips of the epidermis in a salt or sugar solution.
Place small pieces of the strips on glass slides.
Mount in the relevant solution.
Observe with a microscope.
What you observe about the shape of onion cell?
Draw the picture of the cell that you observe under microscope
Plasmolysis may take several minutes, then discuss in groups about your result.
66
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.23: Laboratory Activity
Investigating osmosis using model cell. Dialysis tubing is partially permeable. We can use dialysis
tubing to represent the cell membrane and the solution inside it to represent the cytoplasm.
Objectives: Objective: To Investigating osmosis in animal model cells
For this activity, you will need:
Dialysis tube,
sugar solution,
beaker.
1. Cut two pieces of dialysis tubing, each 15cm long. Tie one end.
2. Fill one dialysis tube with a concentrated sugar solution (tube A). Fill the other model cell
with water (tube B).
3. Put 'cell A' into a beaker of water and put 'cell B' into a beaker containing a concentrated
solution of sugar.
4. After 20 to30 minutes take out the two tubes. What happen to the two tubes? Is there any
difference in volume between tube A and tube B?
Tubes with a
concentrated
sugar solution
Water
Tube A
Tubes with water
Concentrated sugar
solution
Tube B
Grade 9 Biology
67
Unit 3: Cells
3.7.2 Active transport
Active transport is the movement of molecules from areas where
Attention
they're less concentrated to areas where they're more concentrated
Active transport allows
using energy. Active transport enables cells to use their stored energy
cells to maintain internal
to concentrate molecules inside or outside of the cell.
concentrations of
small solutes that differ
Active transport enables cells to use their stored energy to concentrate
from environmental
molecules inside or outside of the cell. Active Transport is the
concentrations. For
movement of particles through a cell membrane from a region of
example, compared with
lower concentration to a region of higher concentration against a
its surroundings, an animal
concentration gradient, using the energy released during respiration.
nerve cell has a much higher
concentration of potassium
Cells sometimes take in substances even though there is already a higher
ions and a much lower
concentration inside than outside. The substance is absorbed against
concentration of sodium
the concentration gradient. Less commonly, cells sometimes pump
ions. The plasma membrane
substances out, even though there is already a larger concentration
helps maintain these
outside. Some of the examples are: ion uptake by root hairs and
differences by pumping
uptake of glucose by epithelial cells of villi.
sodium out of the cell and
potassium into the cell.
Lower solute concentration
This particular case of
Solute
active transport (called the
sodium-potassium pump) is
XXXXXX
00000000
0000000
vital to the nervous system
of most animals.
XXXXXX
XXXXXX
......
0000000
ATP
Higher solute concentration
Fig 3.20 Active transport
3.8. Levels of Biological Organization
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define the terms tissue, organ and organ system, and
list some examples of human systems.
Activity 3.24: Think — Pair —
Share
Life forms a hierarchy of organization from atoms to complex
What is the smallest level
multicellular organisms. Atoms are joined together to form molecules,
of biological organization
which are assembled into more complex structures such as organelles.
that can display all the
These in turn form subsystems that provide different functions. Cells
characteristics of life?
Discuss with a partner and
can be organized into tissues, then into organs and organ systems
share your answers with
such as the nervous system. This organization then extends beyond
your classmates.
individual organisms to populations, communities, ecosystems, and
finally the biosphere.
68
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.25: Think — Pair — Share
Discuss with a partner and share your answers with your classmates.
1. How do these different cells and relate to each other? Where do
body systems, like the digestive system and nervous system fit
into levels of organization?
2. Suppose one organ in a digestive system failed to work properly.
How would the digestive system be affected? Would it still be
able to function? Explain your reasoning.
3. What might happen if a plant organ, such as a leaf or stem,
became damaged? How would the organism be affected?
The organization of the biological world is hierarchical-that is, each
level builds on the level below it:
The cellular level. At the cellular level, atoms, the fundamental
elements of matter, are joined by S chemical bond into clusters called
molecules. Complex biological molecules are assembled into tiny
structures called organelles within membrane-bounded units we call
cells.
Most cells, when they have finished dividing and growing, become
specialized. When cells are specialized, they do one particular job,
they develop a distinct shape and special kinds of chemical changes
take place in their cytoplasm
The organism level. Cells in complex multicellular organisms exhibit
three levels of an organization. The most basic level is that of tissues
(for example nerve tissue), which are groups of similar cells that act
as a functional unit. The cells of each type have a similar structure
and function so that the tissue itself can be said to have a particular
function; for example, muscles contract to cause movement, xylem
carries water in plants. The tissues of the leaf include the epidermis,
palisade tissue, spongy tissue, xylem and phloem.
Key Terms
Tissues, in turn, are grouped into organs body structures composed
Tissues: group of cells that
of several different tissues that act as structural and functional units.
have the same function.
For example, your brain is an organ composed of nerve cells. Organs
Organs: group of tissues
consist of several tissues grouped to make a structure with a special
that work together to do a
function.
particular function.
For example, the stomach is an organ that contains tissues made from
Systems: different organs
epithelial cells, gland cells and muscle cells. These cells are supplied
which are working together
with food and oxygen brought by blood vessels. The heart, lungs,
Grade 9 Biology
69
Unit 3: Cells
intestines, brain and eyes are further examples of organs in animals.
In flowering plants, the root, stem and leaves are the organs.
At the third level of organization, organs are grouped into systems.
The digestive system, for example, consists of digestive organs like
the stomach and intestine. The different systems collectively form an
organism. An organism is formed by the organs and systems working
together to produce an independent plant or animal.
Activity 3.26: Group work
Give examples of some systems in the human body and discuss
The organs from which they are composed of.
Cell
Tissue
Organ
Organ System
Organism
Figure. 3.21 Level of organization in plants
Cell
Tissue
Organ
Organ System
Organism
Figure. 3.22 Level of organization in Animals
70
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Unit review
In this unit, you have learnt about:
Cell theory is the unifying foundation of cell biology. All organisms are composed of one or
more cells. Cells arise only by the division of preexisting cells.
All cells share simple structural features.
All eukaryotic cells have a centrally located nucleus, a semifluid cytoplasm, and an enclosing
plasma membrane.
In eukaryotic cells, membranes partition into several functional compartments called
organelles. The largest organelle is usually the nucleus. Other organelles are located in the
cytoplasm, the region outside the nucleus and within the plasma membrane.
Nucleus is the structure of the cell which control all activities of the cell. Within the nucleus,
DNA and proteins make up chromatin fibers; each very long fiber is a single chromosome.
The nucleus also contains the nucleolus, which produces components of ribosomes.
Endoplasmic Reticulum is the structure consists of membrane-enclosed tubes and sacs
within the cytoplasm. Rough ER, named because of the ribosomes attached to its surface,
makes membrane and secretory proteins. The functions of smooth ER include lipid synthesis
and detoxification.
The Golgi apparatus refines certain ER products and packages them in transport vesicles
targeted for other organelles or export from the cell.
Lysosomes are sacs containing digestive enzymes, aid digestion and recycling within the cell.
Vacuoles include the contractile vacuoles that expel water from certain freshwater protists
and a large multifunctional central vacuoles of plant cells. Microtubules are an important
component of the cytoskeleton, an organelle that gives support to and maintains the shape
of, cells.
Cilia and eukaryotic flagella are appendages that aid in movement.
Animal and plant cells have a cell membrane, nucleus, cytoplasm and organelles like
mitochondria (singular: mitochondrion), Golgi apparatus.
The difference between animal and plant cells is the presence of centriole, chloroplast, cell
walls is large permanent vacuoles only in plant cells.
Passive transport is the movement of substances down a concentration gradient. This
movement is from an area of high concentration to an area of lower concentration without
the need for energy to be used. Whereas active transport is the movement of molecules from
areas where they're less concentrated to areas where they're more concentrated using energy.
Life forms a hierarchy of organization from atoms to complex multicellular organisms. Atoms
are joined together to form molecules, which are assembled into more complex structures
such as organelles. These in turn form subsystems that provide different functions. Cells can
be organized into tissues, then into organs and organ systems such as the nervous system.
This organization then extends beyond individual organisms to populations, communities,
ecosystems, and finally the biosphere.
Grade 9 Biology
71
Unit 3: Cells
Review Questions
i. Match the following organelles under column 'B' with their functions under column 'A'
A
B
1. Protein export
a. Mitochondria
2. Control cellular activity
b. Golgi apparatus
3. Digestion
c. Nucleus
4. Powerhouse of the cell
d. Lysosome
5. Photosynthesis
e. Chloroplast
ii. Choose the best answer for the following questions
1. Which one of the following structures is found in animal cells, but not in plant cells?
A. cell surface membrane B. centriole
C. chloroplast
D. Golgi body
2. When the cell or the surrounding environment contains a relatively high concentration of water,
we call it:
A. isotonic
B. hypertonic
C. hypotonic
D. Osmotic
3. Which structure is found in plant cells but not in animal cells?
A. Cell membrane
B. Mitochondrion
C. Cell wall
D. Nucleus
4. In which direction does the transport of water occur when a cell containing 1% sodium chlo-
ride is placed in seawater that contains 10 % sodium chloride?
A. From the cell to seawater
B. From seawater to cell
5. If you look into a microscope and view an unknown cell. What structure might you see that
would tell you that the cell is eukaryotic?
A. DNA B. nucleoid region C. a plasma membrane D. membrane-enclosed structures
called organelles.
iii. Fill in the blank space with appropriate words
1. A structure that supports and strengthen plant cell is
2. A structure that breaks down a captured bacterium and damaged organelle in the cell is
3. The sac-like structure used to transport protein is
.
4. A structure made up of a group of tissues, working together to perform a specific Function is
5. When the osmotic pressure is the same on both sides of a semipermeable membrane, each solu-
tion is said to be
.
iv. Answer the following questions.
1. What would happen to a person's red blood cells if the person is given an injection of pure water
(0% saline)?
2. Name three structures in plant cells that animal cells lack.
72
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
3. Name two structures that may be found in animal cells but not in plant cells.
4. List the structural features that prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells have in common. Briefly explain
why each of the structures you have listed is essential.
5. Assume that you are observing animal cell under the microscope and the animal cell looks
shrives, what type of environment or solution is found around this animal cell.
1. Fill the following table space by saying YES or No
Cell structure S
cheek cell (animal)
Onion cell (plant)
Nucleus
cell wall
chloroplasts
large vacuole
Cytoplasm
2. Fill the blank spaces of the table with appropriate level organization of some organ system
Cell
Tissue
organ
system
Red blood cell
cardiac muscle
Heart
Egg, sperm
Epithelial tissue of male and
Reproductive system
female reproductive organ
Mucous cell
Epithelial digestive tissue
Digestive system
Xylem or phloem
Xylem /phloem
root /stem
cells
Nerve cell
Nerve tissue
Nervous system
3. Fill in Fill the blank spaces of the table by saying YES or NO
Diffusion
Osmosis
Active transport
It is the movement of substances like O₂
It is movement of water
Movement of ions like K+
Energy is required
Grade 9 Biology
73
Unit 4: Reproduction
Contents
Learning competencies
4.1 Introduction to reproduction
Appreciate that life perpetuates from genera-
4.2 Asexual reproduction
tion to generation through reproduction.
4.3 Types of asexual reproduction
Define asexual and sexual reproductions
4.3.1 Fission
Describe asexual reproductions in bacteria,
4.3.2 Fragmentation
fungi, animals, and plants
4.3.3 Budding
Compare and contrast the advantages and dis-
advantages of asexual and sexual reproduction
4.3.4 Vegetative reproduction
Describe the biological, psychological, and
4.3.5 Parthenogenesis
social changes during the puberty stage
4.4 Sexual reproduction in human
Differentiate between the primary and sec-
4.5 Primary and secondary sexual characteristics
ondary sexual characteristics of males and fe-
4.6 Male reproductive structures
males in humans
4.7 Female reproductive structures
Identify the structure and functions of the
4.8 The Menstrual cycle
male reproductive organs.
4.9 Fertilization and pregnancy
Identify female reproductive structures and
their functions.
4.10 Methods of birth control
4.11 Sexually transmitted infection: transmission
Outline the phases of the menstrual cycle
and prevention
Define fertilization and pregnancy
Discuss the methods of prevention of preg-
nancy
Describe the types, modes of transmission
and preventive mechanisms of sexually trans-
mitted diseases
4.1 Introduction to reproduction
Activity 4.1. Reflective
Objectives
discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
As you know, there were
people living in Ethiopia or
appreciate that life perpetuates from generation to
elsewhere thousand years
generation through reproduction
ago and all were passed away
but still there are people
living there. Why? Though
What is reproduction?
individuals of a species are
Reproduction is one of the unique characteristics of life. The ability of
mortal, life continues from
generation to generation.
organisms to reproduce to form their own kind is the one characteristic
What biological processes
that best distinguishes living things from non living matter. Two
are responsible for this?
modes of reproduction are recognized: asexual and sexual. In asexual
reproduction, there is only one parent and with no special reproductive
organs or cells. Each organism is capable of producing identical copies
74
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
of itself as soon as it becomes an adult. Sexual reproduction as a rule
involves two parents, each of which contributes special germ cells (egg
or sperm) that in union (fertilization) develop into a new individual.
4.2 Asexual reproduction
Objectives
Activity 4.2: Concept
mapping
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define asexual reproduction
No organism can live
differentiate the process of asexual reproduction
forever, but part of it lives in
tell the advantages and disadvantages of asexual
its offspring. Offspring are
produced by the process of
reproduction
reproduction. This process
may be sexual or asexual, but
What is common to all types of asexual reproduction?
in either case, it results in the
continuation of the species.
Asexual reproduction is the production of individuals without gametes
Discuss the differences and
(eggs or sperm). It includes a number of distinct processes, all without
similarities you observe
involving sex or a second parent. Asexual reproduction appears in
among the different types of
bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes and in many invertebrates,
asexual reproduction.
fungi and plants. However, asexual reproduction is absent among
vertebrates. The basic forms of asexual reproduction are fission
(binary and multiple), budding, and fragmentation. For example, a
small piece of stem planted in the soil may form roots and grow into a
complete plant (Fig.4.1).
Asexual reproduction has couple of advantages - no mate is needed;
no gametes are needed; all the good characteristics of the parent
are passed on to the offspring; and offspring will grow in the same
favourable environment as the parent. Plants that reproduce
asexually usually store large amounts of food that allow survival.
The disadvantages are there is little variation created, so adaptation
to a changing environment (evolution) is unlikely. If the parent has
no resistance to a particular disease, none of the offspring will have
resistance. Lack of dispersal can lead to competition for nutrients,
water and light.
cut
Figure 4.1. Vegetative
propagation in plants
Grade 9 Biology
75
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.3 Types of asexual reproduction
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
describe the process of asexual reproduction in bacteria,
protists, fungi, animals and plants
explain the mechanism of fission
discuss the mechanism of fragmentation
describe the mechanism of budding
investigate the mechanism of vegetative propagation
describe the mechanism of parthenogenesis
Attention
4.3.1 Fission
The cells of some species,
What are the steps of fission?
such as bacteria, can divide
In fission, the organism divides into two (binary fission) or more
every 20-30 minutes.
(multiple fission) equal parts. Binary fission is common among
When placed on a solid
bacteria, algae and protozoa. In binary fission, the body of the
growth medium in a petri
dish, a bacterial cell and
unicellular parent divides by mitosis into two approximately equal
its daughter cells undergo
parts, each of which grows into an individual similar to the parent. In
repeated cellular divisions
bacteria, the cell simply divides into two and each new cell becomes
and form a group of
an independent organism (Fig.4.2). However, before a bacterium
genetically identical cells
divides, the bacterial nucleus is replicated (copied) to produce two
called a bacterial colony.
identical copies so that the daughter cells receive one copy each.
Such rapid rate of bacterial
Alternatively, the nucleus of the orgasms divide repeatedly and each
cell reproduction is one
reason why a small number
daughter nucleus breaks away together with a small portion of the
of bacteria can seriously
cytoplasm, resulting in the production of many daughter cells. This
contaminate our food
is common among some parasitic protozoa, for example, malarial
products.
parasites. Also, some invertebrates reproduce through fission.
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 4.2. Binary fission in bacteria
4.3.2 Fragmentation
What is fragmentation?
Fragmentation is one of the most common modes of asexual
reproduction involving the breakdown of a parent organism into
parts that develop into whole organism. Fragmentation is observed
in fungi, plants, animals and algae. For Example, Spirogyra, the
filamentous green-algae undergoes fragmentation which results in
many filaments. Each filament grows into matured filament (Fig.4.3).
76
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Also a multicellular animal (e.g., worms) breaks into two or more
parts, with each fragment capable of becoming a complete individual.
Many invertebrates can reproduce asexually by simply breaking into
two parts and then regenerating the missing parts of the fragments.
Grows
Fragment 1
Fragment 2
Fragment 3
Figure4.3. Fragmentation in filamentous green-algae
4.3.3 Budding
Activity 4.3: Experiment
In budding, the two daughter cells are unequal. Why?
on budding and
fragmentation
Another common type of asexual reproduction is budding. In this
Make a field visit in
mode of reproduction, the organism divides into two unequal parts. It
your village and collect
is common in fungal species and invertebrates. During the process, a
specimens of organisms that
bulge forms on the side of the cell, the nucleus divides mitotically, and
reproduce with budding.
the bud ultimately detaches itself from the mother cell. For example,
Do experimentation on
in some fungi such as yeasts, a bud develops on the surface of either
budding and fragmentation.
the yeast cell or the hypha, with the cytoplasm of the bud being
Material required 10%
continuous with that of the parent cell. The nucleus of the parent cell
glucose solution , yeast,
then divides; one of the daughter nuclei migrates into the bud, and
microscope, slide, cover
the other remains in the parent cell (Fig.4.4.). Budding also occurs
slip, dropper and test tube.
commonly in some invertebrate animals such as hydra.
5 µm
Figure 4.4. Budding in yeast
Grade 9 Biology
77
Unit 4: Reproduction
Sporulation
Key Terms
Why sporulation is an ideal means of asexual reproduction in coloniz-
Chromosome: the
ing different habitats?
hereditary material that
The majority of fungi, however, reproduce asexually by the formation
carry the biological
information
of spores (i.e., sporulation). Spores are dispersed often by air currents
and if they reach a suitable situation, they grow new hyphae. The
Hypha (pl. hyphae): the
hyphae develop into a mycelium (Fig. 4.5; left). At the tip of the
long filamentous branches
found in fungi
hyphae, a swelling or sporangium - spore sac forms. Penicillium and
Mucor are examples of mould fungi that grow on decaying food or
Mitosis: type of cell division
that produce two identical
vegetable matter (Fig. 4.5; right).
daughter cells
Mycelium: the vegetative
part of a fungus, consisting
Spores
of a network of fine white
filaments (hyphae)
Spore: reproductive cell
Germination
Conidiophore
Vertical
hyphae
Subsurface
hyphae
Mycelium
Figure 4.5. Asexual reproductions in fungi
4.3.4 Vegetative propagation
Vegetative propagation is a method of asexual reproduction in plants
where structures with lateral meristems such as roots, stems, buds,
and leaves give rise to new self-supporting individual. The following
are types of vegetative reproduction.
Natural Vegetative propagation
Stolons(runners)
What is a stolon?
Runners originate from auxiliary bud in a lower portion of plant
and grow along the surface of the soil. In the cultivated strawberry,
for example, leaves, flowers, and roots are produced at every other
node on the runner. Just beyond each second node, the tip of the
runner turns up and becomes thickened. This thickened portion
produces first adventitious roots and then a new shoot that continues
the runner. Thus a complete plant may develop and take root at the
node, nourished for a time by food sent from the parent plant through
the stolon. Eventually, the stolon dries up and withers, leaving an
independent daughter plant growing a short distance away from the
parent.
78
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Rhizome
What is a rhizome?
In many plants, horizontal shoots arise from lateral buds near the
stem base and grow under the ground. Such underground horizontal
stems are called rhizomes. At the nodes of the rhizome are buds, which
may develop to produce shoots above the ground. The shoots become
independent plants when the connecting rhizome dies. Many grasses
propagate by rhizomes; the couch grass (Fig. 4.6) is a good example.
Blade
Tiller
Stolon
Crown
Rhizome
Root system
Figure 4.6. Reproduction using stolon and rhizomes
Corms
What is a corm?
Corms are similar to rhizomes, except they are more rounded and
fleshy (such as in gladiolus). Corms contain stored food that enables
some plants to survive the winter.
Tubers
What is a tuber?
Tubers are modified stems that may store starch, as seen in the potato
Activity 4.4:
(Solanum sp.). Tubers arise as swollen ends of stolons, and contain
Experimentation on
growing potato plants
many adventitious or unusual buds. If the tubers are left in the ground
from tuber.
or transplanted, the buds will produce shoots, using food stored in the
Make a field visit to your
tuber (Fig. 4.7.).
village and collect specimens
of potato plants. Materials
Bulb
required include potato
What is a bulb?
tubers, razor blade, iodine
solution, microscope,
A bulb, which functions as an underground storage unit, is a mod-
slide, cover slip, and large
ification of a stem that has the appearance of enlarged fleshy leaves
pot. Take a note on the
emerging from the stem or surrounding the base of the stem.
morphological features and
grow potato plants from
tubers.
Grade 9 Biology
79
Unit 4: Reproduction
Lateral bud
Leaf
Stem
Fleshy Leaves
Side bud
Main Bud
Reduced Stem
Root
Tuber
Rhizome
Forming
New tuber
Root
Lateral bud
Old tuber
shrivelling
Activity 4.5:
Figure 4.7. Asexual reproduction with tuber and bulb
Experimentation on
growing onion plants from
Artificial Vegetative propagation
bulbs.
Artificial methods of asexual reproduction are frequently used to
Make a field visit in your
give rise to new and sometimes novel, plants. They include grafting,
village and collect specimens
cutting, layering, marcotting and micro propagation.
of onion plants. Material
required bulb and pot
Grafting
containing soil mixed with
Grafting is an artificial method of asexual reproduction used to
compost. Take a note on
produce plants combining favourable stem and root characteristics.
the morphological features
The stem of the plant to be grafted is known as the scion. The root is
and grow onion plants from
called the stock.
bulbs.
Cutting
Plants such as hibiscus and Aibika are propagated through stem
cuttings where a portion of the stem containing nodes and internodes
is placed in moist soil and allowed to root. In some species, stems can
start producing a root even when placed only in water. For example,
leaves of crotons or tanget will root if kept undisturbed in water for
several weeks.
Layering or runner
A method in which a stem attached to the plant is bent and covered
with soil. Young stems that can be bent easily without any injury are
the preferred plant for this method.
Self Assessment 4.1
1. Discuss the mechanisms of multiple fission.
2. When a food is left open for two or three days, one observes a
fruiting body on the food. The taste of food changes? Why?
3. What makes parthenogenesis unique as compared to other mode
of asexual reproduction?
80
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.3.5 Parthenogenesis
Attention
Why offspring produced by parthenogenesis is commonly called "virgin
birth"?
Whip tail lizard
(Aspidoscelis uniparens)
Some species of animals (e.g., bees) are able to reproduce asexually.
produces females by
Among common honeybees (Apis mellifera), a queen bee might lay
employing parthenogenesis.
2,000 eggs per day. Nearly all of these eggs are fertilized by sperm the
All the members of this
queen has received during one of her nuptial fights, and each one
species are female, and
of these eggs will develop into one of the worker bees of the colony
all reproduction in the
every one of them a female. A queen can, however, choose to let
species comes through
parthenogenesis. Thus, each
some of her eggs go unfertilized; no sperm from a male ever fuses
new lizard develops solely
with these eggs, yet bees develop within them and hatch from them.
from one of her mother's
Since egg and sperm do not come together in this process, this is not
eggs, meaning that each is a
sexual reproduction. Instead, each of these bees has been derived
clone of her mother.
through parthenogenesis: a form of asexual reproduction in which
an unfertilized egg develops into an adult organism. Among the
honeybees, all the bees derived through parthenogenesis are males
these are the few drones of a bee colony.
4.4 Sexual reproduction in Humans
Objectives
Activity 4.6. cooperative
learning
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Read books and
describe the mechanism of sexual reproduction
write advantages and
compare and contrast asexual and sexual reproduction
disadvantages of sexual
reproduction.
What is sexual reproduction?
Sexual reproduction involves the production of sex cells. It almost
always involves two parent organisms. These sex cells are called
gametes and they are made in reproductive organs. The gametes are
Key Terms
produced through meiosis. Sexual reproduction starts with the union
Egg: female gamete
of sperm and an egg in a process called fertilization. This can occur
Fuse: union(fertilization) of
either inside (internal fertilization) or outside (external fertilization)
egg and sperm
the body of the female. Fertilization results in the formation of a single
Gametes: reproductive cell
cell called a zygote. The zygote then grows into a new individual. The
(sex cells - egg or sperm)
female gametes are always larger than the male gametes and are not
Meiosis: type of cell
mobile.
division whereby
gametes are produced
Sperm: male gamete
Zygote: fertilized egg
Self Assessment 4.2
1. What are the advantages of asexual reproduction as compared to
sexual reproduction?
Grade 9 Biology
81
Unit 4: Reproduction
Activity 4.7. Inquiring and
4.5 Primary and secondary sexual characteristics
researching
Objectives
During puberty, humans
mature physically and
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
become able to reproduce.
differentiate between the primary and secondary sexual
What are the major
characteristics of males and females in humans
biological, psychological and
describe the biological, psychological, and social changes
sociological changes that
during the stage of puberty
occur during puberty?
At what ages do you think
What are primary sexual characteristics?
males and females go
through puberty?
The human males are born with the penis, scrotum and testicle
whereas females are born with vagina, uterus, and ovaries. These are
the primary sexual characteristics in males and females, respectively.
At puberty or adolescence these characteristics change markedly.
What are secondary sexual characteristics?
Key Terms
Puberty begins in the early teen years. Puberty or adolescence
Hormones: Are chemical
is the time when secondary sex characteristics begin to develop.
messengers secreted by
Secondary sexual characteristics begin to develop so that sexual
endocrine glands.
maturity is reached. Sexual maturity means that the potential for
Puberty: the time
sexual reproduction exists. Secondary sexual characteristics in males
when secondary sex
include:
characteristics begin to
develop; as secondary
growth and maintenance of the male sex organs,
sexual characteristics begin
to develop, so does sexual
an increase in body hair, an increase in muscle mass,
maturity, the potential for
increased growth of the long bones of the arms and legs, and
sexual reproduction.
deepening of the voice.
Secondary sex characters:
characteristics that are
What role do hormones play in puberty?
not primarily involved in
formation and delivery of
The glands of the endocrine system release hormones (chemical
egg/sperm, but that are
substances) which control the development and activity of the
essential for behavioral
male reproductive system. The changes that occur during puberty
and functional success of
are controlled by sex hormones. These hormones are secreted by
reproduction.
the endocrine system. The onset of puberty in males causes the
hypothalamus to produce several kinds of hormones. These hormones
interact with the pituitary gland.
Puberty in females begins in the early teen years. In females, LH
causes eggs to be released into the oviduct whereas FSH stimulates the
development of follicles in the ovary. A follicle is a group of epithelial
cells. These epithelial cells surround a developing egg cell. FSH also
causes a hormone called estrogen to be released from the ovary. It is
responsible for the secondary sex characteristics of females. Secondary
sexual characteristics in females include:
Increase in growth rates of the long bones of the arms and legs.
82
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Develop more hair, especially under the arms and in the pubic
Attention
area.
The hypothalamus secretes
The hips broaden, and more fat is deposited in the breasts,
a hormone that causes the
buttocks, and thighs.
pituitary gland to release
two other hormones. The
The menstrual cycle begins.
hormones are follicle-
What are the psychological and social changes during puberty? How do
stimulating hormone (FSH)
they affect life of the youth?
and luteinizing hormone
(LH). When FSH and
Young people must adjust to remarkable physiological, anatomical,
LH are released into the
and psychological transformations during the process of puberty.
bloodstream, are carried
to the testes. In the testes,
Their bodies change rapidly, and thus their body image also changes.
FSH causes the production
Any deviations of their bodies from what they or their peers consider
of sperm cells. LH causes
"normal" can lead to low self-esteem. For example, females will worry
the endocrine cells that are
about the size of their breasts and other aspects of their figures and
in the testes to produce the
will not feel feminine if these are not in line with the norm of their
male hormone testosterone.
peers. Similarly, a male may worry about the size of his penis or
Testosterone influences the
his physique; and if these are not within the norm, he will feel that
production of sperm cells.
something is wrong with him. Young people should realize that there
Testosterone is responsible
for the growth and
is considerable variation in the timing of the stages of puberty among
development of secondary
different individuals, and that most people develop into "normal"
sex characteristics in
adults in the course of their sexual and physical maturation.
the male. The FSH and
LH are also secreted in
An individual who reaches puberty later or earlier than his or her peers
females and influence the
can suffer psychological pain. If not handled in a constructive fashion,
development of secondary
early or late puberty can lead to poor self-esteem and problems in
sex characteristics.
sexual and other areas of life. For example, late-developing males may
suffer from a poor self-image, and this can influence them in later
life. They tend to have a lower occupational attainment, get paid less,
marry later, and have fewer children than other men of the same adult
height. Early maturing males, on the other hand, can have an easier
time of it. They tend to be held in higher esteem by their peers because
of their broad shoulders and masculine physiques. Early-maturing
females suffer more than early-maturing males. Because of their
mature bodies (large breasts), their peers make the assumption that
they are sexually experienced and sexually "easy," whereas in actuality,
early maturing females tend to be submissive, socially indifferent, and
low in popularity. Therefore, such individual should get medical or
psychological advice to cope up with problems related early or late
puberty.
Adolescence is the period between puberty and adulthood, when a
good deal of social learning takes place. The length of this period of
youth is socially determined. Its length could be influenced by nature,
culture, and civilization. Biologically, teenagers are adult after they
have reached puberty, when they are capable of having children.
Grade 9 Biology
83
Unit 4: Reproduction
Self Assessment 4.3
Economically, they are adult when they can support themselves and
possibly a family. Morally, they are adult when they are responsible
1. What are the two hor-
for their actions, can express love in a mature manner, and can
mones involved in male
have productive and meaningful relationships. During adolescence,
puberty released by the
teenagers must achieve economic and moral adulthood; deal with
pituitary gland?
separation from family.
2. What are the secondary
sex characteristics in
females?
4. 6 Male reproductive structures
Activity 4.8. Reflective
Objectives
discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
The main function of
Identify the structure and functions of the male reproductive
the organs, glands and
hormones of the male
organs.
reproductive system is to
produce sperm and deliver
What are the functions of the male reproductive organs?
them to the female. Discuss
the roles of the various parts
The male reproductive system of vertebrates, such as human males
of the male reproductive
,
includes testes, epididymis, vas deferens, accessory glands, and a
system. Draw and label parts
penis. Paired testes are the sites of sperm production. Each testis is
of the male reproductive
composed of numerous seminiferous tubules, in which the sperm
organ along with their
develop. The sperm are surrounded by cells, which nourish the
function.
developing sperm. Between the tubules are cells which produce the
male sex hormone (testosterone). In most mammals, the two testes
are housed permanently in a sac-like scrotum suspended outside the
abdominal cavity. This odd arrangement provides an environment
of slightly lower temperature, since in most mammals (including
humans) viable sperm do not form at temperatures maintained within
the body.
The sperm travels from the seminiferous tubules to epididymis, where
sperm maturation occurs and then to a vas deferens, the ejaculatory
duct. The vas deferens joins the urethra, a duct that carries both sperm
and urinary products through the penis. Three sets of accessory glands
open in to the reproductive channels: a pair of seminal vesicles, a
single prostate gland, and the pair of bulbourethral glands (Fig.4.8).
Fluid secreted by these glands furnishes food to the sperm, lubricates
the female reproductive tract for sperm, and counteracts the acidity
of the vagina so that the sperm retain their viability longer after being
deposited in the female. Semen is a mix of sperm, proteins, nutrients,
ions, and signalling molecules. Sperm constitute less than 5 percent of
semen volume.
84
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Bladder
Seminal
Vesicles
Pubic Bone
Vas deferens
Rectum
Urethra
Anus
Prostate
Epididymis
Figure 4.8 Parts of male
Testicle
Scrotum
reproductive systems
How does the structure of a sperm relate to its function?
The sperm has a "head" that is packed full of genetic material and
covered by an enzyme. The enzymes help the sperm penetrate an egg.
At its other end, the sperm has a flagellum that it uses to swim toward
an egg. In the midsection contains many mitochondria that supply
the energy required for flagellar movement (Fig.4.9).
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Flagellum
cap
Figure 4.9 Parts of a sperm cell
Head(5pm) Midpiece(6pm)
Tail(55pm)
Key Terms
Self Assessment 4.4
Bulbourethral glands: secrete a lubricating mucus into the urethra
which helps clear the urethra of residual urine.
1. What is the advantage
of testes located in the
Epididymides: a pair of ducts in which sperm formed in testes
scrotum?
mature; each empties into a vas deferens.
2. What does the mid piece
Penis: male organ of intercourse.
of the sperm contain?
Prostate gland: produces alkaline secretions that help raise the
3. What are the function
pH of the female reproductive tract, making this passage more
of seminal vesicle and
hospitable to sperm.
protest gland?
Scrotum: pouch of skin that encloses a human male's testes.
4. What is the purpose of
Semen: sperm mixed with secretions from seminal vesicles and the
the vas deferens?
prostate gland.
5. Which glands secrete
Seminal vesicles: are exocrine glands which secrete fructose-rich
alkaline fluids?
fluid into the vasa deferentia.
Seminiferous tubules: inside a testis, coiled tubules that contain
male germ cells and produce sperm.
Testosterone: main hormone produced by testes; required for sperm
production and development of male secondary sexual traits.
Vas deferens: one of a pair of long ducts that convey mature sperm
toward the body surface.
Grade 9 Biology
85
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.7. Female reproductive structures
Objectives
Activity 4.9. Investigating
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discuss the roles of the
Identify female reproductive structures and their functions.
different parts of the female
reproductive systems. Draw
What are the functions of female reproductive organs?
and label the various parts
along with their function.
A human female's gonads-her ovaries-lie deep inside her pelvic
cavity. They produce and release egg. They also secrete estrogens and
progesterone, the main sex hormones in females. Estrogens trigger
development of female secondary sexual characteristics and maintain
the lining of there productive tract. Progesterone thickens the lining
of the reproductive tract in preparation for pregnancy.
Adjacent to each ovary is an oviduct, a hollow tube that connects the
ovary to the uterus. Both oviducts open onto the uterus, a hollow, pear
shaped organ. The uterine lining consists of glandular epithelium,
connective tissues, and blood vessels. The bottom of the uterus, a
narrowed region called the cervix, opens into the vagina. The vagina,
which extends from the cervix to the body's surface, is the organ of
intercourse and the birth canal.
Externally visible organs of the reproductive tract are called genitals.
Female genitals include two pairs of liplike skin folds that enclose the
openings of the vagina and urethra. Adipose tissue fills the thick outer
folds, the labia majora. Thin inner folds are the labia minora. The
clitoris lies near the anterior junction of the labia minora. It contains
erectile tissue and is highly sensitive to tactile stimulation. The
opening into the vagina is often reduced in size in the virgin state by
a membrane, the hymen, although in today's more physically active
females, this membrane may be much reduced in extent (Fig.4.10).
The paired ovaries of the human female, contain many thousands of
eggs. During a woman's fertile years, except following fertilization,
approximately 13 eggs mature each year, and usually the ovaries
alternate in releasing eggs. Because a woman is fertile for only about
30 to 35 years, of the approximately 400,000 eggs in her ovaries at
birth, only 300 to 400 have a chance to reach maturity; the others
degenerate.
The uterine tubes or oviducts are lined with cilia for propelling the egg
away from the ovary from which it was released. The two ducts open
into the upper corners of the uterus, or womb, which is specialized
for housing the embryo during its intrauterine existence. It consists
of thick muscular walls, many blood vessels, and a specialized lining:
the endometrium. The uterus is designed to hold more than one
developing embryo.
86
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Fimbriae
Uterine fallopian tube
Ovary
Urinary bladder
Cervix
Clitoris
Anterior fornix
Urethra
Rectum
Urethral opening
Vagina
Labia majora
Anus
Labia minora
Vaginal opening
Figure 4.10 Female reproductive systems
Ovulation
What is ovulation?
In humans, egg production occurs before birth. A girl is born with
Self Assessment 4.5
about 2 million eggs. At puberty hormonal changes prompt eggs to
mature, one at a time, in an approximately twenty eight- day ovarian
1. How are eggs produced?
cycle. As the cycle begins, the follicle enlarges and a fluid filled cavity
2. How are eggs released?
forms around it. About two weeks after the follicle began to mature, its
wall ruptures and ovulation occurs. The egg and surrounding follicle
cells are ejected into the adjacent oviduct. After ovulation, cells of the
ruptured follicle develop into a hormone-secreting corpus luteum. If
pregnancy does not occur, the corpus luteum breaks down, and a new
follicle will begin to mature (Fig.4.11).
4
Day 4-5:
3
Day 2-4:
2
Day 1:
Blastocyst reaches uterus
Cell division
Fertilization
Inner cell
Zygote
Blastocyst
Fallopian
Ovary
Egg
tube
5
Day 5-9:
1
Ovulation
Blastocyst implants
Uterus
Figure 4.11 Ovulation
Grade 9 Biology
87
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.8 The Menstrual cycle
Objectives
Activity 4.10: Concept
mapping
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Outline the phases of the menstrual cycle
Discuss the major changes
during the menstrual cycle.
Also discuss the about
What cyclic changes occur in the ovary and uterus?
importance menstrual
hygiene and its health
The ovarian cycle described in the previous section is coordinated
benefits. Preparations of
with cyclic changes in the uterus. We refer to the approximately
menstrual hygiene materials
monthly changes in the uterus as the menstrual cycle. The first day
from locally available
of the menstrual cycle is marked by onset of menstruation (flow
resources.
Phase), which is the flow of bits of uterine lining and some blood
from the uterus, through the cervix, and out of the vagina.
FSH stimulates maturation of an ovarian follicle. The interval of
follicle maturation before ovulation is the follicular phase of the cycle.
During this time, cells around the egg secrete estrogens that stimulate
the endometrium to thicken. The rise in estrogens encourages the
pituitary to release more LH. The flow of LH causes the follicle to
swell and burst. LH trigger for ovulation. The luteal phase of the cycle
begins after ovulation. LH stimulates formation of the corpus luteum,
which secretes some estrogens and a lot of progesterone. These
hormones cause the uterine lining to thicken and encourage blood
vessels to grow through it. The uterus is now ready for pregnancy
(Fig.4.12).
A woman enters menopause when all the follicles in her ovaries have
either been released during menstrual cycles or have disintegrated
as a result of aging. With no follicles left to mature, production of
estrogen and progesterone is diminished and menstrual cycles cease.
Menopause is known only in humans and two species of whales.
Activity 4.11: Home work
Key Terms
Make internet search
Corpus luteum: a structure that secretes the hormones estrogen and
or ask a midwife nurse
progesterone; progesterone causes changes to occur in the lining of
(Gynecologist) in your
the uterus that prepare it to receive a fertilized egg
village (clinic) about
Flow phase: The first phase of the menstrual cycle.
menstrual cycle and the
Follicular phase: The second phase of the menstrual cycle
three phases of the cycle
and, menstrual hygiene
Luteal phase: The third phase of the menstrual cycle
present your results your to
Menstrual cycle: the series of changes in the female reproductive
classmates.
cycle that occur each month, which include producing an egg and
preparing the uterus for receiving the egg
88
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Ripening of follicles
Ovulation
Ripening of the corpus luteum
Ovulation
Menstruation
Progesterone
Estrogen
LH (luteinizing hormone)
FSH(follicle-stimulating hormone)
Start of the cycle
Day 7
Day 14
Day 21
Day 28
Figure4.12 Menstrual cycle
Menstrual hygiene and health benefits
Self Assessment 4.6
These hygiene practices can help females stay healthy and comfortable
1. What are the three
during period:
phases of the menstrual
Wear lightweight, breathable clothing (such as cotton underwear).
cycle?
Tight fabrics can trap moisture and heat, allowing germs to thrive.
2. What is shed during
menstrual flow?
Change menstrual products regularly. Trapped moisture provides
3. What two female
a breeding ground for bacteria and fungi. Wearing a pad or period
hormones are secreted
underwear for too long can lead to a rash or an infection.
by the corpus luteum?
Keep genital area clean. Wash the outside of vagina day. In the
4. Adolescent girls are
more exposed for iron
bathroom, good to wipe from the front toward the back, not the
deficiency anemia.
other way. Use only water to rinse vulva. The vagina is a self-
cleaning organ.
Use unscented toilet paper, tampons, or pads. Scented hygiene
products can irritate the skin and impact your natural pH balance.
Drink enough liquids. This can help wash out your urinary tract
and help prevent infections, like vaginal candidiasis.
Track and monitor your period. Your menstrual cycle is a valuable
marker for your overall health. Irregular periods can be a sign of
conditions like diabetes, thyroid dysfunction, and celiac disease.
Visit a healthcare provider for annual check-up. An annual full
check-up includes a pap smear, a pelvic exam, and a breast exam.
These exams are essential for good reproductive health as they can
catch early signs of cancer or other health issues.
Grade 9 Biology
89
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.9 Fertilization and pregnancy
Activity 4.12 Jigsaw
Objectives
groups
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
The union of an egg and a
define mating, fertilization and pregnancy
sperm results in a fertilized
describe process of twin formation and types
egg. This single cell must
undergo many changes
Mating and fertilization
before it develops into a
fetus. List the changes that
What is mating?
you know occur in the
Sexual arousal in the male results in an erection. That is, the penis
developing embryo and
becomes firm and erects as a result of blood flowing into the erectile
fetus.
tissue. Arousal in the female stimulates the lining of the vagina to
produce mucus. This lubricates the vagina and makes it easy for the
erect penis to enter. In the act of copulation, the male inserts the penis
into the female's vagina. The sensory stimulus in the male, which
results in the ejaculation of semen into the top of the vagina.
What is fertilization?
The sperm swims through the cervix and into the uterus by wriggling
movements of their tails. They pass through the uterus and enter the
oviduct. If there is an ovum in the oviduct, one of the sperm may bump
into it and stick to its surface. The sperm then enters the cytoplasm
of the egg and the male nucleus of the sperm fuses with the female
Figure 4.13. Fertilization
nucleus. This is the moment of fertilization (Fig.4.13). The released
egg is thought to survive for about 24 hours; the sperm might be able
to fertilize an ovum for about 2 or 3 days. So there is only a short
period of about 4 days each month when fertilization might occur. If
this fertile period can be estimated accurately, it can be used either to
Attention
achieve or to avoid fertilization (conception).
Neural tube defects (NTDs)
are birth defects of the
Twins (Multiple births)
brain, spine, or spinal cord.
How are twins formed?
It occurs when the neural
Many mammals give birth to more than one offspring at a time, each
tube does not close properly
in very early within the
member of which has come from a separate egg. There are some
first month of pregnancy.
mammals, however, that have only one offspring at a time, although
Women should take folic
occasionally they may have more than one.
acid rich foods before and
during pregnancy. Folic
Human twins may come from one zygote (identical, or monozygotic
acid supplementation is
twins) or two zygotes (non-identical, dizygotic, or fraternal twins).
recommended at least
Fraternal twins do not resemble each other any more than other
three months before
children born separately in the same family, but identical twins
pregnancy to prevent NTDs.
are, of course, strikingly alike and always of the same sex. Triplets,
Recommended to take folic
quadruplets, and quintuplets may include a pair of identical twins.
acid rich foods, including
folate supplement prior to
The other babies in such multiple births usually come from separate
zygotes. About 33% of identical twins have separate placentas, but the
pregnancy.
other identical twins share a common placenta.
90
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Pregnancy and development
What is implantation?
The fertilized egg (zygote) first divides into two cells. Each of these
divides again, so producing four cells. The cells continue to divide
in this way to produce a solid ball of cells (Fig. 4.14), an early stage
in the development of the embryo. This early embryo travels down
the oviduct to the uterus. Here it sinks into the lining of the uterus,
a process called implantation. The embryo continues to grow and
produces new cells that form tissues and organs. After 8 weeks, when
all the organs are formed, the embryo is called a fetus. One of the
first organs to form is the heart, which pumps blood around the body
oviduct Placenta
of the embryo. Inside the uterus the embryo becomes enclosed in a
fluid-filled sac called the amnion or water sac, which protects it from
Implanted
embryo
damage and prevents unequal pressures from acting on it. The fluid is
(12mm)
called amniotic fluid.
Uterus
cervix
Developing
Developing
Vagina
ear
eye
(a) 5 week
Placenta
Umblical
cord
Umblical
cord
Embryo
3 weeks
4 weeks
6 weeks
8 weeks
(60mm)
Amnion
Figure 4.14 Human embryo developmental stages until week eight
(water sac)
The oxygen and food needed to keep the embryo alive and growing
are obtained from the mother's blood by means of a structure called
(b) 10 weeks
Placenta
the placenta. The placenta becomes closely attached to the lining of
the uterus and is attached to the embryo by a tube called the umbilical
Umblical
cord. Oxygen and nutrients such as glucose and amino acids pass
cord
across the placenta to the embryo's bloodstream. Carbon dioxide
Amnion
passes from the embryo's blood to that of the mother. Blood entering
Embryo
(250mm)
the placenta from the mother does not mix with the embryo's blood.
amniotic
Figure 4.15 shows the human embryo from 5 to 35 weeks surrounded
cavity
Uterus
by the amnion and placenta.
(c) 5 months
Placenta
Embryo
(470mm)
Uterus
Amnion
cervix
Figure 4.15 Growth and development in the uterus (5 to 35 weeks)
(d) 35 weeks(a few
weeks before birth)
Grade 9 Biology
91
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.10 Methods of birth control
Activity 4.13: Collaborative
Objectives
learning groups
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Contraception, the
discuss the methods of prevention of unwanted pregnancy
deliberate prevention
explain the advantages and disadvantages of different birth
control methods.
of pregnancy, can be
achieved in a number of
What can prevent unwanted pregnancy?
ways. Some contraceptive
methods prevent gamete
As little as 4 weeks after giving birth, it is possible, though unlikely,
development or release
that a woman may conceive again. Frequent breastfeeding may reduce
from female or male
the chances of conception. Nevertheless, it would be possible to have
gonads; others prevent
children at about 1-year intervals. Most people do not want, or cannot
fertilization by keeping
afford, to have as many children as this. All human communities,
sperm and egg apart;
therefore, practice some form of birth control to space out births and
and still, others prevent
limit the size of the family. Family planning methods could be natural
implantation of an
or artificial.
embryo. Discuss methods
Some family planning methods such as condoms can help prevent the
of use, mechanisms of
transmission of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.
action; advantages and
disadvantages; degree of
Family planning /contraception reduce the need for abortion,
effectiveness of different
especially unsafe abortion.
birth control methods.
Family planning reinforces people's rights to determine the number
and spacing of their children.
By preventing unintended pregnancy, family planning/contraception
prevents deaths of mothers and children.
Benefits of family planning / contraception
Preventing pregnancy-related health risks in women
Reducing infant mortality
Empowering people and enhancing education
Reducing adolescent pregnancies
Slowing population growth
4.10.1. Natural methods of family planning
Abstinence
This is the most obvious way of preventing a pregnancy. This involves
a couple avoiding sexual intercourse. In this way, sperm cannot come
into contact with an egg and fertilization cannot happen. It is the
effective method with added advantage of preventing exposure to
sexually transmissible pathogens.
Fertility Awareness/Natural Family Planning
Fertility awareness methods rely on understanding the most likely
time that ovulation will take place during the monthly cycle, so that
intercourse is avoided, or a barrier method is used.
92
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Fertility awareness methods include:
Standard Days Methods
Calendar Rhythm Method
Symptothermal Method
Ovulation Method
The effectiveness of fertility awareness methods range from 98% with
perfect use to 78% with typical use. Although an important option for
women worldwide, fertility awareness methods overall are less effective
than other methods. Male partners must be continuously cooperative.
Physiologic changes (that is recent childbirth, current breast-feeding,
early menstruation, discontinuation of other hormonal methods,
approaching menopause) can affect reliability.
Withdrawal (Coitus Interruptus)
The withdrawal method for pregnancy prevention refers to the moment
a man pulls his penis out of his partner's vagina before ejaculation to
avoid ejaculating the sperm. Preventing sperm from entering the vagina
(and thus the uterus and fallopian tubes) and fertilising an ovum.
Effectiveness: In terms of pregnancy prevention, withdrawal
effectiveness is similar to that of the male condom. Effectiveness is
ninety six percent (96%) with perfect use and eighty percent (82%)
with typical use. Consider back-up method such as emergency
contraception if ejaculation begins before withdrawal.
Advantages
Withdrawal requires no money, devices, hormones, or medical
provider, making it available to anyone.
Disadvantages
Provides no protection against sexually transmitted infections
and HIV.
Requires a great degree of self-control. For some men, it may
be difficult to ensure that they withdraw before ejaculation has
started.
For some people, pleasure may be diminished by the
interruption of sexual intercourse.
Monitoring body temperature
If it were possible to know exactly when ovulation occurred, intercourse
could be avoided for 3-4 days before and 1 day after ovulation. At
the moment, however, there is no simple, reliable way to recognize
ovulation, though it is usually 12-16 days before the onset of the next
menstrual period. By keeping careful records of the intervals between
menstrual periods, it is possible to calculate a potentially fertile period
of about 10 days in mid-cycle, when sexual intercourse should be
avoided if children are not wanted. On its own, this method is not very
Grade 9 Biology
93
Unit 4: Reproduction
reliable but there are some physiological clues that help to make it
more accurate. During or soon after ovulation, a woman's temperature
rises by about 0.5 °C. It is reasonable to assume that 1 day after the
temperature returns to normal, a woman will be infertile. There is
25% chance of pregnancy per year.
Cervical mucus
Another clue comes from the type of mucus secreted by the cervix
and lining of the vagina. As the time for ovulation approaches, the
mucus becomes more fluid. Women can learn to detect these changes
and so calculate their fertile period. By combining the 'calendar',
'temperature' and 'mucus' methods, it is possible to achieve about
80% 'success', i.e. only 20% unplanned pregnancies.
Natural methods have no side effects and this method is permitted
by most religions. Carried out with care and scientific precision
about recording techniques it can be very effective. Depends on full
co-operation of both partners and it is not always easy to pinpoint
ovulation so pregnancy can result. There is a chance of 10 pregnancies
per 100 women per year.
4.10.2 Artificial methods of family planning (barrier methods)
Female Condom
Activity 4.14: Survey/
Interviewing/ role play
The female condom is a polyurethane sheath - one end is inserted into
Make Internet search
the vagina while the other remains outside of the vagina and provides
or ask a midwife nurse
some protection to the external genitalia. It contains a silicone
(Gynecologist) in your
lubricant. Additional lubricant is provided with each condom.
village (school clinic)
about artificial methods of
Effectiveness: Female condom effectiveness is ninety five percent
family planning methods.
(95%) with perfect use, and eighty percent (80%) with typical use.
Alternatively, you could
assign one of your classmate
Advantages: Dual protection against pregnancy, and STI/HIV,
to act as midwife nurse
accessible without prescription, causes few medical side effects,
(Gynecologist) and ask
some people find female condoms to be more comfortable and less
her/him about methods
constricting than male condoms, as they are wider.
of use; advantages and
disadvantages; degree of
Disadvantages: Coitus dependent, more expensive than male condoms,
effectiveness of different
challenge to use in relationships with weak partner cooperation and/
birth control methods.
or intimate partner violence
Male Condom
Male condoms are available in latex, lambskin, and polyurethane.
All three materials effectively prevent pregnancy. Lambskin contains
small pores that may permit the passage of bacteria and viruses. Thus
they are not recommended for infection prevention.
Effectiveness: Male condom effectiveness is ninety eight percent
(98%) with perfect use, and eighty five (85%) with typical use.
94
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Advantages: Provides protection against both pregnancy and STI/
HIV, widely accessible without a prescription, causes almost no
medical side effects.
Disadvantages: Coitus dependent, reduced sensitivity for men however,
this may be an advantage for preventing premature ejaculation, some
men have difficulty maintaining erections, especially when they are
inexperienced condom users, challenge to use in relationships where
there is weak partner cooperation and/or intimate partner violence or
coercion and latex allergy.
Diaphragm
A thin rubber disc, placed in the vagina before intercourse, covers the
cervix and stops sperm entering the uterus. Condoms and diaphragms,
used in conjunction with chemicals that immobilize sperm, are about
95% effective. However, a diaphragm does not prevent the risk of
transmission of STIs (Fig. 4.16). There are no side effects, offers
some protection against cervical cancer. It must be initially fitted by
a doctor. May be incorrectly positioned or damaged and allow sperm
past. Gives better protection against pregnancy when combined with
spermicide. There is a chance of 2.5 pregnancies per 100 woman years.
Spermicides
Spermicides are chemicals which, though harmless to the tissues, can
kill or immobilize sperm. The spermicide, in the form of a cream, gel
or foam, is placed in the vagina. On their own, spermicides are not
very reliable but, in conjunction with condoms or diaphragms, they
are effective.
Intra-uterine device (IUD)
A small T-shaped plastic and copper device, also known as a coil, can
be inserted by a doctor or nurse into the wall of the uterus, where it
probably prevents implantation of a fertilized ovum. It is about 98%
effective but there is a small risk of developing uterine infections, and
it does not protect against STIs. Once inserted, no further steps need
to be taken. It is relatively effective at preventing implantation and
pregnancy. It can cause pain and heavy periods; can cause uterine
infections which may lead to infertility. If pregnancy does occur, it
has a high chance of being in the Fallopian tubes (ectopic pregnancy).
There is a chance 2.5 pregnancy per 100 woman years
Intra-uterine system (IUS)
This is similar to an IUD; is T-shaped and releases the hormone
progesterone slowly over a long period of time (up to 5 years). The
hormone prevents ovulation. An IUS does not protect against STIs.
Contraceptive pill
The pill contains chemicals, which have the same effect on the body
Grade 9 Biology
95
Unit 4: Reproduction
as the hormones oestrogen and progesterone. When mixed in suitable
proportions these hormones suppress ovulation and so prevent
conception. The pills need to be taken each day for the 21 days
between menstrual periods.
There are many varieties of contraceptive pill in which the relative
proportions of oestrogen- and progesterone-like chemicals vary.
They are 99% effective, but long-term use of some types may increase
the risk of cancer of the breast and cervix. The pill does not protect
against STIs.
Contraceptive implant
This is a small plastic tube of about 4 cm long which is inserted under
the skin of the upper arm of a woman by a doctor or nurse. Once
in place, it slowly releases the hormone progesterone, preventing
pregnancy. It lasts for about 3 years. It does not protect against STIs,
but has more than a 99% success rate in preventing pregnancy.
Contraceptive injection
This injection, given to women, contains progesterone and stays
effective for between 8 and 12 weeks. It works by thickening the mucus
in the cervix, stopping sperm reaching an egg. It also thins the lining
of the uterus, making it unsuitable for implantation of an embryo. It
does not protect against STIs.
Surgical methods
Male sterilization - vasectomy
This is a simple and safe surgical operation in which the man's sperm
ducts are cut and the ends sealed. This means that his semen contains
the secretions of the prostate gland and seminal vesicle but no sperm
so cannot fertilize an ovum. Sexual desire, erection, copulation and
ejaculation are quite unaffected. The testis continues to produce sperm
and testosterone. The sperm are removed by white cells as fast as they
form. The testosterone ensures that there is no loss of masculinity.
The sperm ducts can be rejoined by surgery but this is not always
successful.
Female sterilization- laparotomy
A woman may be sterilized by an operation in which her oviducts are
tied, blocked or cut. The ovaries are unaffected. Sexual desire and
menstruation continue as before, but sperm can no longer reach the
ova. Ova are released, but break down in the upper part of the ovi-
duct. The operation cannot usually be reversed. Both vasectomy and
laparotomy are almost 100% guaranteed to prevent pregnancy and
permanent control of fertility. Remove the problem of human error
in contraception. For women in particular it involves a general an
96
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
aesthetic. Not easily reversible. There a chance of 0.05 pregnancies
per 100 woman years.
condom
contraceptive
Oral
calander rhythm
diaphragm
injection
contraception
method
IUD
spermicide
implant
surgical
coitus interruptus
female condom
sterilization
Figure 4.16 The different Contraceptive methods used by females and
males
Self Assessment 4.7
Sterilization is the permanent prevention of gamete production or
1. What are the
release. For women, the most common method is tubal ligation, the
disadvantages of
sealing shut or tying off (ligating) of a section of each oviduct to
diaphragm?
prevent eggs from traveling into the uterus. Similarly, vasectomy in
2. What are the
men is the cutting and tying off of each vas deferens to prevent sperm
disadvantages of
from entering the urethra. Sex hormone secretion and sexual function
vasectomy and
are unaffected by both procedures, with no change in menstrual cycles
laparotomy?
in females or ejaculate volume in males. Although tubal ligation and
3. Why is abstinence
vasectomy are considered permanent, both procedures can in many
important for the youth
cases be reversed by microsurgery.
like you?
4.11 Sexually transmitted infections (STIs):
Activity 4.15: Inquiry and
Transmission and prevention
research projects
Read books or search in
Objectives
Internet or ask a clinical
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
nurse in your village
describe the types, modes of transmission and preventive
(school clinic) about the
mechanisms of sexually transmitted infection
most common sexually
transmitted infectious
in Ethiopia (e.g., HIV/
AIDS, syphilis, gonorrhea,
What are causes and effects of common sexually transmitted infec-
trichomoniasis and
tions,and how are they treated?
chancroid). Discuss causes,
the modes transmission and
Sexually transmitted infections are infections which spread through
methods of preventions.
Grade 9 Biology
97
Unit 4: Reproduction
sexual contact. Trichomoniasis, syphilis, gonorrhea, chaceriod and
HIV/AIDS are the common STIs in Ethiopia.
Trichomoniasis
It is caused by the flagellated protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis. Many
infected people do not have symptoms, but some infected women
have a yellowish discharge, and a sore, itchy vagina. In both sexes, an
untreated infection can cause infertility. Some epidemiological studies
suggest that, in men, untreated trichomoniasis may increase the risk
of benign prostate enlargement and aggressive prostate cancer. A
single dose of an antiprotozoal drug can quickly cure the infection.
Both partners should be treated.
Chlamydia
It is caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. Chlamydias are small bacteria.
In women, an infection of the reproductive tract by bacteria most
often goes undetected. Some women and most men experience
painful urination; most infected men have a clear or yellow discharge
from the penis. Left untreated, a Chlamydia infection can scar the
reproductive tract and lead to infertility in both sexes. An infection
can be passed from a mother to child during birth, causing pneumonia
and conjunctivitis in the newborn. Chlamydia can be cured with
antibiotics.
Gonorrhea
Is the second most common bacterial STI is caused by Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. Men usually develop symptoms within one week of
becoming infected; yellow pus oozes from the penis and urination
becomes frequent and painful. By contrast, most women have no
early symptoms. In both sexes an infection can damage reproductive
ducts and cause sterility. Gonorrhea is treated with antibiotics, but
strains resistant to the most widely used antibiotics are increasingly
common. Gonorrhea could harms the joints and skin, but can also
affect the heart and liver.
Syphilis
Is caused by Treponema pallidum, a spiral shaped bacterium. During
sex with an infected partner, these bacteria get onto the genitals or into
the cervix, vagina, or oral cavity. They slip into the body through tiny
cuts. If untreated, the infection can become systemic. Skin chancres
appear and the liver, bones, and eventually the brain can be damaged.
Like gonorrhea, syphilis is treated with antibiotics.
98
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
HIV/AIDS
Activity 4.16: Peer
conferencing
The disease is now known as Human Immunodeficiency Virus, or
HIV. HIV kills immune cells in the body. HIV leads to Acquired
AIDS: Acquired Immune
Immune Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS. Once attached, the virus can
Deficiency Syndrome. The
virus that causes AIDS is the
penetrate the immune cell. The virus may remain inactive for months.
human immunodeficiency
Spread of HIV
virus (HIV). Discuss the
transmission mechanisms
The disease HIV is spread from an infected person through blood
of HIV; the different control
or body fluids. This can occur through direct contact with the
method of the spread of
infected blood or body fluids. It also can occur through contact
AIDS and responsible sexual
with objects that have been contaminated by infected blood or body
behavior and HIV/AIDS
fluids. Intimate sexual contact and use of contaminated intravenous
needles are known methods of disease transmission. HIV also can
be transmitted by blood transfusion if the blood is contaminated. A
pregnant woman who has HIV can transmit it to her fetus. The virus
also can be transmitted through breast milk.
What are the symptoms of AIDS?
The first symptoms of AIDS may not appear for as many as ten years
after a person is infected. During this time, the AIDS virus reproduces,
infecting more and more immune cells. People infected with HIV may
develop AIDS. Early symptoms of AIDS may include swollen lymph
nodes, loss of appetite, weight loss, fever, rashes, night sweats, and
fatigue. It is not known how many people who are infected with HIV
will develop AIDS. AIDS weakens the body's immune system and
the body cannot fight off other infectious diseases or certain forms of
cancer.
Prevention and control of HIV
Abstinence from intimate sexual contact protects against HIV
and other sexually transmitted diseases. HIV transmission can be
prevented among users of illegal drugs if they do not share needles.
When AIDS first appeared, there were no effective drugs. Today, there
is a range of drugs that can be given separately or as a 'cocktail', which
slow the progress of the disease. Research to find a vaccine and more
effective drugs is ongoing. There is a range of blood tests designed to
detect HIV infection. These tests do not detect the virus but do indicate
whether antibodies to the virus are in the blood. If HIV antibodies are
present, the person is said to be HIV positive. The tests vary in their
reliability and some are too expensive for widespread use.
Control of the spread of STIs
The best way to avoid sexually transmitted infections is to avoid
having sexual intercourse with an infected person. However, the
symptoms of the disease are often not obvious and it is difficult to
recognize an infected individual. So the STI is avoided by not having
Grade 9 Biology
99
Unit 4: Reproduction
sexual intercourse with a person who might have the infection. Such
persons are:
prostitutes who offer sexual intercourse for money
people who are known to have had sexual relationships
with many others
Casual acquaintances whose background and past sexual
activities are not known.
These are good reasons, among many others, for being faithful to
one partner. The risk of catching a sexually transmitted infection can
be greatly reduced if the man uses a condom or if a woman uses a
female condom. These act as barriers to bacteria or viruses. If a person
suspects that he or she has caught a sexually transmitted infection,
treatment must be sought at once. Treatment is always confidential.
The patients must, however, ensure that anyone they have had sexual
contact with also gets treatment. There is no point in one partner being
cured if the other is still infected. STIs that are caused by a bacterium,
such as syphilis and gonorrhea, can be treated with antibiotics if the
symptoms are recognized early enough. However, HIV is viral so
antibiotics are not effective.
Self Assessment 4.8
1. What are the common sexually transmitted infections in Ethiopia?
How do we control them?
100
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Unit review
Reproduction is one of the ubiquitous properties of life. The ability of organisms to repro-
duce to form their own kind is the one characteristic that best distinguishes living things
from nonliving matter.
Asexual reproduction is the process resulting in the production of genetically identical off-
spring from one parent. It occurs without gametes or fertilization.
The basic forms of asexual reproduction are fission (binary and multiple), budding, and
fragmentation.
Many flowering plants reproduce asexually by vegetative propagation. The stolon of the
strawberry plant is a horizontal stem that grows above the ground, takes root at the nodes
and produces new plants. Rhizomes, corms, bulbs and tap root may store food, which is
used to accelerate early growth.
Sexual reproduction is the process involving the fusion of the nuclei of two gametes to
form a zygote and the production of offspring that are different from each other. The male
gamete is small and mobile. The female gamete is larger and not often mobile. The female
gamete of an animal is an egg.
Fertilization is the fusion of gamete nuclei. Fertilization happens when a sperm enters an
ovum and the sperm and egg nuclei join up (fuse). The fertilized egg (zygote) divides into
many cells and becomes embedded in the lining of the uterus. Here it grows into an em-
bryo.
The human males are born with the penis, scrotum and testicle whereas females are born
with vagina, uterus, and ovaries. These are the primary sexual characteristics in males and
females, respectively.
Secondary sexual characteristics in males include: growth and maintenance of the male sex
organs, an increase in body hair, an increase in muscle mass, increased growth of the long
bones of the arms and legs, and deepening of the voice.
Secondary sexual characteristics in females include: increase in growth rates of the long
bones of the arms and legs, develop more hair, especially under the arms and in the pubic
area, the hips broaden, and more fat is deposited in the breasts, buttocks, and thighs, the
menstrual cycle begins.
Young people must adjust to remarkable physiological, anatomical, and psychological
transformations during the process of puberty.
Young people should realize that there is considerable variation in the timing of the stages
of puberty among different individuals, and that most people develop into "normal" adults
in the course of their sexual and physical maturation.
Adolescence is the period between puberty and adulthood, when a good deal of social
learning takes place.
Biologically, teenagers are adult after they have reached puberty, when they are capable of
having children.
Economically, they are adult when they can support themselves and possibly a family.
Morally, they are adult when they are responsible for their actions, can express love in a
mature manner, and can have productive and meaningful relationships.
Grade 9 Biology
101
Unit 4: Reproduction
During adolescence, teenagers must achieve economic and moral adulthood; deal with sep-
aration from family,
Human testes reside within a scrotum. They produce sperm and testosterone. Sperm form
continually from germ cells inside the testes' seminiferous tubules. The sperm mature in an
epididymis that opens into a vas deferens.
Secretions from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland join with sperm to form semen.
Semen is expelled from the body through the urethra that runs through the penis.
Human ovaries produce eggs and sex hormones. An oviduct conveys an egg to the uterus.
The cervix of the uterus opens into the vagina, which serves as the organ of intercourse and
the birth canal.
Pituitary release follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).
FSH causes an ovarian follicle to begin maturing. Follicle cells around an egg, which formed
before birth, proliferate and secrete estrogens and progesterone.
LH triggers ovulation of the egg. After ovulation, the corpus luteum secretes progesterone
that primes the uterus for pregnancy. When the corpus luteum breaks down, menstruation
occurs.
The ovarian cycle is coordinated with cyclic changes in the uterus. We refer to the approx-
imately monthly changes in the uterus as the menstrual cycle.
Spermenters the cytoplasm of the egg and the male nucleus of the sperm fuses with the
female nucleus. This is the moment of fertilization.
Human twins may come from one zygote (identical, or monozygotic twins) or two zygotes
(non-identical, dizygotic, or fraternal twins).
Fraternal twins do not resemble each other any more than other children born separately
in the same family, but identical twins are, of course, strikingly alike and always of the same
sex.
Soon after the ball of cells reaches the uterus, some of the cells, instead of forming the
organs of the embryo, grow into a disc-like structure, the placenta. The placenta becomes
closely attached to the lining of the uterus and is attached to the embryo by a tube called
the umbilical cord.
Sexual intercourse can pass protozoan, bacterial and viral pathogens between partners. The
consequences of a STIs range from mild discomfort to sterility and systemic disease.
Protozoan and bacterial STIs can be cured with antibiotics, but there are no drugs to cure
viral STIs.
There are natural and artificial methods birth control methods. Abstaining from sex is the
effective method with added advantage of preventing exposure to sexually transmissible
pathogens.
Artificial methods of family planning barrier methods includes sheath or condom, dia-
phragm, femidom, spermicides, intra-uterine device (IUD), intra-uterine system (IUS),
contraceptive pill, contraceptive implant, contraceptive injection, vasectomy and laparot-
omy.
102
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Review Questions
Part One (Matching Items): Match items under column A with the appropriate item under
column B.
A
B
1
Birth canal
A
FSH and LH
2
Secrete fructose rich fluid
B
Prostate gland
3.
Produces estrogens and Progesterone
C
Testis
4
Thin inner folds
D
Epididymis
5
Pituitary gland
E
Labia majora
6
Secretes semen components
F
Endometrium
7
Conveys sperm out of body
G
Seminal vesicles
8
Produces testosterone
H
Ovary
9
Usual site of fertilization
I
Oviduct
10
Lining of uterus
J
Vagina
11
Fat-padded skin folds
K
Urethra
12
Stores sperm
L
Labia minora
Part Two (Multiple Choice Items): Choose the correct answer among the given alternative
1. Sexual reproduction
A. Requires formation of gametes by meiosis
B. Produces offspring identical in their traits
C. Occurs only in vertebrates
D. All of the above
2. The cervix is the entrance to the
A. Oviducts
B. Vagina
C. Uterus
D. Scrotum
3. Semen contains secretions from the
A. Adrenal gland
B. Prostate gland
C. Pituitary gland
D. Corpus luteum
4. Sperm in an epididymis passes next into the
A. Prostate gland
B. Urethra
C. Seminiferous tubules
D. Vas deferens
5. A male attains an erection when
A. The posterior pituitary releases oxytocin
B. Spongy tissue inside the penis fills with blood
C. Muscles running the length of the penis contract
D. Leydig cells release a surge of testosterone
Grade 9 Biology
103
Unit 4: Reproduction
6. Birth control pills deliver synthetic
A. Estrogens and progesterone
B. Oxytocin and prostaglandins
C. LH and FSH
D. Testosterone
7. Which one of the following is not the advantage of asexual reproduction
A. Little variation created
B. No mate is needed,
C. No gametes are needed,
D. All the good characteristics of the parent are passed on to the offspring
8. Morally, teenagers are adult after they have reached puberty, when they are capable of having
children.
A. True
B. False
Part Three: Critical thinking question
1. State exactly what happens at the moment of fertilization.
2. From the list of changes at puberty in girls, select those that are related to childbearing and
say what part you think they play.
3. How do sperm differ from egg in their structure?
4. Is fertilization likely to occur if mating takes place:
a. 2 days before ovulation
b. 2 days after ovulation
5. Define, and distinguish among, the terms fission, fragmentation, parthenogenesis, bud-
ding and vegetative propagation.
6. Explain the function of the corpus luteum in the menstrual cycle. If fertilization of the ovu-
lated egg happens, what endocrine events occur to support pregnancy?
7. Explain how the female hormones FSH, LH, and estrogen interact during the menstrual
cycle to induce ovulation and, subsequently, formation of the corpus luteum.
8. What are the male sex hormones and what are their functions?
9. One of the first signs of pregnancy is that the menstrual periods stop. Explain why you
would expect this.
10. What are causes and effects of common STIs, and how are they treated?
11. Describe, and distinguish among, the birth control methods - vasectomy, diaphragm, con-
traceptive pill, spermicides and laparotomy.
12. Name the general location and give the function of the following reproductive structures:
seminiferous tubules, vas deferens, urethra, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, bulbourethral
glands, mature follicle, oviducts, uterus, vagina, endometrium.
13. Match each disease with the type of organism that causes it. The choices can be used more
than once.
i
Chlamydial infection
A.
Bacteria
ii
AIDS
B.
Protozoa
iii
Syphilis
C.
Virus
iv
Gonorrhea
V
Trichomoniasis
104
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Contents
Learning competencies
5.1 What is food?
Define nutrition
5.2 Nutrition
List the types of nutrients
5.3 Nutrients
Describe the role of a balanced diet especially for children, nurs-
5.4 Balanced diet
ing mothers, athletes, and people with HIV/AIDS
5.5 Deficiency diseases
5.6 Malnutrition
Describe with examples the sources and deficiency diseases of
vitamins and minerals.
5.7 Substance abuse
5.8 Types of diseases
Define malnutrition
5.8.1. Infectious diseases
Discuss the feeding habits that may lead to obesity
5.8.2. Non-infectious
Examine the effects of smoking, alcohol use, chewing khat, can-
diseases
nabis, and other drug use, on the health, social, economic, cultur-
5.9 Renowned Nutritionists
al, and psychological wellbeing
in Ethiopia
Explain the modes of transmission and prevention of infectious
and noninfectious diseases
List and appreciate renowned nutritionists in Ethiopia
5.1. What is food?
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Activity 5.1: Think-pair-
share
Explain about food
Discuss with your friend
next to you and share
Food is any beneficial substance that is eaten, drunk, or otherwise
your idea with the other
taken into the body to sustain life, provide energy, promote growth,
classmates.
etc. It is consumed to provide nutritional support for an organism.
1.How food is important for
Food is usually of plant, animal, or fungal origin, and contains
living things like us?
essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or
2.What would happen if
minerals.
someone don't eat food?
The importance of food in living things
3.Relate the importance of
food with the particular type
Growth: Food is the source substances necessary for making new
of food we eat. For example
cells, tissues and organs.
eating bread
Energy: living things undergo different biological and chemical
reaction in their bodies. These reactions in living things produce at
the same time require energy.
Grade 9 Biology
105
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Food is the sources of energy that fuel all the biological activities.
Running, jumping, moving, growing, reproducing, and all other
activities require energy.
Replacement of damaged tissues: Food is required for making new
cell and used to replace damaged cells of the body.
Protect from diseases: There are different types of diseases caused by
the shortage of specific groups of foods. Our body requires these food
groups to protect our body from deficiency diseases and to become
healthy.
5.2 Nutrition
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Explain about nutrition
Nutrition is the process of taking in food and converting it into energy
and other vital nutrients required for life. Energy obtained from food
is important for different activities of the body. The food we eat keeps
us alive and provides the nourishment for growth, repairs of our body
cells and maintain good health.
5.3. Nutrients
Objectives
Activity 5.2: Group work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list important nutrients
I. What is difference between
explain about the importance nutrients and their deficiency
nutrition and nutrients?
Nutrients: are important chemical substances that are found in foods.
II. Explain the function of
In human body, we need nutrients for growth, source of energy and
food
stay healthy. We obtain these nutrients from the foods we eat. The
five important classes of nutrients are: carbohydrates, proteins, lipids
(Fats and oil) vitamins, minerals and water.
Macronutrients and Micronutrients
The three nutrients, carbohydrate, protein and fats are required in
large quantities. Such nutrients are called macronutrients. In contrast,
minerals and vitamins are needed in very small quantities and are
called micronutrients.
Vitamins and minerals do not supply energy but they play an important
role in the regulation of the metabolic activity in the body and help in
the utilization of proteins, fats and carbohydrates. Minerals are also
used for the formation of body structure and skeleton.
106
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are types of nutrients that provide energy for the
human body. They are composed of three elements, carbon, oxygen
and hydrogen. The human body gets carbohydrate from green plants.
These green plants prepare carbohydrate in the form of starch by the
process of Photosynthesis. They combine carbon dioxide and water
using energy from the sun in order to produce carbohydrate. Such
carbohydrates are the major sources of energy in our diet. Starch is
abundant in potatoes, bread, maize, rice and other cereals. Sugar
appears in our diet mainly as sucrose (table sugar) and is added to
drinks and many prepared foods such as biscuits and cakes. Sugars
also occur naturally in many fruits and some vegetables. One gram
of carbohydrate can provide, on average, 16 kilojoules (kJ) of energy.
An unavailable or indigestible carbohydrate provides dietary fiber
that does not serve as a source of energy. This indigestible part is a
product of plant's cell walls that consists mainly of cellulose. Human
body does not have any enzymes for the digestion of this cellulose.
Therefore, the plant cell walls reach the large intestine (colon)
without being digested. This undigested part of the diet is called fiber
or roughage. The colon contains many bacteria that can digest some
of the substances in the plant cell walls to form fatty acids.
The fibre and the bacteria, which multiply from feeding on it, add bulk
to the contents of the colon and help it to recollect water. This softens
the feces and reduces the time needed for the undigested residues to
pass out of the body. Both effects help to prevent constipation and
keep the colon healthy and increase bowel movement. It is found in
vegetables, fruits, and grains.
There are three types of carbohydrates
Monosaccharide The simplest carbohydrate is simple sugar or
monosaccharide which include glucose, fructose and galactose.
These three monosaccharide each have six carbon atoms, so
they are also known as hexose sugars. Their molecular formula is
Attention
CH₁₀.
The energy produced from
Disaccharide: Similar to other carbohydrates, disaccharides are
the raw materials is usually
measured in units known as
comprised of hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen. It is the combination
calories; one calorie is the
of two simple sugars to form a complex sugar called disaccharide.
amount of energy needed
These are maltose (Glucose + Glucose), sucrose (Glucose +
to raise the temperature of
Fructose and lactose (Glucose + Galactose). The general chemical
1 g or cubic centimeter (cc)
formula of disaccharides is C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁.
of water in 1°C. The calorie
units usually referred to in
Polysaccharide, which is formed when many simple sugar join
biology and nutrition are
together. They are substances whose molecules contain hundreds
kilogram-calories (Kcal);
or thousands of monosaccharaides linked together into long
each is 1,000 gram-calories.
chains. polysaccharides are found in plant cell as cellulose and
Grade 9 Biology
107
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
starch. In addition it stored in animals as glycogen. The general
Activity 5.3: Home work
formula of (C H₁₀₅)n.
Referee to biology books in
Fats and Oils
the library or search from
the internet in order to list
Fats and oils are high-energy nutrients that provide 35 to 45% of caloric
example food that belong to
intake. One gram of lipid gives 37 kJ of energy. Like carbohydrates,
fructose, sucrose, starch etc.
fats and oils are composed of three elements, carbon, oxygen and
In which group of
hydrogen. Fats are obtained from animal source and are solid at
carbohydrate do honey and
room temperature while oils are from plant source and liquid at room
table sugar belong?
temperature. The major sources of fat are meat, milk, cheese, butter
and egg-yolk. We obtain oils from fruits, seeds (e.g. sunflower seed).
In human body, lipid is used to make fatty tissue, adipose tissue,
under the skin forms a layer that can reduce heat losses from the body.
Besides satisfying metabolic energy needs, dietary fat, also serve as a
vehicle for the absorption of the fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K).
Proteins
Proteins are nutrients, which provide growth of the body and build a
new cell. It is made up of amino acid composed of carbon, hydrogen,
Activity 5.4: Think-pair-
oxygen and nitrogen. In all living things, the structural part of the cell
share
is composed of protein.
Compare the amount
The major sources of dietary proteins from animals are meat, fish,
energy obtained from one
eggs, milk and cheese. Plants such as beans, chickpea, soy beans and
gram of carbohydrate and
the same amount of lipid.
nuts are also important protein sources.
Discuss with your friend
next to you and share
your idea with the other
classmates.
Table 5.1: Source and function carbohydrate, protein and fats.
Nutrient
Good food sources
Use in the body
Carbohydrate
Barley, wheat, potato,
storage; source of energy, An unavailable or
bread, sugary foods like
indigestible carbohydrate provides dietary
honey
fiber that does not serve as a source of energy.
Lipids (Fat/oil) oils
Butter, cheese, animal fat,
source of energy (twice as much as carbo-
are liquid at room
groundnuts (peanuts)
hydrate); insulation against heat loss; some
temperature, but fats
hormones; cell membranes; insulation of nerve
are solid
fiber
Protein
Meat, fish, eggs, soya,
Growth; tissue repair; enzymes; some hor-
groundnuts, milk
mones; cell membranes; hair; nails; can be
broken down to provide energy
108
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Vitamins (Types)
Vitamins are nutrients, which are essential in small quantities for
Activity 5. 5: Group work
human body. They are organic substances needed for chemical
Make a group each of with
reactions of human cells. Plants can make these vitamins in their
four or five students and
leaves, but animals as well as human have to obtain many of them
have a discussion on:
ready-made either from plants or from other animals. If any one of
I. List some foods, which are
the vitamins is missing or deficient in the diet, the vitamin- deficiency
the source of minerals and
disease may develop. Examples of vitamins: are vitamin A, vitamin E,
vitamins.
thiamine (vitamin B1) and riboflavin (vitamin B2), and vitamin C.
II. Think about the types
of food you ate in the past
Minerals
24 hours, construct a table
similar to that of table 5.1.
Minerals are inorganic substances, which are essential in small
and classify the foods you
quantities for human body. The major minerals, which are necessary
ate accordingly. Was it a
for human body, are Calcium, Iron, phosphorous and Iron.
balanced diet? If not, What
do you propose it should be?
Calcium is used to build teeth and bones, it make muscles to contract
and help for the transmission of nerve impulses. The important
sources of calcium are milk, cheese etc.
Iron is a mineral which synthesizes the hemoglobin of red
blood cells. Hemoglobin is a molecule, which carries oxygen in
blood. The sources of iron in the diet are red meat, liver, kidney, eggs,
groundnuts, Tikur teff etc.
Iodine is a mineral, which makes thyroid gland to work properly.
The source iodine is iodized salt and seafood.
Phosphorus is a mineral required to build bones in animal as well as
humans body.
Water
Body fluids such as blood, lymph and tissue fluid are mainly composed
of water. The transportation of digested food into the body cell and
excretion of excess salt and urea out of the body is possible because
of water. Thus, water acts as a solvent and as a transport medium for
substances throughout the body.
Activity 5. 6: Group work
Use reference books or your text book to fill the following table
Nutrient
Sources
Use in the body
Deficiency disease
Vitamin C
Vitamin D
Vitamin A
Iron
Iodine
Calcium
Grade 9 Biology
109
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Key Terms
Nutrients: are chemical substance found in food and used by the human body for growth, or to provide
energy.
Carbohydrates: are types of nutrients that provide energy for the human body. One gram of
carbohydrate can provide, on average, 16 kilojoules (kJ) of energy while
Fats and oils: types of nutrients divided into fats (solid at room temperature) and oil (liquid at room
temperature). One gram of lipid gives 37 kJ of energy.
Proteins: are nutrients used for growth of the body and build a new cell. It can also provide energy.
One gram of protein can provide 17 kJ of energy.
Vitamins: are nutrients that are essential in small quantities for human body. They are organic
substances needed for chemical reactions inhuman cells. The major vitamins are: Vitamin A, vitamin B,
Vitamin D, Vitamin C
Minerals: are inorganic substances, which are essential in small quantities. The major minerals are
Calcium, Iron, phosphorous and Iron.
Fiber: is the indigestible part of the vegetables and other plant material, prevent constipation and keep
the colon healthy.
5.4. Balanced diets
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain the meaning of balanced diet
list types of food which make a balanced diet
Ethiopia has multicultural societies. These diverse societies have
different types of cultural foods. All these foods are different in their
preparation, flavor and ingredients. In addition, different people prefer
different food types. Some may prefer to feed on vegetables; others
may carbohydrate, animal protein etc. Different food or diet may
contain important composition of the above important nutrients.
In contrast, some diet may result in health problem because it may
contain high amount of fat or high amount of animal protein etc.
Genfo
Beyaynetu
Figure 5.1. Ethiopian cultural
foods
Kitfo
110
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
The diet that contains all of the nutrients in the correct amount and
proportion is termed as a balanced diet. A balanced diet must contain
enough proportion of carbohydrates and fats to meet our energy
requirement. It should also contain enough protein of the right kind
to provide the amino acids to make new cells and produce tissues
growth. The diet must also contain vitamins and mineral salts, plant
fiber and water for normal functioning of the body. Therefore, a
balanced diet gives us all the essential substances that we need in the
right quantities.
proteins
Fats
Water
Key Terms
Diet: the food that you eat
Balanced diet: the diet that
contains all of the nutrients
The six
in the correct amount and
proportion
essential
Minerals
Carbohydrates
Deficiency disease: disease
nutrients
occurs when a person does
not have enough amount of
one particular nutrient and
suffers health problems.
Vitamins
Figure 5.2. Balanced diet
Balanced diet depends on age, sex, activities and lifestyles
Activity 5.7: Think — Pair -
Share
The feeding habit of people depends on where they live, their social
issues, their age, their sex their personal activity and physiological
Discuss with a friend next
conditions etc. For example, a pregnant woman should eat more food
to you and share your idea
for the development and growth of her baby. She should get more
with the other classmates.
minerals like calcium for the development of bone and teeth of her
Do you think that that our
baby. Children have a greater energy requirement than adults because
body needs energy when we
they are still in the process of growth. Young children also need more
are resting, such as lying on
protein than adult does because they are constantly developing and
our bed?
making new cells. Elderly people generally have lower energy and
If your answer is yes, why
protein needs. However, they need to eat a balanced diet in order to
do we need food when we
stay healthy.
lying on our bed?
Grade 9 Biology
111
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Naturally, female have a relatively higher fat content in their bodies
than male. Fat in female body is stored in fat tissue, such as under the
skin. These fatty tissues have a lower metabolic rate than muscular
tissue, so women generally have a lower energy requirement than men.
Therefore, men should eat relatively more energy food than women
should. Some jobs that involve physical activity require more energy
than less active jobs. People who are usually work physical exercise
such as athletes also require high energy and high protein diets. The
extra protein is required for muscle development.
Table 5.2: Energy requirement by the body depends on age, sex,
activities and lifestyles
Activity 5.8: Group work
Different groups of human
Energy used in a day/kilocalories
Male
Female
Make a group of four or five
students and:
8-year-old child
2031
2031
Compare the daily energy
Teenager, aged 14
2987
2318
requirements of the people
Adult office worker
2629
2342
shown in table 5.2 and
Adult manual worker
3585
2987
explain what makes the
differences in their energy
Pregnant woman
2390
requirement.
Breast-feeding mother
2748
5.5 Deficiency diseases
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain the meaning of deficiency disease
list the main deficiency diseases caused by different diets
identify different diet as a source balanced diet
Human body requires a balanced diet for normal functioning of the
body. If food intake in human body is inadequate in carbohydrate,
proteins, minerals or vitamins, it causes deficiency diseases. A
deficiency disease occurs when a person does not have enough
amount of one particular nutrient and suffers health problems as a
result. Examples of deficiency diseases are Kwashiorkor, Marasmus,
Anemia, Rickets and Scurvy etc.
Marasmus
Marasmus is a deficiency disease caused by inadequate carbohydrate
content in the human body. Like kwashiorkor, the incidence of ma
rasmus increases in children. The symptoms of marasmus are thin
arm and leg, little muscle, old-looking face. Peoples with this disease
are extremely thin with reduced fat and muscle tissue. Their skin is
112
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
thin and hangs in folds. Treatment involves delivery of an energy rich,
balanced diet.
Kwashiorkor
Kwashiorkor is a deficiency disease caused by inadequate protein
content in human body especially in children. Some symptoms of
kwashiorkor are dry or flaky skin, swelling of leg and abdomen, and
changes of the hair color, weakness and irritability. Protein deficiency
can often be cured or prevented by an intake of protein.
Old person's
face
Attention
Wrinkled skin
Distended
abdomen
The term 'marasmus' is a
Greek word, meaning decay.
Severe muscle
Wasting
Swollen
ankles
Figure 5.4. child suffering from
Figure 5.5. Child suffering
Marasmus
from Kwashior
Diseases caused by deficiency of minerals and vitamins.
Anemia
Anemia is a deficiency disease caused by the lack of iron. A human
adult should take enough amount of iron, which is important for the
normal functioning of the body. A human body could not produce
enough haemoglobin if the amount of iron in the blood is insufficient.
Less haemoglobin in the body results in less oxygen transportation.
If the oxygen level of blood became less, it results in less respiration
producing less energy. The symptom of anemia includes feeling weak,
tired and irritable. It can treat or protect by using iron capsules and by
odd shaped
consuming iron rich food.
skull
Activity 5.9: Think-pair-share
skeletal
deformities
Discuss with your friend next to you and share your idea with the
other classmates.
i. What is the function of vitamin D in the human body?
stunted
growth
ii. What is the main source of vitamin D?
Bowed legs
Rickets
Deficiency disease caused by the shortage of vitamin D is called
Rickets. It results in deformed bones in the legs of children. Vitamin D
Figure 5.6. Child suffering from
rickets
Grade 9 Biology
113
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
is the only vitamin that the human body can make upon exposure of
the skin to morning and evening sunlight. In addition, oily fish, butter,
milk, cheese and egg-yolk are some foods that provide vitamin D.
Vitamin D help in the absorption of calcium and phosphorus through
the gut wall, which is important to build bone and teeth.
Scurvy
Scurvy is a deficiency disease caused by a lack of vitamin C (ascorbic
acid). This deficiency disease occurs when fibres in the connective
tissue of skin and blood vessels do not form properly. This disease
causes bleeding under the skin, particularly at the joints, bleeding gums
and poor healing of wounds. Vitamin C can't be stored in the body
therefore, it is important to take it daily. The good sources of vitamin
C are oranges, lemons, grapefruit, tomatoes, fresh green vegetables.
Figure 5.6. an individual suffering from scurvy
Table 5.3: Summary of the major nutrients and their deficiency
diseases.
Name
Rich food sources
Use in body
Deficiency disease
Protein
Meat, fish, eggs,
To build cell structure, growth
Kwashiorkor
soya, groundnuts, milk
and repair.
Carbohy-
Barley, wheat, potato,
Provide energy
Marasmus
drate
bread, sugary foods like
honey
Vitamin C
oranges, lemons, other
tissue repair, resistance to
bleeding gums (scurvy)
citrus fruits
disease
Vitamin D
fish oil, milk, butter (also
strengthens bones and teeth
soft bones, legs bow out-
made by skin in the Sun)
wards (rickets)
Iron
liver, meat, cocoa, eggs
used in formation of hemo-
tiredness, lack of energy
globin in red blood cells for
(anemia)
transport of oxygen
Calcium
milk, fish, green vegetables
strengthens bones and teeth
weak, brittle bones and
teeth (rickets), muscle
weakness and cramps
114
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
5.6 Malnutrition
Objectives
Activity 5.10: Think-pair-
share
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain the meaning of malnutrition
Discuss with your friend
differentiate problems relating to malnutrition
next to you and share
discuss how stunting, wasting, underweight and micro-
your idea with the other
nutrient deficiency
classmate.
explain what cause obesity
Sometimes a person can eat
explain about body mass index (BMI)
a lot of food, can this cause
malnutrition?
Malnutrition is defined as the insufficient, excessive or imbalanced
consumption of nutrients, which leads to health problems. The causes
of malnutrition can be poverty, famine due to drought or flood, soil
erosion, wars, too little land for too many people, ignorance of proper
nutritional requirements.
The dual burden of malnutrition consists of both under nutrition and
overweight and obesity, as well as diet-related non communicable
diseases. Malnutrition causes tissue damage, growth retardation,
disorderly differentiation, reduce developing of children's brain
including negative behavioural issues which can cause poor intellectual
capacity, class repetition, reduce productivity.
Under nutrition the most common form of malnutrition is caused by
under nutrition of protein and dietary energy (Carbohydrate, lipids).
If the total intake of food is not sufficient to meet the body's need
for energy, it leads to loss of weight, muscle wastage, weakness and
ultimately starvation. Extreme reduction of diets, such as carbohydrate
foods can result in the deficiency disease like marasmus. The victims
of malnutrition due to food deficiencies have reduced resistance to
different types of diseases. Under nutrition addresses the following
four broad groups of conditions :
Wasting (low weight-for-height) is defined as low weight-for-height.
It often indicates recent and severe weight loss, although it can also
persist for a long time. It usually occurs when a person has not had
food of adequate quality and quantity and/or they have had frequent
or prolonged illnesses. Wasting in children is associated with a higher
risk of death if not treated properly.
Stunting (low height-for-age), is defined as low height for age. It is the
result of chronic or recurrent under nutrition, usually associated with
poverty, poor maternal health and nutrition, frequent illness and/or
inappropriate feeding and care in early life. Stunting prevents children
from reaching their physical and cognitive potential.
Grade 9 Biology
115
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Underweight (low weight-for-age) is defined as low weight-for-age.
Key Terms
Micronutrient deficiencies are a lack of vitamins and minerals that
Malnutrition: the
insufficient, excessive or
are essential for body functions such as producing enzymes, hormones
imbalanced consumption
and other substances needed for growth and development.
of nutrients, which leads to
health problems.
In contrast, when the diet contains too much fat it causes diseases like
coronary heart disease. If fatty substance builds up in the arteries,
Wasting : low weight for
it reduces the diameter of these blood vessels which results in blood
hight
clots and leads to heart attack.
Stunting; low height for age
Underweight: low weight
Obesity: If you eat more food than you want, your body stores the
for age
extra food as fat. Then the stored fat results in obesity (overweight).
Obesity: can be caused by
People with overweight may use diet contains fattening foods, such as
a high intake of fatty foods,
high fat foods and foods with a lot of sugar.
foods containing a lot of
In order to prevent malnutrition, it is better to
added sugar plus the effects
Consume diverse and nutrient dense food,
of too little exercise.
avoid junk foods and sugary foods,
do regular physical exercise, etc.
Obesity is caused because of an imbalance between the energy store
in human body and the energy released. An increase in consumption
of high-energy foods, without an equal increase in physical activity
leads to an unhealthy increase in weight. In other way, decreased levels
of physical activity can also result in an energy imbalance and lead to
weight gain.
People who are overweight and obese are at high risk to have health
problems such as, heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and
arthritis (worn joints).
Activity 5.11: Group work
Make a group, each with four or five students and discuss in group
about:
Which of the following activities may cause or may not cause
obesity?
Why does it may or may not cause obesity?
i. Sitting and watch TV
ii. Playing football in the field
iii. Playing computer games
iv. Going to school by Walking
V. Going to school by taxi
Fig 5.7 Persons with obesity
vi. Eating breakfast with high fats and sugars contents
116
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Obesity can be controlled by
Activity 5.12: Class work /
Eating less high energy foods (lower energy intake)
Individual assignment
Taking more exercise (increase energy output).
1. Calculate the BMI of a
Eating a balanced diet with a lower intake of energy
person who has a body mass
of 80 kg and he is 1.85m tall.
Is he/she likely to be obese?
Attention
If yes why?
2. Form a group of 5-7
There are two ways in which people can identify being obese:
students and go to nearby
being 20% above the recommended weight for his or her height
health facility, measure your
weight and height, calculate
having a body mass index (BMI) greater than 30. Body mass
your body mass index and
index = body mass (kg) / height2 (metres2)
compare it with your age
A person with a BMI Status below 18.5 is underweight,18.5-24.9 normal
then present to the students/
weight,25.0-29.9 overweight, 30.0 and above obese.
class
Adolphe Quetelet, a Belgian statistician and scientist, developed
BMI in the 19th century. He based the formula on measurements of
thousands of soldiers. It provided a useful guide to check on a healthy
body mass, but it may not tell the whole story. Fitness training builds
up larger muscles, which weigh more than fat and can make the BMI
of a very high therefore, athlete with a large frame appear in the
'overweight' category.
5.7. Substance abuse
Objectives
Activity 5.13: Think-pair-
share
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
describe the effects of tar and carcinogens in tobacco smoke
Discuss with your friend
on the gas exchange system
next to you and share
describe the short-term effects of nicotine and carbon
your idea with the other
monoxide on the cardiovascular system
classmate.
explain the social and psychological effect of chewing Khat
i. What are drugs?
discuss the consequences of doping.
ii. List some drugs which
have medicinal value
Drugs
iii. Can we get drugs from
A drug is any substance taken into the body that change and affects
food ? if your answer is
chemical reactions in the body. It can be taken legally to reduce a
yes list some of them
symptom such as a headache or to treat a different types of infection,
iv. List some stimulant
this is called medicinal drugs. There are also other drugs which could
drugs which are taken
also be one taken illegally in order to provide stimulation or induce
for recreational purpose.
sleep or create hallucinations (recreational drugs).
Can drugs be found in our food?
Drugs are present in many food products such as: tea, coffee, energy
drinks and alcoholic drinks. Though they have many useful medicinal
Grade 9 Biology
117
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
properties their stimulant properties can produce caffeine, a nasty
condition that can readily addict.
What is substance abuse?
Substance abuse is using legal or illegal drugs (substances) in the
wrong way or in the excess amount. Some of the drugs are medical
drugs taken legally to reduce a symptom and pain of diseases. These
drugs designed to suppress pain, treat and cure diseases. In addition
to medical substances, other legal substances are present in many
products such as:
tea, coffee and 'energy drinks' (caffeine)
tobacco(nicotine)
alcoholic drinks (alcohol)
Although these substances are legal, they can cause serious effects
when taken excessively or over long periods of time.
Peoples are using drugs illegally to provide stimulation, induce sleep,
or create hallucinations (recreational drugs) example of such drugs
are: alcohol, tobacco, Khat, heroin etc. Peoples are also using alcohol,
nicotine and caffeine for their pleasurable effects, to help them relax
or concentrate. Some of the commonly practiced drugs in our country
include:
1. Cigarettes smoking
Activity 5.14: Group work
Cigarette is made up of a plant called tobacco (Nicotiana tobacum)
which originally cultivated and used in Central America. People use
Make a group of four or
five students and make a
cigarette in order to stimulate their body or because they are addicted
discussion on some of the
to it.
common smokers reaction
The chemical composition of cigarette leads to addiction and problem
or their habits during
smoking.
in human health. The main components of cigarette or tobacco are
tar, carbon monoxide and Nicotine.
i. Tar
Tar is the black sticky substance found in cigarette that collects in the
Attention
lungs when the smoke cools. The health effect of tar can be chronic
bronchitis, lung cancer etc.
Currently, The smoking
of a flavored tobacco
Chronic bronchitis
called shisha has become
When people smoke cigarette, the chemical substance called tar
fashionable among young
accumulates in the bronchioles. Tar irritates the lining of the
people. However, the social,
bronchioles and stimulates the production of excess mucus. The
economic and psychological
effect of shisha is similar to
function of cilia in our lung is to remove dust, dirty and excess mucus
that of ordinary cigarette.
from the lining of lungs. However, when cilia damaged by smoking,
it will be difficult for cilia to remove the excess mucus and dirt. This
leads to the collection of dirt, bacteria and viruses that block the
118
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
bronchioles. This stimulates smoker's to cough which is an effort to
move the mucus, the bronchioles and bronchi becomes thicker. This
thickening of the bronchioles causes them to narrow and makes it
difficult to breathe, this leads to infections such as pneumonia. This
damage and obstruction of the airways is chronic bronchitis.
In addition, there are different chemical compounds in tar such as
carcinogen (produce cancer) compounds. Cancer starts because of the
changes in the epithelial cells of the lungs that lead to the development
of a mass of cells, known as a tumor. It is this tumor which results in
cancer.
Emphysema
Smokers usually have weakened alveoli wall because of the above
action of tar that result in coughing. During coughing, some of the
weakened alveoli burst. Then the amount of alveoli decrease as well
as absorbing surface of the lungs is greatly reduced. Then the smoker
cannot oxygenate his or her blood properly and the least exertion
makes the person breathless and exhausted. Bronchioles collapse
during expiration, trapping air in the alveoli, which often burst. This
condition is called emphysema.
ii. Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas found in cigarette. During
cigarette smoking, the carbon monoxide enters to lung. This carbon
monoxide diffuses across the walls of the alveoli and diffuses into
red blood cells where it combines with haemoglobin to form the
compound carboxy- haemoglobin.
The carbon monoxide combines permanently with hemoglobin. Then
no more oxygen is carried by hemoglobin that results in the reduction
of the volume of oxygen in blood. Therefore, less oxygen is supplied
to the heart. In this case, the heart beat increases to get more oxygen.
Carbon monoxide may also damage the lining of the blood vessels.
In this case, smokers put the health of their cardiovascular system at
risk. The damaging of the walls of arteries may lead to the build-up of
fatty tissue and the reduction of blood flow. This may result coronary
Activity 5.15: Think-pair-
share
heart disease (CHD) and stroke. These diseases are a major cause of
death and disability in the world.
Discuss with your friend
next to you and share
iii. Nicotine
your idea with the other
classmate.
Nicotine is a compound found in cigarette. It is a stimulating and
I. What is the function of
relaxing compound which has a molecular structure that allows it to
hemoglobin?
interact with our nervous system. In addition to its stimulating effect,
II. How does carbon
nicotine is a compound which produce addiction.
monoxide reduce amount of
When people smoke cigarettes, nicotine from cigarette is absorbed
oxygen in smokers lung?
Grade 9 Biology
119
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
through the alveoli to enter the Blood stream. Then it is able to go to
the brain through blood circulation.
In the brain, nicotine activates the release of dopamine. Dopamine is
the natural neurotransmitter substance associated with our experience
of pleasure. Long-term exposure to nicotine eventually comes to
have the reverse effect, actually depressing the ability to experience
pleasure. So more nicotine is needed to 'satisfy', and cigarettes become
addictive. Smokers find it increasingly hard to quit the habit.
Nicotine also increases the heart rate and blood pressure. It narrows
the arterioles, which increases blood pressure. It decreases the blood
flow, particularly in the hands and feet, and it makes blood clotting
more likely. It also increases the stickiness of blood platelets that
promote blood clotting.
Tar
Cadmium
material for paving roads
in battery acid
Arsenic
Carbon Monoxide
in rat poison
Butane
released in car
Lighter fluid
exhaust fumes
Lead
Formaldehyde
Acetic acid
in batteries
known as embalming fluid
ingredient in hair dye
Ammonia
Acetone
Figure 5.8 Substances in tobacco smoke
2. Drinking Alcohol
Alcohol is a socially acceptable drug in many countries including
Ethiopia. In Ethiopia, there are different types of alcohol drinks such
as Tella, Arekie (Katicala), Beer, Wine. When human body consumes
Attention
alcohol, it is absorbed through the wall of the stomach and small
intestine and it is absorbed into the blood. Alcohol gets distributed
The breaking down of
through- out the body by the help of blood circulation. It is absorbed
alcohol by liver enzyme
by liver cells and broken down by liver enzymes, There- fore its
happens more quickly in
concentration in the blood decreases gradually.
men than in women because
men have more of these
To decreases the risk of alcohol-related harms, the World health
enzymes and their enzymes
organization identifies a standard drink as having 10 grams of pure
tend to be more active. They
ethanol. It recommended no more than two drinks per day on average
also have more water and
for both men and women.
less fat in their bodies than
women do, which tends
Alcohol is a depressant. It affects the brain by slowing down the
to cause the concentration
of alcohol in the blood to
transmission of nerve impulses. Consuming larger quantities of
alcohol leads to:
decrease more quickly.
120
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
i. Loss of coordination,
ii. Loss of self-control.
Activity 5.16: Group work
iii. Loss of judgment and control of movements
Discuss with your friend
iv. Slower reaction times(the interval between receiving a stimulus
next to you and share
your idea with the other
and making a response) of judgment and slower reaction times
classmate.
Alcohol drink and addiction
What is the common
reaction of alcohol drunken
Some people become dependent upon alcohol and they are referred
man?
to as alcoholics. They feel tense and irritable. It is hard to cope with
Why is everybody
everyday problems without drinking they develop a tolerance as more
discouraged from drinking
enzymes that metabolize alcohol are made in the liver. They therefore
particularly when driving?
need to take greater quantities of alcohol to get the same effect.
Alcoholics can cause their families pain and unhappiness. They can
become aggressive after drinking and spend a lot of money on drink.
There are also other social problems such as crime, family disputes,
marital breakdown, child neglect and abuse, absenteeism from work,
Attention
vandalism, assault and violent crime including murder.
The liver is the site of the
Long-term effects of alcohol
breakdown of alcohol and
Drinking large quantities of alcohol over a number of years can lead
other toxins. Drugs are
to stomach ulcers, heart disease and brain dam- age. In addition, large
broken down in the body by
amount of alcohol damage the liver tissue and replaced by scar tissue
enzymes and the products
are excreted. The breakdown
known as cirrhosis. This condition may leads to death unless the
products can be detected in
person stops drinking.
the urine, and this is why
urine tests are carried out
3. Heroin
to see if people have been
Heroin is a powerful depressant that slows down the nervous system.
taking drugs. Athletes taking
It has a chemical structure that is similar to endorphins, a group of
part in competitions and car
chemicals that are found in the brain. Endorphins are made naturally
drivers who have been in
in the brain and provide relief when the body experiences pain or
accidents are routinely tested
stress.
for drugs.
Endorphins work on the synapses in the brain and preventing neurons
from transmitting impulses from pain receptors, so they producing
pain relief. When a person takes heroin, the heroin molecules bind
to the endorphin receptor sites, blocking nerve transmission. This
mimics the function of natural endorphins. Therefore, by using
heroin, the feeling of pain disappears and addiction produced. People
practice to take heroin to reduce the pain. This is how the body
develops a tolerance to the drug, and it has to be taken in ever-greater
quantities in order to feel euphoria or just to reduce the pain.
4. Cannabis
Cannabis is the most commonly used illegal drug in the world. It is
drug from Cannabis plant. Mostly it is the flower of cannabis plant,
harvested, dried, and used as drug. Some people named this drug
Grade 9 Biology
121
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
as weed, some call it pot, and others call it marijuana. This cannabis
plant has been used as a drug for both recreational and traditional
medicines for a long period. This drug contains a stimulant or
psychoactive component called Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
Peoples used this cannabis by smoking, vaporizing, together to food
and as extract.
Cannabis causes: enjoyment, different states of mind and sense of
time, difficulty concentrating, reduced short-term memory and body
action relaxation and it results in an increase in appetite. The effect of
Figure 5.9 Cannabis
cannabis in human body last for two to six hours, based on the quantity
of the drug used. When cannabis is taken at high amount, it causes
mental effects like: nervousness, panic, false beliefs, hallucinations,
suspicion, and psychosis.
5. Chewing khat
Khat (Catha edulis) is bushy plant whose leaves are chewed for its
stimulant effect. This plant is grown in southern Arabia and Eastern
Africa including Ethiopia, Somalia, and Kenya. Khat is usually
supplied as a bundle of leaves and fresh shoots wrapped in false
banana leaves.
Khat contains a chemical compound known as cathinone, which
affects central nervous system (CNS). This cathinone can be found
only in fresh Khat leaves. Chewing khat releases Cathinone into
the saliva that can be absorbed to the body easily. Only fresh leaves
are chewed, because cathinone soon degrades into old in dry plant
material.
Figure 5.10. Khat
Although khat can be ingested as an infusion or smoked, the most
common route of administration is to chew the fresh plant. The juice
of the masticated material is swallowed, while the residues are spat
out. In some places, teas from dried leaves are also consumed.
Ethiopia is one of the country where large number of people with the
habit of chewing chat. In the previous years, it was mainly cultivated
Activity 5.17: Group work
in eastern part of the country. However, currently, it is grown and
1. Make a group of four
consumed in all parts of the country.
or five students and make
This current increment in khat consumption brings socio-economic,
a discussion on some of
psychological and physical health consequence on the individuals
the social, economic and
involved. Chewing khat induce a state of joy and feelings of increased
behavioral problems of
alertness and stimulation. At the end its consequence results in a
chewing chat.
depressed mood, irritability, loss of appetite, gastritis and peptic ulcer,
2. What are the common
disease and difficulty sleeping. In addition, the habit of chewing khat
reactions of a person after
leads to some social problems like family fragment, multiple sexual
chewing chat? Why ?
practices and the spread of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) due
to unprotected sex. Early initiation of sexual activity was also reported
122
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
among Khat chewers.
6. Doping
The term "doping" refers to the use of prohibited medications, drugs,
Activity 5.18: Group work
or treatments in competitive sports It is practiced in athletes with
the intention of improving athletic performance. Performance
Make a group of four or
enhancing drugs (PEDs) is another term used to for drugs used by
five students and make a
athletes to improve their athletic performance.
discussion on:
1. All athletes test their blood
The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) uses a battery of blood
and urine before the athletics
and urine tests to determine if athletes are cheating. A key tool is the
competition. Why?
biological passport program, which tests all athletes for doping and
2. Have you heard about
performance enhancing drugs.
doping? If yes, discuss its
Why is doping such a big deal?
meaning.
The most important reason doping is a big deal is the fact that many
of these substances can have harmful and long-lasting side effects
which may include :
Cardiovascular: irregular heart rhythm, elevated blood pressure,
heart attack, sudden death.
Central Nervous System: insomnia, anxiousness, depression,
aggressive behavior, suicide, headache, addiction with withdrawal,
psychosis, tremor, dizziness, stroke
Attention
Respiratory: nose bleeds, sinusitis
The word doping is probably
derived from the Dutch
Hormonal: infertility, gynecomastia (enlarged breasts), decreased
word dop, the name of an
testicular size, low sex drive, acromegaly (coarse bones in face, hands,
alcoholic beverage made of
and feet), cancer
grape skins used by Zulu
warriors in order to enhance
The second issue is more of a moral dilemma. These banned substances
their prowess in battle.
are used to gain an unfair advantage which significantly diminishes
the spirit of competition.
The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), has a program which has
a purpose, to protect the athletes' fundamental right to participate in
doping-free sport and thus promote health, fairness and equality for
athletes worldwide.
What substances are banned from use?
Some drugs are banned both in and out of competition due to their
performance enhancing properties, while others are only banned
during competition. Another reason for banning a drug is due to their
ability to mask the presence of a different banned drug during testing.
In general, the following classes of drugs are banned: Street drugs,
stimulants, anabolic steroids, peptide hormones (i.e. human growth
Grade 9 Biology
123
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
hormone [hGH]), alcohol and beta blockers (for archery and rifle
Key Terms
shooting only), diuretics, beta-2 agonists, anti-estrogens, blood
Drugs: refers to any
doping, and gene manipulation.
substance taken into the
body that modifies or affects
Prohibited list: some drugs are listed on Prohibited list which is the
chemical reactions in the
document identifying the substances and methods that are prohibited
body.
in competition, out of competition, and in particular sports.
Heroin is a powerful
The criteria for adding a substance to the prohibited list are:- Must
depressant affecting the
nervous system. It is taken
meet any 2 of the following 3 criteria:
into the body in the form
It has the potential to enhance or enhances sport performance;
of injection. People often
It represents an actual or potential health risk to the athlete;
share needles for injection.
Sharing needles can result
It violates the Spirit of Sport.
in infections such as HIV/
Substances & methods prohibited at all times: all prohibited
AIDS
substances in this class are non-specified substances anabolic agents
Nicotine: it is also a
are prohibited, ptide hormones, growth factors, related substances,
stimulant, it increases pulse
and mimetics, growth factors and growth factor modulators, beta-2
rate and narrows blood
vessels which can cause
agonists, hormone and metabolic modulators, diuretics And gene
damage
doping, masking agents, blood doping, Substances & methods
prohibited in competition: Stimulants, narcotics, cannabinoids,
Emphysema: walls between
alveoli break making large
glucocorticoids
sacs, reducing surface area
massively and making
Prohibited in particular sports:- Beta-blockers
difficult to breathe.
For athletes who need a banned drug for legitimate medical reasons,
Carbon monoxide:
the anti-doping programs offer a way to request a therapeutic use of
irreversibly bonds with
exemption (TUE) so the athlete can use the drug. The athlete must
hemoglobin which can lead
have a physician complete a TUE form that states the athlete needs
to oxygen starvation
the drug to treat their medical condition and that an alternative non-
Cannabis: stimulant or
banned drug is not available or insufficiently treats their condition.
psychoactive component
The TUE is reviewed by a medical committee, which either allows the
called Tetrahydrocannabinol
athlete to take the drug or denies the athlete's request.
(THC)
Cathinone ; a chemical
Doping Consequences
compound found in
Khat which affects central
1. Physical and Mental Health: - Physical health: depending on
nervous system (CNS).
the substance, the dosage, and the consumption frequency, doping
products may have particularly negative side effects on health. Some
Doping is the use of
prohibited medications,
damages to the body are irreversible and may lead the athlete's life
drugs, or treatments in
to be in great danger. The following section will outline the possible
competitive sports.
health consequences and sports benefits to using certain groups of
doping substances.
Steroids: General side effects:
Increased risk of liver disease
Increased risk of cardiovascular disease
High blood pressure
124
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Acne
Baldness
In Males: Shrinking testicles, sexual side effects (reduced sperm
production, impotence, libido disorders) Breast growth
In Females: Deepening of voice Excessive hair growth on face &
body abnormal menstrual cycles
Enlarged clitoris
Erythropoietin (EPO)
Increased blood viscosity (thickness/stickiness)
Pulmonary embolism
Increased risk of heart attack and stroke
General weakness
High blood pressure
Human Growth Hormone
Severe headaches
Loss of vision
High blood pressure and heart failure
Diabetes and tumors
Crippling arthritis
Irreversible acromegaly
Enlargement of the hands & feet
Protruding forehead, brow, skull & jaw
Heart enlargement
Water retention
Liver and thyroid damage
2. Psychological health- Some doping substances may not be
detrimental to the body but exercise an impact on mental health. It
has been scientifically evidenced that anxiety, obsessive disorders, or
psychosis are direct consequences of doping.
Psychological dependence
Increased aggression
Mood swings
3. Social consequences- The existence of an athlete who was held
guilty of doping may be completely disrupted. Indeed, doping may
represent a danger to health, but it may also be prejudicial to fame,
respect, and creditworthiness. Even in the future negative findings are
regularly questioned by the media and the entourage. The poor image
will remain in the collective unconscious and the athlete could remain
isolated.
Grade 9 Biology
125
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
4. Financial consequences:- As regards high-performance sports, an
infringement of anti-doping rules often leads to a loss of income, the
reimbursement of prize money, and of sponsorship money. An athlete
suspended for several years, or even life-banned, cannot earn his/her
living as usual and can be forced countries loss foreign treasures from
athletes even banned countries from any sport competition in the
world.
5. Sporting consequences:- A doping violation may mean loss of
results, rankings, medals, and qualification places at events. It could
also have an impact on members of a team causing medals to be lost
a day-to-day basis.
6. Legal consequences:- Doping may have major legal consequences.
A doped athlete may be suspended, i.e., he/she may not take part in a
sports competition on or in organized training sessions.
Problems of using drugs
Peoples start using substances because of different reasons. Some
people taking substances for stimulation, some for recreational value,
and others use it because of the pressure from other people. Whatever
the reason, the effect is almost similar among all the users. When
substance users first start taking a substance, users may think they can
control how much they use. However, when time passes, they may
want more of the drug to get the same feeling or effect. Over time
some people can reaches beyond abuse to addiction. Addiction can
produce health, social, economic and cultural problems. Some of the
problems that drug users faced are:
Eat more or less than normal
Change their friends a lot
Stop taking care of themselves
Sleep at unusual hours
Lack concern in things they used to love
Have problems at work or with family
Spend more time alone than they used to
Switch quickly from feeling good to bad
Financial problems - stealing, loss of job
Strong desire to use the substance
difficulty to keep a job,
family breakdown and homelessness, tendency to avoid
friends and families,
Preferring the company of other addicts, and so they become
isolated from the society
How people recover from drug addiction?
Addictions are treatable. With the right plan and resources, recovery
126
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
is possible. The following are important steps in recovering.
Anyone who is addicted for any drug should admit to his friends, and
to himself, that he has a problem.
Find support from others.
Rewrite daily routine.
Enjoy the small successes.
Recognize and avoid relapse.
Reach freedom, and stay there
5.8. Infectious and noninfectious diseases
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
identify infectious and non-infectious diseases
list the major infectious diseases
explain about modes of transmission and prevention of
infectious diseases
explain about COVID-19
Disease is a condition in which the body does not function normally,
and which produces symptoms such as: headache, increased body
temperature, pain, distress or feeling weak. There are two types of
diseases are called infectious and non-infectious diseases.
Activity 5.19: Group work
Make a group of four or five students and discuss about
i. The difference between infectious and non-infectious diseases
ii. List two infectious and non-infectious diseases.
iii. List some diseases that occur in your surrounding and arrange them in the following table.
Name of the disease
Infectious
Non infectious
causes
1.
2.
3.
5.8. 1. Infectious diseases
Infectious diseases are diseases that are caused by disease causing
organisms. These types of diseases can be transmitted from person to
person such as HIV-AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria etc. Disease causing
organisms are organisms, which cause diseases. Examples of disease
causing organisms are bacteria, virus, protozoa, and fungi.
Grade 9 Biology
127
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
There are different types of infectious diseases that caused by different
Attention
disease causing organisms. Their difference is based on:
Endemic: This disease is
the type of host that they infect, some infect human, some infect
occurring when disease-
only plant etc.
causing agent exists
permanently in specific
their mode of transmission, some are transmit by insects, some by
place or population, For
contaminated water/food etc.
example malaria is endemic
in Afar region.
type of disease causing organisms, some are caused by viruses,
Epidemics are diseases that
some by bacteria etc.
occur suddenly and then
the severity of the disease, such as the common cold, measles
spread in a specific area or
and influenza, only affect us for a short period of time. Others,
within a specific population
such as tuberculosis (TB), human immune deficiency virus (HIV)
group, For example, in 2015
Ebola was epidemic in west
infection may last a much longer time.
Africa.
Transmission of infectious diseases
Pandemic is an epidemic
that spreads far more widely
An understanding of the biology of the pathogen and its mode of
throughout the whole world.
transmission is essential to control and prevent the disease. Different
It affects a huge number of
infectious diseases have different mode of transmission.
people. Example COVID-19
Some infectious diseases are transmitted from one per- son to
another by direct contact with a patient.
Other infectious diseases are transmit by drinking contaminated
water or by eating contaminated food, (food or water contains
disease-causing organisms like bacteria and virus). This is because
the infectious organisms can survive in water, human food, faeces
Some infectious diseases are transmitted by insect bite.
Some infectious diseases are transmitted by sexual inter-course
etc.
Preventing infections and control methods of infectious diseases
Control is an attempt to break transmission cycles by removing the
conditions that favour the spread of the disease causing organisms.
1. Vaccination: is a major control measure for many infectious
diseases; it works by making the body to defend against disease
causing organisms.
2. Personal hygiene; people of all ages should wash their hands after
using the toilet and before handling or eating food; this protects
the entrance of disease causing organisms into our body.
3. Hygienic food preparation: food should be covered to keep flies
away, kitchen surfaces should be cleaned to kill bacteria, and food
should be cooked exhaustively to make sure any bacteria are killed.
4. Boiling cooking and/or drinking water to kill the pathogens
128
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
5. Proper waste disposal: household waste should be put into covered
bins and collected at regular intervals.
6. Sewage treatment: toilet waste is a serious health threat if it is not
disposed properly. Water pipe should be arranged far from toilet
drainage. For example, the disease causing organism that cause
giardia and cholera are transmitted through contamination of
drinking water by faeces and sewage.
Human immune deficiency virus infection/ acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV-AIDS)
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome is caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) HIV infection rates are especially
Activity 5.20: Think — Pair -
high sub-Saharan Africa including Ethiopia. Peoples who have HIV
Share
in their body are called HIV-positive or HIV carriers. Usually, these
Discuss with your friend
HIV positive people do not show any symptom of the disease for
next to you and share
several years after infection. Infection of HIV starts when the virus
your idea with the other
classmate.
infects and enters to T-lymphocytes. These are cells that defend our
body from diseases.
Explain the difference
between being HIV-positive
HIV replicates and survives in human T-lymphocyte cells. During its
and having AIDS
replication HIV, destroys these T-lymphocytes cells. As a result the
number of T-lymphocytes gradually decrease which leads to declining
of disease resistant mechanism of the body. When the body reduced in
its dis- ease resistant mechanism, it causes acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS). AIDS is the result of opportunistic diseases like
pneumonia, TB, cancers; weight loss, diarrhoea etc.
Transmission of HIV-AIDS
HIV can be passed from one person to another by direct exchange of
body fluids such as:
Fluid transfer from one person to another during sexual
intercourse
Blood transfusion from one person to another, during blood
donation
Sharing needles in intravenous drug users
Mother to fetus across placenta, more often, through the mixing
of blood during birth
Mother to infant in breast milk
Prevention and control of HIV-AIDS
There are no cure drug for HIV-AIDS and no vaccine for HIV, there-
fore it is very important to prevent this disease by the following meth-
ods.
Grade 9 Biology
129
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
All blood should be tested before transfusions in activity of blood
Attention
donation
T- Lymphocyte cells
Needles used by intravenous should be sterile and used only once.
(Immune cells) have another
name called T-helper cells
People should avoid multiple sexual activity
that defend our body from
Using condoms, If condom is properly used, it can pre-vent the
infection. Opportunistic
virus transmission from carrier to healthy per-son
diseases: disease caused by
different disease causing
HIV-positive mother should be treated with appropriate retroviral
organisms that occurs when
drugs. These retro-viral drugs can also significantly increase the
the body diseases resistance
length of time between a person be-coming infected with HIV and
mechanism.
developing symptoms of AIDS and can significantly prolong life.
Retroviral drugs are drugs
that are used to stop or
Tuberculosis (TB)
reduce viral replication in
Tuberculosis is another example of infectious disease caused by
human, but they don't kill
the virus.
the bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis and rarely by
Mycobacterium bovis. These bacteria live inside human cells, mainly
in the lungs. TB has many symptoms like cough, chest pain, shortness
of breath, fever, sweating, weight loss etc. After infection, some people
develop TB quite quickly, while in others the bacteria remain inactive
for many years. This difference is because of the difference in disease
resistance ability between peoples.
TB transmission
TB bacteria can enter the lungs in airborne droplets. It spread when
infected people with the active form of the illness cough or sneeze. The
bacteria are carried in the air in tiny droplets of liquid. Transmission
occurs when people who are uninfected inhale (breath in) the
droplets. These happen rapidly in places where many people are living
Key Terms
in crowded conditions such as very crowded public transportation.
Drug resistance bacteria:
The other transmission way is by consuming undercooked meat and
are bacteria that does not
killed by commonly used
unpasteurized milk. This type of transmission mainly occurs for the
drugs. More powerful
TB transmits from infected animals.
called second line drugs
Prevention and control of TB
are important to kill these
resistant bacteria.
There are drugs and vaccines that are important to treat and prevent
Vector: is an organism that
this disease
carries a disease-causing
organism and transmit from
Treatment of TB: A person, who shows symptoms relating to TB,
one person to another or
should his/her sputum sample tested for the presence of TB bacteria.
from an animal to a human.
If a person is positive for TB, then patients should be isolated while they
For example Anoph-
are in the most infectious stage (which is at two to four weeks). The
eles mosquito.
treatment involves using several drugs to ensure that all the bacteria
are killed. The treatment also need about six to nine months. If the
bacteria not killed by treatment, it may be because of drug resistance
TB.
130
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Vaccine: The only vaccine available for TB is the BCG vaccine, which
is derived from animal TB bacteria and protects up to 70-80%of
people who receive it. This vaccine is given during early child or
infant stage. The effectiveness of the vaccine decreases with in old age.
TB is relating to reduced immunity of the body, increasing standards
of people who are living with HIV and treating HIV infected people
help to reduce the incidence of TB.
Avoid overcrowding: TB is a disease transmitted by inhales the
bacteria when infected person cough and sneeze. Therefore, covering
the mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing reduces the spread of
TB bacteria, and good ventilation is important to prevent this disease.
Avoid eating undercooked meat and avoid drinking unpasteurized
or not boiled milk. This is important to prevent TB transmission from
animal to human.
Malaria
Activity 5.21: Group work
Make a group, each with four or five students and discuss in group
about:
i. The causes of malaria,
ii. If you are living in malaria endemic area observe your
surrounding and discuss how malaria is transmitted from
patient to healthy person ( If your living area is not endemic
for malaria, please use reference or internet to answer this
question).
iii. What is vector?
iv. How can we prevent malaria?
Malaria is caused by protozoa known as plasmodium Protozoa.
Malaria is found in many parts of the world where Anopheles mosquito
species that can act as vectors are found. It is very common in tropical
and subtropical regions where humidity is high, a comfortable
environment for mosquito breeding. Female Anopheles mosquitoes
feed on human blood to obtain the protein they need to develop their
eggs. If the person they bite is infected with Plasmodium, they will
take up some of the plasmodium together the blood meal. When
the mosquito feeds again another healthy person, she injects the
plasmodium with her saliva. Then the parasites enter the red blood
cells, where they multiply.
Grade 9 Biology
131
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
infective stages of parasite
cell division produces thousands
invade mosquito's salivary glands
of immature malarial parasites
6-12 days
infected mosquito
takes blood meal
male and female gametes of parasite
fuse in mosquito's stomach
infective stages
of parasite enter
bloodstream and
then liver cells
24 hours
liver
mosquito takes
infected blood meal
parasites leave liver cells
and enter red blood cells
maturation and production of parasite's
48-72 hours
male and female sex cells (gametes)
Figure 5.11. Life cycle of malaria
The life cycle of Plasmodium. Plasmodium has two hosts which
are human and mosquito. The reproduction of plasmodium taken
place in both hosts, sexual reproduction in mosquito and asexual
preproduction in human
Prevention and control of malaria
There are three main ways to control malaria:
Reducing the population of mosquitoes. This can be done by
removing sources of water in which they can breed. Sometimes,
it is possible to use Biological controls like fish which feeds on
the larva of the mosquito. In addition using insecticide to kill
Activity 5.22: Individual /
mosquito is another way to reduce the number of mosquito.
Home work
Avoiding mosquitoes bite: This can be done by sleeping under a
Construct the table that
mosquito net, or using insect repellant.
shows the cause, method of
transmission, and prevention
Using anti-malarial drugs such as Artemisinin combination
and control methods for
therapy ( ACT) or Quartem and chloroquine to treat infected
infectious diseases like
people. However, in many parts of the world Plasmodium has
Ameba, Giardia,. Typhoid
evolved resistance to some of these drugs. Chloroquine resistance
fever.
for plasmodium falciparum is widespread in parts of South
America, Africa; newer drugs such as mefloquine are used in
these areas.
132
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Corona virus large family of viruses belongs to family coronaviridae
which cause diseases in mammals and birds. This virus has extracellular
covering structure called lipid envelop. The virus also has club shaped
spikes proteins on the outer surface of the virus.
The viral envelope is made up of a lipid bilayer membrane (M),
envelope (E) and spike proteins(S). The E and M protein are the
structural proteins that combined with the lipid bilayer to shape
the viral envelope and maintain its size. S proteins are needed for
interaction with the host cells.
Spike Glycoprotein (S)
M-Protein
Hemagglutinin-esterase dimer(HE)
Envelope
RNA and N Protine
E-Protrin
Figure 5.12 Structure of COVID-19
While SARS had occurred in 2003 in China, MERS occurred in
Middle East countries in 2012. COVID-19 virus (previously called
novel coronavirus) is a new strain of a coronavirus that first emerged
in China in December1, 2019. The first case of pneumonia outbreak
was reported in Wuhan, China. On 31 December 2019, the outbreak
was traced to a novel strain of coronavirus that was given the name
SARS-COV-2 by the international committee on Taxonomy of
Key Terms
Viruses.SARS-CoV-2 may have originated in an animal and changed
"coronavirus" : is de-
(mutated) so it could cause illness in humans. In March 2020, the
rived from
Latin
World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 as a
corona , meaning "crown"
pandemic. The disease caused by SARS-COV-2 known as coronavirus
or "wreath", itself a borrow-
disease 2019 (COVID-19).
ing from Greek
Incubation period: is a
Most people infected with the COVID-19 experience mild to
period from the time of
exposure or entrance of
moderate respiratory illness and recover without requiring special
infectious agent up to the
treatment. Older people and those with underlying medical problems
time of the appearance of
like cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, and
signs or symptoms of the
cancer are more likely to develop serious illness.
disease.
Grade 9 Biology
133
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Activity 5.23: Think- pair-
share
Discuss with a friend next to
you and share your idea with
the other classmate. What is
pandemic?
Fig. 5. 13 Pandemic of COVID-19
How does the coronavirus spread?
The COVID-19 virus spreads primarily through the droplets and virus
particles released into the air when an infected person breathes, talks,
laughs, sings coughs or sneezes. When many people are gathered and
if there is poor ventilation, these droplets can be inhaled or land in the
mouth, nose or eyes of a person close. It can also spread, if a person
touches a surface with the virus on it and then touches his or her
mouth, nose or eyes.
What are the symptoms of COVID-19
COVID-19 symptoms can be very mild to severe. Even some people
have no symptoms. The most common symptoms are fever, cough,
and tiredness, shortness of breath, muscle aches, chills, sore throat,
headache, chest pain, and loss of taste or smell. This list is not all
inclusive. These symptoms may appear two to fourteen days after
exposure.
How is COVID-19 diagnosed?
COVID-19 is diagnosed or tested by taking fluid sample from nose
or mouth and testing it through a laboratory test. Laboratory testing
is important because some people with the coronavirus do not have
symptoms at all.
Prevention and control of COVID-19
There are many steps you can take to prevent yourselves from getting
the COVID-19 virus and spreading it to others.
Follow important precautions or instructions:
keep at least 6 feet (2 meters) of distance between
134
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
yourself and people outside your household.
avoid crowds and indoor places that have poor ventilation.
wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 sec-
onds, or use an alcohol based hand sanitizer that contains at least
60% alcohol.
wear a mask in public places, especially when social distancing is
difficult.
cover your mouth and nose with your elbow or a tissue when
you cough or sneeze.
Throw away the used tissue. Wash your hands rightaway.
avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth
clean and disinfect surfaces you often touch on a daily basis.
Vaccine: currently there are different type's vaccines produced by
different countries. Examples of these vaccines are AstraZeneca's
AZD1222 BioNTech's BNT162 etc. Currently, large number of people
in different country including Ethiopia receives these vaccines.
COVID THE
Counge
COVID
Vaccine
EXCHE
Figure 5.15. Vaccine for corona
If you are suspect COVID-19 or if you are ill withCOVID-19 take the
following precautions to avoid spreading the COVID-19 virus:
stay home from school and public areas, except to get medical
care.
avoid public transportation, taxis and ride-sharing if possible.
wear a face mask around other people.
isolate yourself as much as possible from others in your home.
use a separate bedroom and bathroom if possible.
avoid sharing dishes, glasses, bedding and other household
items.
Grade 9 Biology
135
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
5.8. 2 Non-infectious diseases
These are disease caused by malnutrition, chemical effect, inherited
or genetic factor etc. These diseases are not caused by disease causing
organisms. Some of the non-infectious diseases that you have learnt
previously in this chapter are:
diseases caused by malnutrition like Kwashiorkor, Scurvy, night
blindness marasmus etc.,
disease caused by cigarette smoke like lung cancer , Chronic
bronchitis etc.
In addition there are other examples of sickle cell anemia, cancer,
allergies, diabetes, podoconiosis, etc.
Tobacco use, physical inactivity, the harmful use of alcohol and
unhealthy diets are all increase the risk of dying from non-
infectious diseases.
Unhealthy diets and a lack of physical activity may show up in
people as raised blood pressure, increased blood glucose, elevated
blood lipids and obesity. These can lead to cardiovascular disease,
the leading non infectious disease in terms of premature deaths.
Detection, screening and treatment of non-infectious diseases , as
well as palliative care, are key components of the response to non-
infectious diseases.
5.9 Renowned Nutritionists in Ethiopia
Nutritionists are researchers or scientists who study nutrition.
Activity 5.24: Home work /Individual assignment
Using Internet and books as a source of information write a
paragraph on known nutritionists In Ethiopia.
136
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Unit review
Nutrition is the process of taking in food and converting into energy and other vital nutrients required
for life. The important function of food in living things: Growth, repair, energy, Replacement of
damaged tissues, Protect from diseases.
Nutrients are important chemical substances in food. These important nutrients are:
Carbohydrates: are one type of nutrients which provide energy for the human body. One gram of
carbohydrate can provide 16 kJ of energy
Protein: Proteins are nutrients used for growth of the body and build a new cell when it is damaged.
It is made up of amino acid composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. One gram of protein
can provide 17 kJ of energy
Lipids (Fats and oil) another nutrient which provide energy, composed of carbon, hydrogen oxygen.
One gram of lipid can provide 37 kJ of energy
Vitamins: are nutrients organic substances which are essential in small quantities for human body.
Minerals: Minerals are inorganic substances which are essential in small quantities
Water: Major composition of body fluid
Fiber: help to prevent constipation and keep the colon healthy.
The diet which contains all of the nutrients in the correct amount and proportion is called a balanced
diet.
A deficiency disease occurs when a person does not have enough amount of one particular nutrient
and suffers health problems as a result. Examples of deficiency diseases are kwashiorkor, marasmus,
anemia, rickets and scurvy etc. Malnutrition is caused by under nutrition.
Obesity is overweight which is caused as a result of an imbalance between the energy in human body
and the energy he or she released.
Substance abuse is using of legal or illegal drugs/ substances in the wrong way or in the excess amount.
The three important substances found in cigarette are: tar, carbon monoxide and nicotine.
Tar is a black sticky substance found in cigarette produce chronic bronchitis and lung cancer Carbon
monoxide is a poisonous gas found in cigarette which can produce heart disease and stroke.
Alcohol gets distributed throughout the body by the help of blood circulation. It is absorbed by liver
cells and broken down by liver enzymes, Therefore its concentration in the blood decreases gradually.
Khat is bushy plant whose leaves are chewed for its stimulant effect. The scientific name of this plant is
known as Catha edulis plant which is grown in southern Arabia and Eastern Africa, including Ethiopia,
Somalia, and Kenya.
A disease is an illness or disorder of the body or mind that leads to poor health; each disease is associated
with a set of signs and symptoms.
Infectious diseases are diseases that are caused by causative agent organism.
Non-infectious diseases are not caused by pathogens. They are inherited or genetic diseases and others
are deficiency diseases.
Grade 9 Biology
137
Unit 4: Reproduction
Review Questions
I. Choose the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which of the following nutrient provide more energy?
a. Protein b. Carbohydrate
c. Lipids
d. Vitamins
2. Which of the following is not belong to deficiency diseases?
a. Kwashiorkor b. Diabetes
c. Marasmus d. Scurv
3. Which of the following diet is composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen?
a. Carbohydrate b. Lipids
c. Protein
d. all
4. Which of the following minerals are used to synthesize the hemoglobin of red blood cells?
a. Iodine
b. Calcium
c. Iron
d. Phosphorus
5. Which of the following group of people needs high amount of balanced diet?
a. Athletes
b. Pregnant women c. Children
d. All
6. Which of the following is not the result of obesity?
a. heart disease b. high blood pressure c. diabetes
d. Marasmus
7. Substance abuse is
a. using legal drugs in the wrong way
b. using illegal drugs/ in the wrong way
c. using legal or illegal drugs for medical purpose
d. a and b
8. What are the chemicals found in tobacco?
a. Carbon monoxide
b. Nicotine
c. Tar
d. All
9. What type of drug is alcohol?
a. Depressant
b. Stimulant
c. Activator
d. all
10. What is the stimulant or psychoactive component found in cannabis
a. Tetrahydrocannabinol b. Cathinone
c. Nicotein
d. Tar
II. Fill in the blank space with appropriate words
1. Tuberculosis is caused by the bacterium called
2. Deficiency disease caused by the shortage of vitamin D is
III. Answer the following questions
1. Discuss the feeding habits that may lead to obesity.
2. List the components of a balanced diet and give a good source of food for each.
3. Explain the modes of transmission of infectious diseases.
4. What are the three substances which are banned from use during sport competition?
138
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Sections
Learning competencies
6.1 Ecology
Define ecological terms
6.1.1 Definitions of common
Explain the biotic and abiotic components of an ecosystem
ecological terms
Describe the ecological levels
6.1.2 Biotic and abiotic compo-
Explain the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
nents
Define biome
6.1.3 Ecological levels
Describe the major terrestrial and aquatic biomes
6.1.4 Ecosystems
Mention the fauna and flora of each biome
6.1.5 Biomes
Describe ecological succession
6.1.6 Ecological succession
Express love and respect to fauna and flora and their bi-
6.2 Ecological relationships
omes
Investigate how elder people in their localities care for
plants and wildlife
6.1 Ecology
6.1.1 Definitions of Common Ecological Terms
Objectives
Activity 6.1: Question and
answer
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define ecological terms
What is ecology? When you
hear the word ecology, what
do you think of? Make a list
Every day you share your environment with many organisms. These
of some of the topics you
can be as small as houseflies or mosquitoes. They can be dust mites
think you will learn about as
that you cannot even see. Larger animals include dogs, cows, and
you study about ecology.
hyenas. You need to know about your environment. The reason is
simple: your environment affects you and every other organism in it.
What is Ecology?
The branch of biology that deals with the study of the interactions
among organisms and with their environment is known as ecology.
Scientists who study ecology are called ecologists. Because our planet
has many diverse plants, animals, and environments, ecologists tend
to study smaller areas called ecosystems. An ecosystem consists of
the physical environment (abiotic factors) and all the living things
(biotic factors) within it. Animals are consumers since they cannot
Grade 9 Biology
139
Unit 6: Ecology
make their own food and must obtain their food from producers or
other consumers. Bacteria and fungi are decomposers. They eat dead
plant and animal remains and convert them into substances that can
be reused.
Each type of living thing in an ecosystem has a place in which it lives.
This is known as its habitat. The combination of the job an organism
does and the place in which it lives is called its niche. What are some
jobs that organisms do? Plants and algae trap the energy in sunlight and
produce their own food. Because of this, they are known as producers.
Animals are consumers; bacteria and fungi are decomposers.
Self Assessment 6.1
1. Describe what animals
Ecologists use both qualitative and quantitative research. They
share your surrounding?
gather qualitative information by observing organisms and their
2. What do ecologists
environment. They gather quantitative data by making measurements
study?
and doing experiments. Ecologists study organisms both in the
laboratory and in the field where they live.
6.1.2. Biotic and abiotic components
Activity 6.2: Discussion
Objectives
Discuss the various abiotic
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
and biotic factors that
explain the biotic and abiotic components of an ecosystem
influence the distribution
discuss the effects of biotic and abiotic factors on the
of organisms in their
distributions of species
environment. Enumerate
at list five abiotic and biotic
factors you knew.
Abiotic Factors
Abiotic factors are non-living components of the ecosystem that
influence the distributions of organisms in their environment.
Examples of abiotic factors include: energy, light, temperature, water,
nutrients, salinity, etc.
All organisms require a usable source of energy to live. Solar
energy from sunlight, captured by chlorophyll during the process of
photosynthesis, powers most ecosystems. Lack of sunlight is rarely the
most important factor limiting plant growth for terrestrial ecosystems,
although shading by trees does create intense competition for light
among plants growing on forest floors. In many aquatic environments,
however, light cannot penetrate beyond certain depths. As a result,
most photosynthesis in a body of water occurs near the surface.
Surprisingly, life also thrives in environments that are completely
dark. These ecosystems are powered by bacteria that derive energy
from the oxidation of inorganic chemicals such as hydrogen sulfide.
Bacteria with similar metabolic talents support communities of caved
dwelling organisms.
140
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Temperature is an important abiotic factor because of its effect
on metabolism. Few organisms can maintain a sufficiently active
metabolism at temperatures close to 0°C (32°F), and temperatures
above 45°C (113°F) destroy the enzymes of most organisms (Fig.6.1).
Most organisms function best within a specific range of environmental
temperatures.
Water is essential to all life. Aquatic organisms are surrounded by
water, but they face problems of water balance if their own solute
concentration does not match that of their surroundings. For
terrestrial organisms, the primary threat is drying out in the air. Many
land animals have watertight coverings that reduce water loss, such
as reptilian scales. Most plants have waxy coatings on their leaves and
other aerial parts.
The distribution and abundance of photosynthetic organisms,
including plants, algae, and photosynthetic bacteria, depend on the
availability of inorganic nutrients such as compounds of nitrogen
and phosphorus. Plants obtain these nutrients from the soil. Soil
structure, pH, and nutrient content often play major roles in
determining the distribution of plants. In many aquatic ecosystems,
low levels of nitrogen and phosphorus limit the growth of algae and
photosynthetic bacteria.
Several abiotic factors are important in aquatic, but not terrestrial,
ecosystems. While terrestrial organisms have a plentiful supply of
oxygen from the air, aquatic organisms must depend on oxygen
dissolved in water. This is a critical factor for many species of fish.
Cold, fast-moving water has higher oxygen content than warm or
stagnant water. Salinity (saltiness), currents, and tides also play a
role in many aquatic ecosystems.
Some abiotic factors affect terrestrial, but not aquatic, ecosystems. For
example, wind is often an important factor on land. Wind increases
an organism's rate of water loss by evaporation. The resulting increase
in evaporative cooling can be advantageous on a hot summer day, but
it can cause dangerous wind chill in the winter. In some ecosystems,
frequent occurrences of natural disturbances such as storms or fire
play a role in the distribution of organisms.
Grade 9 Biology
141
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.3: Field
observation
Make a field visit in your
village or school compound
Soil
Water
take note on the various
abiotic factors (e.g.,
temperature, water, pH,
salinity etc.). Materials
Temprature
Atmospher
required include notebook,
pencil, plastic bags, pH
meter, thermometer, pot,
wind
Sunlight
and hygrometer.
Figure 6.1. Common abiotic factors of territorial and aquatic biome
Activity 6.4: Field
Biotic Factors
observation
Biotic factors are the living components of the ecosystem that influence
Make a field visit in your
the distributions of organisms in their environment. Often, the ability
village or school compound
take note on the effects
of a species to survive and reproduce is reduced by its interactions
various biotic factors that
with other species, such as predators (organisms that kill their prey)
affect the distribution of
or herbivores (organisms that eat plants or algae). Herbivores could
organisms (e.g., predators,
affect the distribution of a food species. In addition to predation and
herbivores, parasite,
herbivory, the presence or absence of pollinators, food resources,
decomposers, competing
parasites, pathogens, and competing organisms can act as a biotic
organisms etc.).
limitation on species distribution. Such biotic limitations are common
Alternatively, ask an
in nature (Fig.6.2).
ecologist or a biologist
in your village how the
distribution of herbivores/
predators affect the
Biotic Factors
distribution of food species.
Producers
Consumers
Decomposers
Materials required include
notebook, pencil, binocular
and meter.
Self Assessment 6.2
1. Why is solar energy
K
such an important factor
for most ecosystems?
2. Which abiotic factor
is more important
for aquatic organisms
Figure 6.2 Common biotic factors of territorial and aquatic biomes
compared to terrestrial
ones? Explain.
142
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Ecological levels
Objectives
Activity 6.5: Jigsaw
groups
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
What are ecological levels?
describe the ecological levels
Summarize the properties of
the different ecological levels
and present the results to
Ecologists study individual organisms. They study relationships among
your classmates.
organisms of the same species and connections among organisms
of different species. They also study the effects of abiotic factors on
species that live together. To make it easier to examine all of these
biotic and abiotic interactions, ecologists have organized the living
world into levels. The levels are the organism by itself, populations,
communities, ecosystems and biosphere (Fig.6.3). The traditional
ecological investigation usually starts at the level of the individual.
Individual
Population
Community
Ecosystem
Biome
Biosphere
Activity 6.6: Field
Figure 6.3 Ecological levels
observation
What is a population?
Make a field excursion to
the nearest national park
A population is a group of interbreeding organisms that are members
or sanctuary and study the
of the same species living in the same area at the same time. Members
population of plants or
of the same population may compete with each other for food, water,
animals. Ask an ecologist
mates, or other resources. Some species have adaptations that reduce
or a wildlife biologist in a
park/zoo about properties
competition within a population. For instance, frogs have a life cycle
of population of plants and
in which the young tadpoles and adult frogs look very different and
animals. Materials required
have different diets. Tadpoles eat algae and adult frogs eat insects;
include notebook, pencil,
therefore, they are not competing with each other for food.
binocular, and meter.
Grade 9 Biology
143
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.7: Sharing
observations and
What is a biological community?
reflections
A biological community consists of the different species within an
Make a field excursion to
area, typically a three-dimensional space, and the interactions within
the nearest national park,
and among these species. Examples of interactions include predation,
wildlife reserve, forest or
parasitism, herbivory, competition, and pollination. In a biological
sanctuary and study the
properties of biological
community, changes in one population may cause changes in other
community. Ask an ecologist
populations. For instance, if the number of mouse-eating birds (e.g.,
or a wildlife biologist in the
hawks) in a community increases slightly, the number of mice in that
park/zoo about properties
community will decrease slightly. In a healthy forest community, there
of biological community.
are many populations that depend on each other. These might include
Materials required includes
birds eating insects, mushrooms growing from decaying leaves or
notebook, pencil binocular,
bark. While these populations are connected to each other, they are
meter.
all affected by abiotic factors. These relationships between different
populations and their surroundings create an ecosystem.
Self Assessment 6.3
Attention
A variety of methods can be used to sample populations to determine
1. How do the young
their size and density. For immobile organisms such as plants, or for
tadpoles and adult frogs
very small and slow-moving organisms, a quadrat may be used. A
reduce competition for
quadrat is a way of marking off square areas within a habitat, either
food?
by staking out an area with sticks and string, or by the use of a wood,
2. Write the characteristic
plastic, or metal square placed on the ground. After setting the quadrats,
features of a biological
ecologists then count the number of individuals that lie within their
community
boundaries. The number and size of quadrat samples depends on the
type of organisms under study and other factors, including the density
of the organism. This ensures that enough individuals of the species
are counted to get an accurate sample that correlates with the habitat,
including areas not sampled.
6.1.4. Ecosystems
Activity 6.8: Inquiring and
Objectives
researching
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
What are ecosystems? Make
explain the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
a discussion on the concept
of ecosystem and write the
properties of an ecosystem.
The community of organisms in a habitat, plus the non-living part
of the environment (e.g., air, water, soil, light, etc.) makes up an
ecosystem. A lake is an ecosystem, which consists of the plant and
animal communities mentioned above, and the water, minerals,
dissolved oxygen, soil and sunlight on which they depend. An
ecosystem is self-supporting. In a woodland ecosystem, the plants
absorb light and rainwater for photosynthesis; the animals feed on
the plants and on each other. The dead remains of animals and plants,
acted upon by fungi and bacteria, return nutrients to the soil.
144
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Lakes and ponds are clear examples of ecosystems. Sunlight, water
Activity 6.9: Sharing
and minerals allow the plants to grow and support animal life. The
observations and
recycling of materials from the dead organisms maintains the supply
reflections
of nutrients. So, a population of carp forms part of the animal
Make a field excursion to
community living in a habitat called a lake. The communities in this
the nearest terrestrial and
habitat, together with their watery environment, make up a self-
or aquatic ecosystem and
supporting ecosystem. A carp is a secondary consumer at the top
study the how the different
components of ecosystem
of a food chain, where it is in competition with other species of fish
interact. Ask an ecologist or
for food and with other carp for food and mates. The whole of that
biologist about components
part of the Earth's surface which contains living organisms (called the
of ecosystem. Materials
biosphere) may be regarded as one vast ecosystem. No new material
required includes notebook,
(in significant amounts) enters the Earth's ecosystem from space and
pencil, etc.
there is no significant loss of materials. The whole system depends on
a constant input of energy from the Sun and recycling of the chemical
Self Assessment 6.4
elements.
1. What is a habitat?
Types of ecosystems
2. What is an ecosystem
made of?
An ecosystem is made of all of the different populations in a biological
community and the community's abiotic factors. There are two major
3. An ecosystem is self-
kinds of ecosystems-terrestrial and aquatic. Terrestrial ecosystems
supporting. Explain.
are those located on land. Examples include forests, fields, and a
4. Name four examples of
rotting log. Aquatic ecosystems are found in both freshwater and salt
ecosystems.
water. Freshwater ecosystems include ponds, lakes, and streams.
5. What is the biosphere?
Oceans are a type of salt-water (marine) ecosystem.
6.1.5 Biomes
Objectives
Activity 6.10: Reflective
discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
What are Biomes? Section
define biome
6.1.5 presents how the
describe the major terrestrial and aquatic biomes
abiotic factors you learned
mention the fauna and flora of each biome
about in the previous section
express love and respect to fauna and flora and their biomes
are largely responsible
for the distribution of
life on Earth. Discuss the
A biome is a major terrestrial or aquatic life zone characterized by
characteristic features of the
vegetation type in terrestrial biomes and the physical environment in
typical terrestrial or aquatic
aquatic biomes. In this section, we will briefly survey the terrestrial
biomes in your locality.
biomes, followed by the aquatic biomes.
Terrestrial Biomes
Terrestrial biomes vary greatly. For example, at the North Pole, the
weather is very cold and there are no plants. As you move south,
the weather gets warmer and there is a change in the size, number,
and kinds of plants that cover the ground. As you continue south,
the temperatures rise and you encounter forests. Still farther south
Grade 9 Biology
145
Unit 6: Ecology
are grasslands and deserts, with high summer temperatures and
little rainfall. Near the equator, you find abundant growth and much
rainfall.
What are the tropical rain forests?
Tropical rain forests of evergreen broad-leaf trees form between
latitudes 10° north and south in equatorial Africa, the East Indies,
Southeast Asia, South America, and Central America. Rain that falls
throughout the year sums to an annual total of 130 to 200 centimetres.
Regular rains, combined with an average temperature of 25°C (77°F)
and little variation in day length, allow photosynthesis to continue
year-round.
Plants are vertically layered, and competition for light is intense
(Fig.6.4). Broad-leaf evergreen trees are dominant in tropical rain
forests. Tropical forests are home to millions of animal species. In
fact, animal diversity is higher in tropical forests than in any other
terrestrial biome. The animal species includes amphibians, birds and
reptiles, mammals and arthropods. Deforestation is an ongoing threat
to tropical rain forests. Tropical forests are located in developing
countries with fast-growing human populations who look to the
forest as a source of lumber, fuel, and potential agricultural land.
Deforestation in any region leaves fewer trees to remove carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere.
Figure 6.4 Picture Tropical forest
What is a desert?
Deserts receive an average of less than 10 centimetres of rain per year.
Maximum air temperature in hot deserts may exceed 50°C while
146
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
in cold deserts air temperature may fall below -30°C. They cover
about one-fifth of Earth's land surface and many are located at about
30°north and south latitude. Examples of desert biome include Chile's
Atacama Desert and China's Gobi desert. Lack of rainfall keeps the
humidity in deserts low. With little water vapor to block the sun's rays,
intense sunlight reaches and heats the ground. At night, the lack of
insulating water vapour in the air allows the temperature to fall fast.
The plants include succulents such as cacti or euphorbs, deeply
rooted shrubs, and herbs that grow during the infrequent moist
periods (Fig.6.5). Desert plant adaptations include tolerance of heat
and desiccation, water storage, and reduced leaf surface area. The
desert fauna include snakes and lizards, scorpions, ants, beetles,
migratory and resident birds, and seed-eating rodents. Many species
are nocturnal. Water conservation is a common adaptation with
some species surviving solely on water obtained from breaking down
carbohydrates in seeds. Urbanization and conversion to irrigated
agriculture has reduced the natural biodiversity of some deserts.
Figure 6.5 Desert biome
What are Savannas?
The Savanna biome occurs in equatorial and sub-equatorial regions.
Savannas lie between the tropical forests and hot deserts of Africa,
India, and Australia. Africa's savannas are famous for their abundant
wildlife. The precipitation averages 30-50 cm per year while the dry
season can last up to eight or nine months. The temperature is warm
year-round, averaging 24-29°C.
The biome is characterized by scattered trees found at different
densities. Fires are common in the dry season, and the dominant
Grade 9 Biology
147
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.11: Sharing
plant species are fire-adapted and tolerant of seasonal drought.
observations and
Grasses and small non-woody plants make are common. These plants
reflections
grow rapidly in response to seasonal rains and are tolerant of grazing
Read books and/or search
by large mammals and other herbivores (Fig.6.6) Herbivores include
in the int Make a field
giraffes, zebras, elephants, a variety of antelopes, and immense herds
excursion to the nearest
of wildebeests. Lions and hyenas are carnivores that eat the grazers.
savanna biome and study the
characteristic features. Ask
During seasonal droughts, grazing mammals often migrate to parts
an ecologist or a biologist
of the savanna with more forage and scattered watering holes. The
about the plants and
animal species in savanna
earliest humans may have lived in savannas. Fires set by humans may
biome. Materials required
help maintain this biome, though overly frequent fires reduce tree
include notebook, pencil,
regeneration by killing the seedlings and saplings. Cattle ranching
plastic bags, pH meter, and
and over-hunting have led to declines in large-mammal populations.
thermometer. ernet for
the scientific and the local
names common Ethiopian
plants and animals species.
Present your report to your
classmates.
Figure 6.6. Savanna biome
What are temperate grasslands?
Temperate grasslands are warm in summer, but cold in winter. Annual
rainfall is 25 to100 centimeters, with rains throughout the year. Grass
roots extend profusely through the thick topsoil and help hold it in
place, preventing erosion by the constant winds. North America's
grasslands are shortgrass and tallgrass prairies. During the 1930s,
much of the shortgrass prairie of the American Great Plains was
plowed to grow wheat. Tallgrass prairie has somewhat richer topsoil
and slightly more frequent rainfall than shortgrass prairie. Nearly all
tallgrass prairie has now been converted to cropland. The Tallgrass
Prairie National Preserve was created in 1996 to protect the little that
remains. North America's prairies once supported enormous herds of
elk, pronghorn antelope, and bison that were prey to wolves (Fig.6.7).
Today, these predators and prey are absent from most of their former
range.
148
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Figure 6.7. Grassland biome
What are Boreal Forests?
The boreal forest, also known as taiga or coniferous forest, is found
south of the Arctic Circle and across most of Canada, Alaska, Russia,
and northern Europe. This biome has cold, dry winters and short,
cool, wet summers. The annual precipitation is from 40 cm to 100 cm
and usually takes the form of snow. Little evaporation occurs because
of the cold temperatures.
The long and cold winters in the boreal forest have led to the
predominance of cold-tolerant cone-bearing (coniferous) plants.
These are evergreen coniferous trees like pines and spruce which
retain their needle-shaped leaves year-round (Figure 6.8). This
benefits evergreen trees, which grow faster than deciduous trees in
the boreal forest. In addition, soils in boreal forest regions tend to be
acidic with little available nitrogen. Plant species diversity is less than
that seen in temperate forests and tropical wet forests.
Figure 6.8. Northern Coniferous Forest biome
Grade 9 Biology
149
Unit 6: Ecology
What is the temperate broad-leaf forest?
Temperate broad-leaf forest is found mainly at mid-latitudes in the
Northern Hemisphere, with smaller areas in Chile, South Africa,
Australia, and New Zealand. The precipitation can average from
about 70 to over 200 cm annually. In winter temperatures average 0°C
while in summers, with temperatures up to 35°C, are hot and humid.
The dominant plants are deciduous trees, which drop their leaves
before winter, when low temperatures would reduce photosynthesis
and make water uptake from frozen soil difficult(Fig.6.9).Many
mammals hibernate in winter, while many bird species migrate to
warmer climates.
Temperate broad-leaf forest has been heavily settled on all continents.
Logging and land clearing for agriculture and urban development
cleared virtually all the original deciduous forests in North America.
However, owing to their capacity for recovery, these forests are
returning over much of their former range.
Figure 6.9 Temperate Broad-leaf Forest biome
What are the tundras?
Cover expansive areas of the Arctic, amounting to 20% of Earth's land
surface. The precipitation averages from 20 to 60 cm annually in arctic
tundra but may exceed 100 cm in alpine tundra. Winters are cold,
with averages in some areas below -30°C while summer temperatures
generally average less than 10°C. High winds and low temperatures
produce similar plant communities, called alpine tundra, on very
high mountaintops at all latitudes, including the tropics.
The vegetation of tundra is mostly herbaceous, consisting of a mixture
of mosses, grasses, and forbs, along with some dwarf shrubs and trees
and lichens. A permanently frozen layer of soil called permafrost
150
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
restricts the growth of plant roots (Figure 6.10) Large grazing musk
oxen are resident, while caribou and reindeer are migratory. Predators
include bears, wolves, and foxes. Many bird species migrate to the
tundra for summer nesting. The major human impact are mineral
and oil extraction.
Figure 6.10 Tundra biome
Self Assessment 6.5
Match the terms at column A with description with the most suitable
descriptions a column B.
A
B
1.
African grassland with trees
A.
Desert
2.
North American grassland
B.
Tundra
3.
Low-Growing plants at
C.
Tropical rain forest
high latitudes or elevations
4.
The dominant plants are deciduous trees
D.
Prairie
5.
At latitudes 30° north and south
E.
Savanna
6.
Broadleaf forest near equator
F.
Temperate broad
leaf Forest
7.
Conifers dominate
G.
Boreal Forest
Grade 9 Biology
151
Unit 6: Ecology
Aquatic biomes
Aquatic biomes, which occupy roughly 75% of Earth's surface, are
determined by their salinity and other physical factors. Freshwater
biomes (lakes, streams and rivers, and wetlands) typically have salt
concentrations of less than 1%. The salt concentrations of marine
biomes (oceans, intertidal zones, and coral reefs) are generally
around 3% (Fig.6.11). Aquatic biomes are classified into freshwater
and marine.
Intertidal zone
Neritic
zone
Oceanic zone
Littoral
-0
zone
Limnetic
zone
200 m
Photic
zone
Continental
shelf
Photic
Pelagic
zone
zone
Benthic
Pelagic
zone
Benthic
Aphotic
zone
zone
zone
Aphotic
zone
2000-
6000 m
Abyssal
zone
A
B
Figure. 6.11 Zonations of marine (A) and freshwater (B) biomes
What are the lakes?
Key Terms
Standing bodies of water range from ponds a few square meters in
area to lakes covering thousands of square kilometres. The salinity,
Aphotic zone: There is
oxygen concentration, and nutrient content differ greatly among lakes
little light penetration
and can vary with season (Fig. 6. 12).
Photic zone: zone
Rooted and floating aquatic plants in lakes live close to shore. Here,
of sufficient light for
sunlight penetrates all the way to the lake bottom; aquatic plants and
photosynthesis
algae that attach to the bottom are the primary producers. Also a
Pelagic zone: The photic
variety of phytoplankton, including cyanobacteria and zooplankton
and aphotic zones together
live in the open water zone of a lake. Fishes live in all zones with
sufficient oxygen. Runoff from fertilized land and dumping of wastes
Abyssal zone: the part
lead to nutrient enrichment, which can produce large numbers of
of the ocean 2000-6000
algae (an algal "bloom") oxygen depletion, and fish kills.
m below the surface
152
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.12: Sharing
observations and reflec-
tions
Make a field excursion to
the nearest lakes biome
and study the characteristic
features. Ask an ecologist
or a biologist about the
plants and animal species
and the major human
impacts. Materials required
include notebook, pencil,
Figure 6.12 Lakes biome
plastic bags, pH meter, and
thermometer.
What are the wetlands?
Alternatively, you could
make a discussion on the
Wetlands are environments in which the soil is either permanently
spread of invasive species
or periodically saturated with water. Wetlands are different from lakes
such as water hyacinth/
because wetlands are shallow bodies of water. There are several types
Emboch (Eichhornia
of wetlands including marshes, swamps, bogs, mudflats, and salt
crassipes) and the impacts
marshes.
caused on freshwater
ecosystems (e.g., lake
Because of high organic production by plants and decomposition
Tana) and propose possible
by microbes and other organisms, both the water and the soils are
solutions.
periodic low in dissolved oxygen. Wetlands have a high capacity to
filter dissolved nutrients and chemical pollutants (Fig.6.13) Wetlands
are among the most productive biomes on Earth.
Woody plants dominate the vegetation of swamps, while bogs are
dominated by sphagnum mosses. Wetlands are home to a diverse
community of invertebrates, birds, and many other organisms.
Wetlands help purify water and reduce peak flooding. Draining and
filling have destroyed up to 90% of wetlands in Europe.
Figure 6.13 Wetlands biome
What are streams and rivers?
The most prominent physical characteristic of streams and rivers is the
Grade 9 Biology
153
Unit 6: Ecology
speed and volume of their flow. Headwater streams are generally cold,
clear, swift, and turbulent. Farther downstream, where numerous
tributaries may have joined, forming a river, the water is generally
warmer and more turbid because of suspended sediment (Fig.6.14).
The salt and nutrient content of streams and rivers increases from the
headwaters to the mouth. Headwaters are generally rich in oxygen.
A great diversity of fishes and invertebrates inhabit unpolluted rivers
and streams. Municipal, agricultural, and industrial pollution degrade
water quality and kill aquatic organisms. Damming and flood control
impair the natural functioning of stream and river ecosystems and
threaten migratory species such as salmon.
Figure 6. 14 Streams and Rivers biome
Self Assessment 6.6
What are estuaries?
1. What are the major
physical and chemical
An estuary is a transition area between river and sea. Seawater flows
factors that affect the
up the estuary channel during a rising tide and flows back down during
distributions of plants
the falling tide. Often, higher-density seawater occupies the bottom
estuaries ecosystem?
of the channel and mixes little with the lower-density river water at
2. Discuss the major
the surface (Fig.6.15). Salinity varies spatially within estuaries, from
human impacts in
nearly that of fresh water to that of seawater. Nutrients from the river
the estuaries and the
make estuaries, like wetlands, among the most productive biomes.
solutions
Saltmarsh grasses and algae, including phytoplankton, are the major
producers in estuaries. Estuaries support an abundance of worms,
3. Why are planktons
important?
oysters, crabs, and many fish species that humans consume. Many
marine invertebrates and fishes use estuaries as a breeding ground or
4. Discuss the major
migrate through them to freshwater habitats upstream. Estuaries are
human impacts in
also crucial feeding areas for waterfowl and some marine mammals.
Streams and Rivers.
Filling, dredging, and pollution from upstream have disrupted
5. Discuss some of the
estuaries worldwide.
limiting factors for
organisms in lakes.
154
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Figure 6. 15. Estuaries biome
6.1.6 Ecological succession
Objectives
Activity 6.13: Collaborative
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
learning groups
describe ecological succession
This section 6.1.6 presents
the phenomenon of
ecological succession.
What is an ecological succession?
Discuss the concept of
ecological succession. Tell
Changes in the composition of terrestrial communities are most
the difference between
apparent after a severe disturbance, such as a volcanic eruption or
primary and secondary
a glacier, strips away all the existing vegetation. The disturbed area
successions. How might the
early species facilitate the
may be colonized by a variety of species, which are gradually replaced
arrival of other species?
by other species, which are in turn replaced by still other species-a
process called ecological succession. When this process begins in a
virtually lifeless area, such as on a new volcanic island or on the rubble
(moraine) left by a retreating glacier, it is called primary succession
(Fig. 6.16).
PIONEER SPECIES
INTERMEDIATE SPECIES
CLIMAX COMMUNITY
BARE
LICHENS
SMALL ANNUAL
GRASSES AND
GRASSES, SHRUBS AND
SHADE-TOLERANT
ROCK
PLANTS
PERENNIALS
SHADE-INTOLERANT
TREES SUCH AS
AND LICHENS
TREES SUCH AS PINES
OAK AND HICKORY
HUNDREDS OF YEARS
Figure 6.16 Primary successions
Grade 9 Biology
155
Unit 6: Ecology
During primary succession, the only life-forms initially present
Key Terms
are often prokaryotes and protists. Lichens and mosses, which
Climax community: a stable
grow from windblown spores, are commonly the first macroscopic
community that undergoes
photosynthesizers to colonize such areas. Soil develops gradually as
little or no change
rocks weather and organic matter accumulates from the decomposed
Limiting factor: any
remains of the early colonizers. Once soil is present, the lichens
biotic or abiotic factor
and mosses are usually overgrown by grasses, shrubs, and trees
that restricts the existence,
that sprout from seeds blown in from nearby areas or carried in by
numbers, reproduction, or
animals. Eventually, an area is colonized by plants that become the
distribution of organisms
community's dominant form of vegetation (climax community).
Pioneer species: The first
Producing such a community through primary succession may take
organisms to grow on a new
patch of cooled, hardened
hundreds or thousands of years. Early-arriving species and later-
lava
arriving ones may be linked by one of three key processes- facilitating
Primary succession:
inhibiting and tolerating.
colonization of barren land
In contrast to primary succession, secondary succession involves the
by pioneer organisms
re-colonization of an area after a major disturbance has removed most
Secondary succession:
but not all of the organisms in a community (Fig. 6. 17). Following the
sequence of changes that
disturbance, the area may return to something like its original state.
take place after a community
is disrupted by natural
For instance, in a forested area that has been cleared for farming and
disasters or human actions
later abandoned, the earliest plants to recolonize are often herbaceous
Succession: the orderly,
species that grow from windblown or animal-borne seeds. If the area
natural changes that take
has not been burned or heavily grazed, woody shrubs may in time
place in the communities of
replace most of the herbaceous species, and forest trees may eventually
an ecosystem
replace most of the shrubs.
Tolerance: the ability of
an organism to withstand
PIONEER SPECIES
INTERMEDIATE SPECIES
CLIMAX COMMUNITY
changes in biotic and abiotic
environm
GRASSES AND
GRASSES, SHRUBS, PINES
MATURE OAK AND
FIRE
PERENNIALS
YOUNG OAK AND HICKORY
HICKORY FOREST
0 YEARS
1-2YEARS
3-4 YEARS
5-150 YEARS
150+ YEARS
Figure 6.17. Secondary succession
Self Assessment 6.7
1. After a flood destroys everything growing on the land, which
type of succession is most likely?
2. What is succession?
156
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
6.2. Ecological relationships
Objectives
Activity 6.14: Reflective
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discussion
discuss ecological relationships in ecosystems
Interactions between species
can help, harm, or have no
effect on the individuals
involved. Discuss the
Some key relationships in the life of an organism are its interactions
various types of inter-specific
with individuals of other species in the community. These inter-
relationships. Explain how
specific interactions include competition, predation, herbivory,
competition, predation, and
parasitism, mutualism, and commensalism.
mutualism differ in their
effects on members of two
Competition(-/-)
interacting species.
What is a competition?
Competition is interaction that occurs when individuals of
different/same species each use a resource that limits the survival
and reproduction of both individuals (Fig. 6.18). Weeds growing in
a garden compete with garden plants for soil nutrients and water.
Predators compete for prey such as hares. In contrast, some resources,
such as oxygen, are rarely in short supply on land; most terrestrial
species use this resource but do not usually compete for it.
Figure 6. 18 Intra-specific competitions between two lions
Predation (+/-)
What is predation?
Predation is interaction in which an individual of one species,
the predator, kills and eats an individual of the other species, the
prey(Fig.6.19). For example, a rotifer (a tiny aquatic animal that is
smaller than many unicellular protists) that kills a protist by eating it
can also be considered a predator. Because eating and avoiding being
eaten are prerequisites to reproductive success, the adaptations of
both predators and prey tend to be refined through natural selection.
Grade 9 Biology
157
Unit 6: Ecology
Figure 6. 19 Predation
Herbivory (+/-)
What is herbivory?
Herbivory is an exploitative interaction in which an organism-
an herbivore-eats parts of a plant or alga, thereby harming it but
usually not killing it. Examples of herbivores include cattle, sheep,
giraffe and goat. However, most herbivores are invertebrates, such as
grasshoppers, caterpillars, and beetles (Fig. 6.20). Herbivores have
many specialized adaptations. Many herbivorous insects have sensors
on their feet that enable them to distinguish between plants based on
their toxicity or nutritional value. Goats also use their sense of smell
to examine plants, rejecting some and eating others. Other herbivores
also have specialized teeth or digestive systems adapted for processing
vegetation.
Figure 6. 20. Herbivory
158
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Parasitism (+/-)
What is parasitism?
Parasitism is exploitative interaction in which one organism, the
parasite, derives its nourishment from another organism, its host,
which is harmed in the process (Fig.6.21). Endoparasites such as
parasitic roundworms live and feed inside their host. An ectoparasite
such as a tick feeds while attached to a host's external surface. Many
parasites have complex life cycles involving multiple hosts. The
blood fluke, which currently infects approximately 200 million
people around the world, requires two hosts at different times in its
development: humans and freshwater snails.
Figure 6. 21. Parasitism
Mutualism (+/+)
What are the effects of participating in a mutualism?
Mutualism is interaction that benefits individuals of both of the
interacting species. Mutualisms are common in nature, including
cellulose digestion by microorganisms in the digestive systems of
termites and ruminant mammals, animals that pollinate flowers or
disperse seeds, nutrient exchange between fungi and plant roots
in mycorrhizae, and photosynthesis by unicellular algae in corals
(Fig.6.22). In some mutualisms, such as the acacia-ant, each of the
interacting individuals depends on the other for their survival and
reproduction. Both partners in a mutualism incur costs as well
as benefits. In mycorrhizae, for example, the plant often transfers
carbohydrates to the fungus, while the fungus transfers limiting
nutrients, such as phosphorus, to the plant.
Figure 6. 22. Mutualism
Grade 9 Biology
159
Unit 6: Ecology
Commensalism(+/0).
Activity 6.15: Field
observation
What is a commensalism?
Make a field excursion
Commensalism is interaction that neither benefits the individuals
around your village or
of one of the interacting species but neither harms nor helps the
school compound and
individuals of the other species. For instance, cattle egrets feed on
investigate how the various
insects flushed out of the grass by grazing bison, cattle, horses, and
ecological interactions
other herbivores (Fig. 6. 23). Because the birds increase their feeding
influence the distribution
organisms. Describe the
rates when following the herbivores, they clearly benefit from the
type of ecological iteration
association. Much of the time, the herbivores are not affected by the
(e.g., competition, predation,
birds. At times, however, the herbivores too may derive some benefit;
herbivory, parasitism,
for example, the birds may remove and eat ticks and other ectoparasites
mutualism, commensalism
from the herbivores' skin, or they may warn the herbivores of a
etc.). Materials required
predator's approach.
includes notebook, pencil.
Cattle egrets eat insects
Epiphytes get sunkight and
Birds trail army ants to eat
disturbed by grazing
nutrients by living on the
fleeing insects.
livestock.
host plant.
Figure 6. 23. Commensalism
Self Assessment 6.8
Match the following
A
B
1.
Two species interact and both benefit by the interaction
a.
Interspecific competition
2.
Two species interact and one benefits while the other is
b.
Commensalism
neither helped nor harmed
3.
One free-living species feeds on another and usually kills it
c.
Mutualism
4.
Two species access a resource
d.
Predation
5.
One species feeds on another that it lives on or in
e.
Parasitism
160
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Unit review
Ecology is the study of relationships organisms to one another and to their surrounding
environment.
Abiotic factors are the non-living components of the ecosystem that influence the distributions
of organisms in their environment. Examples of abiotic factors includes: energy, light,
temperature, water, nutrients, salinity, etc.
Most organisms are adapted to live within a relatively narrow range of temperatures and will
not thrive if temperatures are colder or warmer. The growing season of plants, for example, is
importantly influenced by temperature.
All organisms require water. On land, water is often scarce, so patterns of rainfall have a major
influence on life.
Almost all ecosystems rely on energy captured by photosynthesis; the availability of sunlight
influences the amount of life an ecosystem can support, particularly below the surface in marine
communities.
The physical consistency, pH, and mineral composition of the soil often severely limit terrestrial
plant growth, particularly the availability of nitrogen and phosphorus.
Biotic factors are the living components (e.g., predators, herbivores, parasite, decomposers,
competing organisms etc.) of the ecosystem that influence the distributions of organisms in
their environment.
A population is a group of organisms that belongs to the same species.
A community is all of the populations of different species in an ecosystem.
An ecosystem is a unit containing the community of organisms and their environment,
interacting together.
The Earth has terrestrial biomes and aquatic biomes.
Biomes located on land are called terrestrial biomes. Biomes located in bodies of water are
known as aquatic biomes.
Major terrestrial biomes are tropical forests, savannas, deserts, temperate grasslands, temperate
forests, boreal forests, and tundra. The same biome can occur in different geographic locations
with similar climates.
Temperature and precipitation, and variations in both, are key abiotic factors that shape the
composition of animal and plant communities in terrestrial biomes.
A biome is a large group of ecosystems that shares the same type of climax community. All the
ecosystems within the biome have similar climates and organisms.
Grade 9 Biology
161
Unit 6: Ecology
Aquatic biomes, which occupy roughly 75% of Earth's surface, are determined by their salinity
and other physical factors. Freshwater biomes (lakes, streams and rivers, and wetlands) typically
have salt concentrations of less than 1%. The salt concentrations of marine biomes (oceans,
intertidal zones, and coral reefs) are generally around 3%.
succession: the orderly, natural changes that take place in the communities.
When this process begins in a virtually lifeless area, such as on a new volcanic island or on the
rubble (moraine) left by a retreating glacier, it is called primary succession.
In contrast to primary succession, secondary succession involves the re-colonization of an
area after a major disturbance has removed most but not all of the organisms in a community.
Some key relationships in the life of an organism are its interactions with individuals of other
species in the community. These inter-specific interactions include competition, predation,
herbivory, parasitism, mutualism, and commensalism.
162
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Review Questions
Part One (Matching Items): Match items under column A with the appropriate item under column B.
Column 1
Column 2
1
millipedes, centipedes, insects, slugs, and earthworms
A
Abiotic factor
under a log
2
a tick on a cat
B
Parasitism
3
an owl eating a mouse
C
Biological community
4
rain
D
Habitat
5
a rain forest
E
Predator-prey relationship
6
cold temperatures and high winds that prevent tree
F
Limiting factors
growth in mountain areas
7
the first organisms to grow on a new patch of cooled,
G
Secondary succession
hardened lava
8
ability of mosquitoes to survive in very different condi-
H
Tolerance
tions all over the world
9
an old forest that has not had any fire damage in over
I
Pioneer species
200 years
10
weeds and wildflowers beginning to grow in a field after J
Climax community
a corn crop is harvested
Part Two. Fill in the blanks below with the following words to make correct statements about the
material you read in this section: desert, tundra, plankton, photic zone, rain forest.
1.
The
biome is a home to more types of life than any other biome.
2.
The
is so cold that very little life exists there.
3.
The driest biome is
the biome.
4.
The part of the marine biome that is shallow enough for sunlight to penetrate is called the
5.
The base of the entire marine biome food chain is formed by
Part Three. Critical thinking questions
1.
Explain the difference between intra-specific competition ad inter specific competition.
2.
What are common animal species in savanna biome?
3.
Discuss the major human impact to the savanna biome and the solutions
4.
Desert animals have various adaptive mechanisms to cope up with adverse ecological
conditions. Describe some of the adaptive mechanisms.
5.
Do we have tropical forests in Ethiopia? If we have indicate the locations/places in our country?
Grade 9 Biology
163
Unit 6: Ecology
6. Carefully look at the diagrams given below and answer the questions that follow
i. Which diagram stands for biotic factors of an ecosystem?
ii. Which diagram stands for abiotic factors of an ecosystem?
iii. Which diagram represents: an ecosystem, community, individual, and population levels of
ecology.
B
C
D
E
F
7.
Carefully look at the diagram given below and identify the various ecological levels (individual,
population, community, ecosystem and biosphere levels)
C
B
F
A
D
164
Grade 9 Biology