
Physics
Physics
Student Textbook
Physics
Grade 11
Student Textbook
Student Textbook
Grade 11
E=Mc2
ISBN 978-99990-0-034-5
9
"789999"000345">
Grade 11
&gouc+ ather
FDRE Ministry of Education
MUNC
FDRE Ministry of Education
2023
2023
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
Take Good Care of This
Textbook
This textbook is the property of your school. Take good
care not to damage or lose it. Here are 10 ideas that help
you take care of the book.
*
Physics
1. Cover the book with protective materials.
2. Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
think
E:MC?
3. Be sure your hands are clean when you use the book.
4. Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5. Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6. Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
on
7. Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8. Pack the book carefully when you place it in your school
bag.
9. Handle the book with care when passing it to another
person.
10. When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its
back. Open only a few pages at a time. Press lightly
along the bound edge as you turn the pages. This will
keep the cover in good condition.
Physics
Student Textbook
Grade
11
Writers
Fresenay Misker (MSc)
Zinaye Tefera (MSc)
Editors
Hagos Tsegaye (Ph.D), Content Editor
Abharam Zelalem (Ph.D), Curriculum Editor
Daniel Taye (Ph.D), Language Editor
Illustrator
Getasew Admasu
Designer
Geda Hoka (M.A.)
Evaluator
Girmaye Defar (MSc)
Dessie Melese (MSc)
Zafu Abraha (MSc)
+90 UC+
FLACAT
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
HAWASSA UPA UNIVERSITY
FDRE, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
HAWASSA UNIVERSITY
First Published in 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia,
Ministry of Education, under the General Education Quality Improvement
Program for Equity (GEQIP-E) supported by the World Bank, UK's Department
for International Development/DFID-now merged with the Foreign, Common
wealth and Development Office/FCDO, Finland Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, the Royal Norwegian Embassy, United Nations Children's Fund/
UNICEF), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and Danish
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through a Multi Donor Trust Fund.
©2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of
Education. All rights reserved. The moral rights of the author have been
asserted. No part of this textbook reproduced, copied in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means including electronic,
mechanical, magnetic, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without
the prior written permission of the Ministry of Education or licensing in
accordance with the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia as expressed
in the Federal Negarit Gazeta, Proclamation No. 410/2004 - Copyright
and Neighboring Rights Protection.
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank many individuals, groups, and
other bodies involved - directly or indirectly - in publishing this Textbook.
Special thanks are due to Hawassa University for their huge contribution
to the development of this textbook in collaboration with Addis Ababa
University, Bahir Dar University, and Jimma University.
Copyrighted materials used by permission of their owners. If you are
the owner of copyrighted material not cited or improperly cited, please
contact the Ministry of Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (P.O.Box 1367),
Addis Ababa Ethiopia.
Printed by:
GRAVITY GROUP IND LLC
13th Industrial Area,
Sharjah, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Under Ministry of Education Contract no. MOE/GEQIP-E/LICB/G-01/23
ISBN: 978-99990-0-034-5
CONTENTS
Unit
1
1
1. Physics and Human Society
1
1.1 Importance of Physics to Society
1
1.2 Physics Communities and Their Roles
3
1.3 Making of Physics Knowledge
5
1.4 The Mission of Physics and Career Awareness
7
1.5 Current Status of Physics
10
Unit
2
17
2. Vectors
17
2.1 Vectors and Types of Vectors
17
2.2 Graphical Method of Addition of Vectors in Two Dimensions (2-D)
21
2.3 Algebraic Method of addition of vectors in Two Dimensions (2-D)
26
2.4 Product of Vectors
39
Unit
3
47
3. motion in one and two dimensions
47
3.1 Uniformly Accelerated Motion in 1D
48
3.2 Equations of Uniformly Accelerated Motion in 1D
54
3.3 Graphical Representation of Uniformly accelerated Motion in 1 D
60
3.4 Vertical Motion
70
3.5 Uniform Circular Motion
79
Unit
4
95
4. Dynamics
95
4.1 The Concept of Force and Newton's Laws of motion
96
4.2 Frictional Force
112
4.3 The First Condition of Equilibrium
126
4.4 Work, Energy and Power
128
4.5 Conservation of mechanical energy
144
4.6 Impulse and Linear Momentum
148
Unit 5
175
5. Heat Conduction and Calorimetry
175
5.1 The Concept of Heat
176
5.2 Heat transfer mechanisms
179
5.3 Heat Capacity and Specific Heat Capacity
183
5.4 Thermal expansion
186
5.5 Change of phase
196
5.6 Calorimetry
203
Unit 6
217
6. Electrostatics and Electric Circuit
217
6.1 Coulomb's Law
218
6.2 Electric Fields
225
6.3 Electric Potential
232
6.4 Electric Current, Resistance and ohm's law
240
6.6 Capacitors and Capacitance
270
6.7 Electric Circuits in Our Surroundings
280
Unit
7
287
7. Nuclear Physics
287
7.1 The nucleus
288
7.2 Radioactivity
299
7.3 Use of nuclear radiation
312
7.4 Nuclear Reaction and Energy Production
316
7.5 Safety Rules Against Hazards of Nuclear Radiation
323
UNIT 1
PHYSICS AND HUMAN SOCIETY
Introduction
Physics is a major driver of innovation and economic growth in world-wide in sectors
ranging from energy, security, advanced manufacturing, data extraction and analysis to
healt care and diagnostic, finance and communication for the benefit of society.
In this chapter you will understand the career opportunity of physics, the contribution of
physics for every individuals and economic growth of a country. In addition to see you
will practice the method of gaining knowledge, It is important in providing fundamental
knowledge for understanding nature, in providing applied knowledge for the development
of technology.
After completing this unit, student will be able to:
get acquainted with the impact of physics on society.
familiarize themselves with physics communities and their roles.
develop basic understanding of the making of physics knowledge.
familiarize themselves with basic principles and applications of physics in
various disciplines.
acquire basic knowledge and understandings of nature and appreciate it.
update themselves with the current status of physics.
1.1 Importance of Physics to Society
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the importance of physics to society
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the benefit of physics for society?
2. What are the technologies directly related to physics that benefit society?
1
Physics
Student Text Book
Physics is one of the sciences that generate fundamental knowledge needed for the
future technological advances that will continue to drive the economic engines of the
world. Physics contributes to the technological infrastructure and provides trained
personnel needed to take advantage of scientific advances and discoveries. Physics
is an important element in the education of chemists, engineers and computer
scientists, as well as practitioners of the other physical and biomedical sciences. The
future of any country and its contribution to the global economy is linked to its
ability to develop its human capital in the field of science and engineering. Through
its scientists and engineers, it is able to develop infrastructure for trade and industry.
Physics extends and enhances our understanding of other disciplines, such as
the earth, agricultural, chemical, biological, and environmental sciences, plus
astrophysics and cosmology subjects of substantial importance to all peoples of the
world.
Physics can play an important role in developing strategies to combat climate change,
in the development of cleaner energies, and in the development of technological
advancements.
Physics improves our quality of life by providing the basic understanding necessary
for developing new instrumentation and techniques for medical applications, such as
computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography,
ultrasonic imaging, and laser surgery.
Physics and technology must work together to resolve the need for new technologies
that will decrease the damage to our planet, for strategies to ensure that the people
of developing countries have the tools to progress, the need for solutions to deadly
diseases that remain a threat, and the need for solutions to the increasing demands
we place on our resources before they depleted. The role of physics in our modern
world is more important than in any other time in history.
Society's reliance on technology represents the importance of physics in daily life.
Many aspects of modern society would not have been possible without the important
scientific discoveries made in the past. These discoveries became the foundation
on which current technologies were developed. Discoveries such as magnetism,
electricity, conductors and others made modern conveniences, such as television,
computers, phones and other business and home technologies possible. Modern
means of transportation, such as aircraft and telecommunications, have drawn
people across the world closer together all relying on concepts in physics.
2
Grade 11
The Influence of Physics on Society
Explain the important of physics in transport, electronics and health.
Simple mechanical devices such as pulleys and levers, as well as complex modern
machines like quantum computers and nuclear reactors, would be impossible to
create without the use of physics.
Physics lies at the root of many inventions that have had an enormous impact on the
everyday life of the average person. There are numerous ordinary objects that people
use regularly that rely on the science of physics to function, including semiconductors,
lasers, X-rays, GPS devices, radio transmitters and bar code scanners.
Transportation vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes and space shuttles could not
be constructed without the help of physics experts. Physics is also useful for military
purposes, informing the design of weapons. Many of the scientists responsible for
inventing the atomic bomb were physicists, and today physicists are involved in the
creation of nuclear weapons.
?
Activity 1.1
1. Explain the influence of physics on society in transport, health, economy,
technology, etc
1.2 Physics Communities and Their Roles
At the end of this section you will be able to:
discuss about physics communities and their roles.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the purpose of establishment of physics communities? What are the
technologies directly related to physics that benefit society?
Physics communities are an organized group of persons associated together
for scientific purposes. This organization is established at the level of national,
continent as well as worldwide based on their aims. For example, Ethiopian Physical
Society (EPS) was established by Ethiopian physics professionals to enhance physics
research and education, thereby contributing its share to the overall development of
the country.
3
Physics
Student Text Book
Objectives of EPS
To promote physics education and research in the country;
To organize and coordinate various conferences on physics education
and exchange of scientific information;
To popularize physics in order to make students develop interest in
physics;
To promote active participation of Ethiopian physicists and the general
public in the design and implementation of the physics curriculum;
To create a means for disseminating scientific information; etc.
Ethiopian Physics Society in North America (EPSNA) was established to
promoting physics education and research among Ethiopians in Ethiopia and North
America. The mission of EPSNA was to promote and support the education and
training of Ethiopian Physics professionals by donating educational materials, field
equipment, computing facilities, provide scholarship. etc.
African association of physics students (aaps) is Student-run educational
association. It comprises students and recent graduates who are interested in physics.
The purpose of the organization is to encourage physics students in their scientific
and professional work in an African and an international context as well as to promote
relations between physics students from all over the world. The 'aaps' is committed
to supplement physics education with an international scientific experience and
it is affiliated with Physics societies and departments. 'aaps' is open to all persons
committed to physics.
Group Work
Make a group and do a project work on searching for detailed information about
Ethiopian space science society (ESSS) mission, strategies, goals etc and present
in the class.
?
Activity 1.2
What are the benefits of physics communities?
4
Grade 11
1.3 Making of Physics Knowledge
At the end of this section you will be able to:
discuss how scientific knowledge is constructed.
discuss the roles that the learning of physics plays to the individual
intellectual satisfaction.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the process of gaining knowledge in physics?
One way of understanding the concept of knowledge is to look at the different ways
in which we acquire knowledge. There are two types of knowledge from two entirely
different sources. First, there is knowledge through experience: seeing something,
hearing about something, feeling something called a posteriori knowledge. Second,
there is knowledge that does not come from experience, but perhaps instead is
intuitively supplied from reason itself, such as logical and mathematical truths called
a priori knowledge.
Experimental knowledge
Experiential (a posteriori) knowledge is of many types. Four of them are sensory
perception, introspection, memory, and testimony: these are the four main ways of
acquiring knowledge through experience.
I. Sensory perception: sensory perception is perhaps the dominant source of
experiential knowledge, it immediately raises a critical question. We gather
knowledge by seeing, touching hearing, etc.
II. Introspection: Introspection is like a sixth sense that looks into the most
intimate parts of our minds, which allows us to inspect how we are feeling and
how our thoughts are operating. If I go to a doctor complaining of an aching
back, she'll ask me to describe my pain. Through introspection I then might
report, "Well, it's a sharp pain that starts right here and stops right here."
The doctor herself cannot directly experience what I do and must rely on my
introspective description.
III. Memory: a memory is like a recording device that captures events that one
can experience more or less in the order that they occur.
IV. Testimony: Testimonies from written sources are usually more reliable than
5
Physics
Student Text Book
oral sources, but much depends on the integrity of the author, publisher, and
the methods of fact-gathering.
Non-Experiential Knowledge
Turning next to non-experiential (a priori) knowledge, this source of information
is more difficult to describe. We presumably gain access to this knowledge through
rational insight. Usual examples of non-experiential knowledge are mathematics
and logic. Take, for example, 2+2=4. Indeed, I might learn from experience that two
apples plus two more apples will give me four apples.
Scientific method
The scientific method is an ordered series of steps to acquire knowledge based on
experimental evidence.
Examples of Scientific Method in Physics
Observation: the water boiled at a lower temperature when I was visiting the
mountains than when I was in other cities with low altitudes.
Question: Why does my water boil at different temperatures?
Research: In a chemistry book, you read that the boiling temperature of a substance
depends on the strength of the molecular bonds of a substance and
the pressure.
Hypothesis: Since the atmospheric pressure changes with altitude, the boiling
temperature of water is different at different altitudes.
Experiment: You decide to heat water at different altitudes and record the boiling
temperature.
Analysis:
Altitude (m)
Boiling point of water (C°)
O
100
150
99.5
305
99
610
98
1524
95
6
Grade 11
Your measurements indicate that as the height increases,
I
the boiling temperature of water decreases!
Question
Conclusion: The original hypothesis was correct. The
Analysis
boiling temperature of water decreases
approximately by one degree Celsius.
/
Hypothesis
?
Activity 1.3
1. Give some examples in the process of scientific method of knowledge gain.
1.4 The Mission of Physics and Career Awareness
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the job opportunities concerning to physics.
?
Brainstorming
1.
Mansion lists of career related to physics.
The diversity of physics careers is an appealing aspect for prospective students.
Physics graduates have skills that are in high demand in diverse sectors. These include
skills relating to numeracy, problem-solving, data analysis and the communication
of complex ideas, as well as a wider understanding of how the world works on a
scientific and human level.
Typical careers in physics
Whether you want to explore space, time,
PHYSICS:
matter or the many other intriguing elements
of the physical world, a physics degree can
OL
MULTIPLE
do wonders for your career path. While
CATEWAY
many physics graduates go on to work within
Geophysics
Science
Engineering
L
CAREER
graphy
Biophy
research roles, these are spread across many
YOUR
Chemistry
Meteorology
Authorize
OPTIONS
different industries - including education,
Medicine
Education
Actuarial
automotive and aerospace industries,
Patent
Science
defense, public sector, healthcare, energy,
materials, technology, computing and IT.
Figure 1: Career opportunities
7
Physics
Student Text Book
Physics careers in space and astrono-
my
As an astronomer, your job would be to
study the universe, collecting data from
global satellites and spacecraft and operating
radio and optical telescopes. Other tasks
within this sector include investigation and
research of new materials and technologies,
measuring performance of existing materials
Figure 2: A person observing
and technologies, and problem-solving at
stars through telescope
the design stage.
Physics careers in healthcare
Physics careers in the healthcare sector are
numerous. Medical physics overlaps significantly
with biomedical engineering, and physicists
work alongside biomedical engineers to create,
review and maintain medical technologies and
equipment. Although cardiology and neurology
are areas reserved for those with an additional
medical degree, physicists are regularly employed
within areas such as radiology, radiation oncology
Figure 3: observing CT scan
and nuclear medicine, in order to test and approve
result
the latest technologies and equipment.
Physics careers in engineering
The engineering sector provides many
careers in physics, particularly within
manufacturing and technology-based
roles. Physics graduates are often
tasked with improving and developing
products and manufacturing processes,
and benefit from a large range of
potential employers spanning multiple
industries such as medicine, energy,
transport, defense, space exploration and
Figure 4: engineers working place
telecommunications
8
Grade 11
Physics careers in energy
Whether we're talking about renewable or
non-renewable energy, there are plenty of
careers in physics within the energy sector.
Alongside the rise of renewable energy, oil
and gas companies remain big players in the
energy market and are major employers for
physics graduates. Oneb area of focus is
Figure 5: wind energy production
on extracting fossil fuel reserves in the most
site
efficient way possible, using knowledge of
the Earth's characteristics and the newest
technologies.
With the prospect of fossil fuels running out, energy companies are also branching
out into renewable alternatives such as wind and solar energy and are investing
heavily in research and development in this area, offering much career potential.
Your role here could be to collaborate with other scientists and engineers to develop
efficient and functional energy systems which harness the Earth's energy sustainably
and cost-effectively.
Physics careers in technology
A broad arena of continual growth and
innovation, the technology sector is a constant
source of new opportunities, challenges and
career paths. For physics graduates, there is
scope to work alongside other specialists in
order to develop new ideas and products. Fields
with particularly high demand for research and
development workers from various backgrounds
Figure 6: application of
include relatively young fields such as robotics,
machines
nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Technology careers in physics may be based in
public or private-sector research centers. Many
opportunities for graduates are available within
large technology companies, as these businesses
are keen to attract innovative and talented
researchers from around the world.
9
Physics
Student Text Book
Geophysics and meteorology careers
Those who study physics are also prime
candidates for environmental careers, thanks
to their scientific understanding of the ways in
which the Earth functions. While geophysicists
are more concerned with the prediction of
natural disasters, meteorologists focus on areas
such as daily weather forecasting, as well as
Figure 7: Metrological report
researching the long-term effects of climate
change.
Research scientist careers
The main reason to study physics is to help
you gain more in-depth, specialized knowledge
to prepare you to work effectively in a specific
field. Potential areas of specialization include
astrophysics, particle physics, biotechnology,
nanotechnology, meteorology, aerospace
dynamics, atomic and laser physics,
atmospheric, oceanic and planetary physics and
climate science.
Figure 8: Data scientist
The mission of physics is to advance science, engineering, and innovation
throughout the world for the benefit of all and serving Society.
1.5 Current Status of Physics
At the end of this section you will be able to:
list at least five recent new developments or discoveries in the fields of
physics.
?
Brainstorming
Go to library and websites search out what are the newest discoveries in physics
Nowadays, there is a lot of discoveries and inventions in different parts of the world.
Among this some are listed below.
10
Grade 11
Major recent discoveries in Physics
Physics is the study of physical world from the smallest particles to the gigantic
structures known to human; galaxies, clusters of galaxies and black holes. Some of
them are,
Discovery of Exoplanets:
Exoplanet or extrasolar planet is a planet
outside our solar system. As of 1 October
2022, there are 5,197 confirmed exoplanets
in 3,833 planetary systems.
Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz won the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 2019.
Figure 9: Artist's impressio of exo
planet orbiting two stars
https://www.nobelprize.org/interactive-visualisations-the-discovery-of-exoplanets/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel Mayor
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Didier Queloz
Black hole:
Black hole is a region of space-time the gravity
of it so strong that nothing can escape. Not
even, light (electromagnetic wave).
Roger Penrose, Reinhard Genze. And
Andrea M. Ghez have won the Nobel Prize in
2020 for discovery black hole formation and
discovery of supermassive compact object
(Black hole) at the center of our Milky-way
Galaxy.
Figure 10: Image of Black Hole
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Penrose,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinhard_Genzel
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrea_M_Ghez
11
Physics
Student Text Book
Quantum cryptography:
Cryptography is a way of sending information and messages in secret. Think of your
bank account number, password etc. without the secret encryption all these are at
risk. Quantum cryptography is an application of quantum physics that enhances the
security of the information exchange at higher level.
High energy physics (Particle Accelerators)
July 4, 2012 EC, CERN scientists (thousands of them doing collaboratively from
almost every corner of the world) discovered a particle called Higgs Boson. It is a
subatomic particle like photons, protons and electrons but at the very basic level.
The experiment took 60 years to prove the existence of this particle.
Gravitational wave (Large scale structures)
Even more years have taken to prove Albert Einstein's theory of gravity that says
gravity is a wave that travels with the speed of light 3.00 X 10⁸ m /s. The hypothesis
was formulated in 1916, it was proved to be right in 2016 by LIGO, it took again
thousands of scientists' collaborative work. They use Laser Interferometer as shown
in the figure.
Global warming:
Global warming is an increase in earth's temperature and its impact on earth's climate.
Climate is a long-term weather variability
averaged over many years and decades. Some
of the variables are temperature, humidity,
atmospheric pressure and wind. According to
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
a typical variability average year is 30.
Syukuro Manabe and Klaus Hasselmann
have won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2021
for modeling earth's climate and reliability
predicting global warming. The following
Figure 11: gravitational wave
images from Wikipedia illustrate the effect of
experimenting areas
global warming.
12
Grade 11
Temperature change in the last 50 years
Global surface temperature
°C
°F
Observed temperature
3.0
1.5
Change from pre-industrial
Human and natural drivers
Natural drivers only
2.0
1.0
0.5
1.0
0
0
2011-2021 average VS 1956-1976 baseline
-0.5
-1.0
-1.0 -0.5 -0.2 +0.2 +0.5 +1.0 +2.0 +4.0 °C
Year 1850
1900
1950
2000 2020
-1.8 -0.9 -0.4 +0.4 +0.9 +1.8 +3.6 +7.2°F
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syukuro_
Figure 12: illustrating the effect of
Manabe
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klaus
global warming.
Hasselmann
James Webb Space Telescope (JWST)
It is an infrared telescope located between
earth and sun at a distance of 1,500,000 km
beyond Earth's orbit around the Sun. It is
operating at the temperature of (-223 °C)
important for infrared detection of the
galaxies and other large-scale structures.
Figure 13: image of JWST
13
Physics
I
Student Text Book
It will tell us about assembly of galaxies, birth
of stars and atmospheres of exoplanets and
objects in our solar system.
Figure 14: Star formation in Carina
Nebula.
Future perspectives.
Research at the forefront is very expensive (Billions of dollars), it is also needing a
collaboration of scientists from many fields. It also involves many countries.
Rich countries have huge laboratories of their own with many physicists involved.
Ethiopia as developing country must start doing physics at the highest level for its
national security and sustainable growth. the Ethiopian Science and Art Museum
inaugurated by PM Abiy Ahmed 4 October 2022 would stimulate and attract young
students towards science. It is situated in Addis Ababa.
Figure 15: Some photographs of the newly inaugurated Ethiopian Science and Art Museum.
14
Grade 11
The museum holds exhibition hall dedicated to scientific and developmental
research. It also includes several building complexes dedicated to interactive display
screens, cyber security, geographical information system (GIS), data analysis,
manufacturing, and robotics to name a few.
Figure 16: Interior of the Dome-shaped Science and Art Museum
Planetarium: Inside this dome you can seat and watch from our solar system to
stars and galaxies. It is an amazing and inspiring place for young and old alike.
?
Activity 1.4
1. Google the web or go to the library to find some information to find out what
is going on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethiopia_Museum_of_Art_and_
Science.
Questions 1.1
Explain current status of physics.
1. What do you think the future of physics looks like? Your opinions in one
paragraph or two with justification.
2. What is the significances of the two discoveries- gravitational wave, and Higgs
boson?
15
Physics
Student Text Book
UNIT SUMMARY
Physics improves our quality of life by providing the basic understanding necessary
for developing new instrumentation and techniques for medical applications,
such as computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission
tomography, ultrasonic imaging, and laser surgery.
c
Transportation vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes and space shuttles could
not be constructed without the help of physics experts.
c
Physics is also useful for military purposes, informing the design of weapons.
Many of the scientists responsible for inventing the atomic bomb were physicists,
and today physicists are involved in the creation of nuclear weapons.
Physics communities are an organized group of persons associated together
for scientific purposes. This organization is established at the level of national,
continent as well as worldwide based on their aims.
c
The scientific method is an ordered series of steps to acquire knowledge based on
experimental evidence.
C
The mission of physics is to advance science, engineering, and innovation
throughout the world for the benefit of all and serving Society.
c
Physics have a lot of job opportunities in the fields of Astronomy, healthcare,
engineering, energy, technology, meteorology, etc
c
New discoveries of Exoplanets, Black hole, Quantum cryptography, High energy
physics, Gravitational wave, Global warming, James Webb Space Telescope, etc
have been seen in recent years.
END OF UNITQUESTIONS
1. What is the importance of learning physics in your opinion?
2. What did you benefit from knowing physics at this level?
3. List at least ten technological benefits that physics has contributed for society.
4. What is the benefit of establishing physics communities?
5. Is there a physics community in your high school? If the answer is yes, what is it
helpful for?
6. What process skills should you use investigating a phenomenon?
7. What are the process skills you are using in your in investigating a phenomenon?
8. What are the career opportunities physics have?
9. At the forefront in physics research, there are many countries collaborating. Why
is that?
16
UNIT 2
VECTORS
Introduction
Many physical quantities in nature have both magnitude (size) and direction. To describe
the motion of an airplane for instance, we must state its speed and the direction of its
motion. To describe a force, we use a number to tell how big the force is and indicate its
direction of application. The principal aim of this unit is to discuss ways of describing
two dimensional 2-D vector physical quantities and the mathematical operations involving
vectors.
After completing this unit you should be able to:
familiarize themselves with basic principles of vector operations
interpret physical phenomena using the concept of vector
develop skills of using the concept of vector in solving various problems.
2.1 Vectors and Types of Vectors
After completing this section, you should be able to:
describe the difference between vector and scalar quantities.
list down the common vector quantities in our everyday life.
discuss geometric representation of vectors.
give the definitions of the different types of vectors.
?
Brainstorming
1. Why do we need to know the direction of some quantities in order to have a
complete sense of them? If a girl told you that the velocity of a delivery truck
was 50 km/h, has she fully expressed the motion of the truck?
17
Physics
Student Text Book
Some physical quantities such as mass, speed, distance, density, etc., can be expressed
completely by their magnitudes and units only. But many others that are common in
our day to day activities such as force, velocity, acceleration, displacement need both
their magnitude as well as direction for their specification.
To refresh your memory of category of vectors, the table below has some of the most
common physical quantities.
?
Activity 2.1
Categorize the quantities listed in Table 2.1 as scalars or vectors and prepare your
own list of vector and scalar quantities that are common in our daily practices.
Table 2.1 Table of physical quantities
Quantity
Scalar/vector
Quantity
Scalar/Vector
Area
Density
Distance
Weight
Pressure
Representation of vectors
In Grade 10 you have learnt that a vector can be represented graphically by an arrow.
Recall that the length of the arrow drawn to scale represents the magnitude and the
tip of the arrow represents the direction of the vector. When drawing diagrams with
vectors, we use a scale similar to those used for maps. For example, a displacement of
10 km might be represented in a diagram by a vector 1 cm long and a displacement
of 20 km by a vector 2 cm long. In a diagram for velocity vectors, a vector that is 1
cm long might represent a velocity of magnitude 5 m/s. A velocity of 40 m/s would
then be represented by a vector 8 cm long.
y
y
y units
D
0°
29.1°
90°
9 units
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.1 Representing a vector by an arrow drawn to scale. Ruler, Protractor and
Graph paper used
18
Grade 11
Illustration of the concept of vectors in practice
Typical forces for a dam
Weight
Head water
of Dam
Tail wa
Hydro power Dam
Heal
Toe
Uplift
Figure 2.2 Hydro power dam and force vectors
By researching the size and direction of all forces on a dam, engineers design a
structure that is able to resist all these forces, Figure 2.2
While rowing a boat, the person
F1
F2
pushes the water backward using
oars and the water exerts a
forward force on the boat. There
are also the weight of the boat
man rowing a Canoe boat
A Tug-of-war
and an upward force (upthrust)
(a)
(b)
exerted by the water on the boat,
Figure 2.3a.
Figure 2.3 Force vectors in action
In a tag-of-war the rope is the means to transfer forces, Figure 2.3b. The concepts of
vectors plays important role in analyzing all of the above situations
?
Activity 2.2
Ask your friend to stand at a mark in the middle of the volleyball field. Tell her to
walk through a certain distance in any direction she chooses. Use a measuring tape
to measure the distance between her starting point and the ending point. Take the
starting point as the origin of coordinates with the x axis pointing toward East and
the y axis toward North. Show the displacement of the girl graphically on a graph
paper.
Types of vectors
Parallel vectors: Vectors that are in the same direction are said to be Parallel,
Figure 2.4a.
19
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Antiparallel vectors: When vectors have opposite directions, whether their
magnitudes are the same or not, they are Antiparallel, Figure 2.4b.
Equal vectors: If two vectors representing the same quantity have the same
magnitude and the same direction, they are Equal vectors, Figure 2.4c, no
matter where they are located in space.
Collinear vectors: These are vectors that lie along the same line or parallel
lines. Two vectors are collinear if they are parallel to the same line irrespective
of their magnitudes and direction.
Co-planar vectors: Three or more vectors lying in the same plane or parallel to
the same plane are known as co-planar vectors.
Zero vector: A zero vector is a vector when the magnitude of the vector is zero
and the starting point of the vector coincides with the terminal point.
Orthogonal vectors : Vectors that are perpendicular to one another.
A unit vector: A vector which has a magnitude of unit length is called a unit
vector.
The vector-A in Figure 2.6d is not equal to vector À because its direction is
opposite to that of A. We define the Negative of a vector as a vector having the
same magnitude as the original vector but the opposite direction. The negative of
vector A is denoted as- A.
Á/B/C/₅/
À
B
(a) Parallel vectors
(b) Antiparallel vectors
Ã
À'
À
TO
(c) Equal vectors
(d) Negative of a vector B =
Figure 2.4 (a) Parallel vectors,
(b) Antiparallel vectors,
(c) Equal vectors,
(d) Negative of a vector
Example 2.1
Find the negative of each of the following vectors.
a. dosplacement vector= 60km toward North
b. Velocity vector = 100km/h towards 200 southeast.
20
Grade 11
Solution
The negative of a vector has the same magnitude as the original vector in opposite
direction.
(a) If S = 60 km, toward North, then - S = 60 km, toward South
(b) S = 100 km/h, toward 20o South of East, then - S = 100 km/h, toward 20o
North of West
Review questions 2.1
1. How do you represent a vector graphically?
2. Why do we use of scale diagram in vector drawing?
3. How does vector À differ from vector - À?
2.2 Graphical Method of Addition of Vectors in Two
Dimensions (2-D)
After completing this section, you should be able to:
define the term resultant vector.
explain the geometric method for addition and subtraction of vectors in a
plane.
apply geometric method of addition of vectors to find resultant of vectors in
two dimensions.
?
Brainstorming
1. In grade 10 physics you have studied the properties of vectors in one dimension.
Is it possible to add two vector quantities such as displacement vectors the
way we do with scalar quantities like mass? Share your answer with your
classmates.
N
W/O-E
There are two commonly used methods
B
2.0km
C
employed to determine the vector sum of
two or more vectors. The two methods that
1.2 km
ß
Resultant displacement
we will discuss in this unit are Graphical
A
method and Analytic (algebraic) method
Figure 2.5 A vector diagram with
of vector addition.
scale of a trip in a park
21
Physics
Student Text Book
In your physics lesson in grade 10 you have learnt about vectors in one dimension
(1-D). Here we are going to develop further the concept of vectors in two dimensions
(2-D) which in physics has physical representation and importance in our daily lives.
Graphical method of vector addition gives visual understanding of vectors and it is
commonly used in navigation. Figure 2.5 represents a trip that starts at point A then
to point B and ending at point C. You see that total distance traveled for the whole
trip is 1.2 km + 2 km = 3.2 km, but what is the displacement from A to C? How do
you get the resultant displacement given displacements from A to B and from B to C?
In this section we will discuss Triangle law, Parallelogram law and Polygon law of
addition of vectors.
When two or more vectors are added they must have the same units. For example,
it doesn't make sense to add a force vector carrying units of newtons, to a velocity
vector carrying units of meters per second. Scalars obey the same rule: It would
be similarly meaningless to add mass to volume or density to time intervals.
Graphical method of addition of vectors involves the use of equal vectors. As long as
its length is not changed, a vector is not altered if it is displaced parallel to itself. This
process is known as Translating a vector.
Triangle Law of Vector Addition
Suppose a particle undergoes displacement S₁ followed by a second displacement
S₂. The final result is the same as if the particle had started at the same initial point
and undergone a single displacement S.
We call displacement S the vector sum, or resultant, of displacements ASI S₁ and S₂ We
express this relationship symbolically as
S=S₁+S₂
This can be shown graphically by placing the vectors head to tail and then the arrow
drawn from the tail of the first vector to the head of the second vector represents the
resultant, Figure 2.6. This is known as Triangle Law of vector addition.
S1
S2
S,
S2
Figure 2.6 Triangle law of addition of vectors: S1 and S2 are placed head to tail.
22
Grade 11
?
Activity 2.3
1. Use graph paper, a protractor, and a ruler and apply triangle law of vector
addition to show that A+B=B+A. Use vector A of magnitude 5 units
and vector B of 9 units, and the angle between the vectors to be 60°.
Parallelogram law of vector addition
Two vectors can also be added graphically
by constructing a parallelogram using the
5₂
vectors as the sides of the parallelogram.
$
The vectors are now placed tail to tail
and the diagonal drawn from the tails of
the vectors to the opposite corner of the
Figure 2.7. Paralelogram Law of addi-
parallelogram represents the resultant,
tion of vectors: : S1 and S2 are placed
Figure 2.7.
tail to tail.
?
Activity 2.4
Discussion with your classmates
It's a common error to conclude that if C = A+B, then the magnitude C should
equal the magnitude. A plus the magnitude B. What is wrong with this conclusion?
When we need to add more than two vectors, we may start with one of the vectors
and then place the tail of the next vector to the head of the first and do the same
until all the vectors are included. The vector drawn from the tail of the first vector to
the head of the last vector represents the resultant. This is known as polygon law of
addition of vectors, Figure 2.8.
R=A+B+C+D
C
B
À
C
À
D
B
TO
TR
Figure 2.8 polygon law of vector addition
Exercise 2.1
What is the result of adding a vector to the negative of itself?
23
Physics I Student Text Book
?
Activity 2.5
How can you add individual displacement vectors to determine total displacement?
Materials
A 20 m tape measure, Field marker (or flag), Graph paper
ruler and Protractor
Procedure
Mark a point at the center of the field with a flag.
Indicate the North-South direction taking the marked point as the origin
Ask your friend to walk the following distances starting from the flag: 12
m toward North, and 16 m toward East, 10 m toward South-East.
Mark the final point and use the measuring tape to measure magnitude
of his/her displacement from the starting point.
Show your vector diagram on a graph paper
Use a scale of 1 cm for 1 m of displacement.
Use a protractor to determine the direction if displacement.
What is the magnitude and direction of the displacement?
Subtraction of Vectors
We can subtract vectors as well as add them. Recall that vector -B has the same
magnitude as B but the opposite direction. Subtracting a vector is the same as
adding a vector of the same magnitude but opposite in direction.
We define the difference A-B of two vectors and B to be the vector sum of À
and -B, Figure 2.9.
C=A-B=A+(-B)
®
A
B
C
B
A
Figure 2.9 Subtraction of vectors
24
Grade 11
Review questions 2.2
1. Which one of the vector diagrams (Figure 2.10) satisfies the vector equation
C=A+B?
B
(a)
(b)
B
(c)
B
À
C
À
C
À
C
Figure 2.10
2. Three displacement vectors A,B,C are specified by their magnitudes A = 10
cm, B = 7 cm, C=8 cm, respectively, and by their respective direction angles
(with the +x direction) of α = 53°, ß = 120°, γ = 210°. Choose a convenient
scale and use a ruler and a protractor to find the magnitude and direction of
the vector sum:
(a) R = À + B
(b) P=A-B (c) Q = A - 2B+C Q
a) the magnitude C equal to the sum of the magnitude A and magnitude B?
b) the magnitude C equal to the difference of magnitude A and magnitude B?
3. Suppose an insect lands on a sheet of graph paper at a point located 12 cm to
the right of the left edge and 8 cm above the bottom edge and walks slowly
to a point located 7 cm from the left edge and 4 cm from the bottom edge.
Choose the rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the lower left-side
corner of the paper and find the displacement vector of the insect. Use a ruler,
a graph paper and make use of graphical representation of vectors
4. What is the minimum number of vectors of equal magnitudes required to
produce a zero resultant?
25
Physics
Student Text Book
2.3 Algebraic Method of addition of vectors in Two
Dimensions (2-D)
After completing this section, you should be able to:
apply algebraic method to find the resultant of two collinear vectors, and
perpendicular vectors.
apply trigonometry to determine the direction of a resultant vector in terms of
the angle it forms with a reference direction.
compare the resultant of two given vectors as determined by way of geometric
construction and by analytic method.
resolve a vector into its components.
find the resultant of two or more vectors applying component method.
define unit vector and determine a unit vector in the direction of a given
vector.
apply the unit representation of vectors to determine the resultant of two or
more vectors.
?
Brainstorming
Do you recall the different ways in which vectors that represent similar quantities
can be added to/ subtracted from one another? Mention two ways of vector addition
based on your physics lesson in grade 10.
Adding two collinear vectors
As scalars are fully described by their magnitude, addition or subtraction of scalars
can be done by applying simple arithmetic. Vector addition, on the other hand
involves both the magnitude and direction of the vectors.
Before beginning to add vectors in two dimensions, let us review important points
about addition of vectors in one dimension.
Consider two force vectors F1 and F2 acting at a point along the same direction,
Figure 2.11a. The resultant of these vectors R has a magnitude equal to the sum of
the magnitude of each of the vectors and it is directed along the direction of any one
of the vectors, Figure 2.11b.
26
Grade 11
TW
THE
THE
F
(a)
a
Figure 2.11 Vectors in the same direction
We write the resultant vector R symbolically as
=
When force vectors F₁ and F₂ are acting in opposite directions, Figure 2.12a, their
resultant Ř will have magnitude equal to the absolute value of the difference in
magnitudes of the vectors and it is directed along the direction of the larger vector,
Figure 2.12b.
THE
F₁
THE
F2
&
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.12 Vectors in opposite directions
Exercise 2.2
The magnitudes of two vectors À and B are 13 units and 9 units, respectively.
What are the largest and smallest possible values for the magnitude of the
resultant vector R=A+B?
Example 2.2
A man rows his boat along the direction of flow of a river (downstream). If the
boat can sail in still water at 0.50 m/s, and the river flows at 0.30 m/s, what is the
resultant velocity of the boat?
Let the magnitude of velocity of the river be A and that of the boat be B.
A = 0.30 m/s
B = 0.50m/s
The resultant velocity is R=A+B
27
Physics
Student Text Book
Since both vectors are along the same direction, the magnitude of the resultant
velocity is given by:
R = A + B = 0.30 m/s + 0.50m/s.
R = 0.80 m/s.
The direction of the resultant is along the direction of the river flow.
Therefore, the resultant velocity is:
R = 0.8m/s, downstream
Exercise 2.3
If the man in Example 2.2 rows his boat upstream (in opposite direction to the
river flow), what would his resultant velocity be?
Example 2.3
Two men are pushing a block along a
horizontal surface by exerting oppositely
directed forces of magnitudes 200 N and
100 N respectively, as shown in Figure
2.13. What is the resultant force applied
on the block by the two men?
Figure 2.13 Two men pushing the block
in opposite directions
Solution:
The two men applied two different forces on the same block.
Let the magnitude of the force exerted by the man on the right be F1 = 200 N and
that of the man on the left be F2 = 100 N.
Ř = F₁+₂
The magnitude of the resultant force is
R = F 1 -F2 = 200N - 100N = 100 N
The direction of the resultant is along the direction of the 200 N (larger) force.
R = 100N, toward the right.
28
Grade 11
Adding two perpendicular vectors
The rules for addition of vectors that lie in a plane - that is, when they are in two
dimensions become more complicated than the rules for addition of vector in
one dimension. We have to use graphical method of vector addition to construct
resultant vectors, followed by trigonometry to find magnitudes and directions. To
get the resultant vector of two perpendicular vectors, A and Figure 2.14, we use
Pythagorean theorem for the magnitude of the resultant and apply trigonometry for
the direction of the resultant.
Recall
According to Pythagoras theorem applied on a
c
right angled triangle, Figure 2.14, the square of
the hypotenuse, c, is equal to the sum of squares
8
of the other two sides, a and b.
Figure 2.14 A Right-angled triangle
sin Θ = hypotenuse opposite b/c = c
a
Example 2.4
An ant, starting at a point, walked through a distance of 40 cm due South and then
50 cm due West. What is the resultant displacement of the ant from its starting
point?
Solution
Placing the tail of the vectors at the origin of coordinates, the vector diagram of
the motion is shown in Figure 2.15.
North
S₂ = 50 cm, East
East
0
$1 = 40 cm, South
S
Figure 2.15 Vector diagram of motion of the ant
29
Physics | Student Text Book
using pythagorean theorem, the magnitude of the resultant displacement is
S = S1² + S2 = /(40cm) 2 + (50cm) = /4100cm² = 64cm
Direction of the reultant displacement is shown by the angle Θ, where
tan Θ = adjacent = = 0.8, Θ = 38.6°
the resultant is $ = 64cm, 38.6° South of West
Components of a vector
In the previous sections we discussed addition of vectors by applying graphical
method (a scale diagram) and by using properties of right angled triangles. Graphical
method offers only very limited accuracy and calculations with right triangles work
only when the two vectors are perpendicular. This section introduces a simple but
general method for adding vectors known as Component Method.
In your mathematics lesson you have studied about rectangular (Cartesian)
coordinate system of axes. Consider a vector placed on the xy-plane with its tail at o,
the origin of the coordinate system, Figure 2.16.
The projection of the vector on the coordinate axes is known as component of the
vector. The projection of vector À on the X axis, Aₓ, is known as the X component
of vector À and that on the y axis, A,, is known as the y component of vector À
Components Ax and A y-, are numbers but they are not vectors. Aₓ and Ä, are the
vector components of A and in symbols
y
y
À
À
Ay
Ay
α
Θ
O
X
O
X
Ax
Ax
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.16 Vector \vec{A} in terms of its vector components Àₓ and Ä,
The x and y components of vector A (Figure 2.16a) have magnitudes of Aₓ = A COS Θ
and Ay = A sin Θ, respectively. In the arrangement shown in Figure 2.16a, both
components are positive numbers. But in a more general situations, components
may be positive or negative umbers depending on how the vector is oriented, i.e., the
angle it makes with the X axis. The process of breaking up a vector into its components
is known as resolution of a vector.
30
Grade 11
Note that: In finding the x- and y- components of a vector, we associate cosine
with the x-component and sine with the y-component, as in Figure 2.16a. This as-
sociation is due to the fact that we chose to measure the angle α with respect to the
positive x-axis. If the angle were measured with respect to the y-axis, as in Figure
2.16b, the components would be given by
Aₓ = Asin and Ay = Acos α
Key terms
Component of a vector: the projection of a vector on the coordinate axes.
Resolution of a vector: Breaking a vector into its components
Example 2.5
A force vector 1/4 of magnitude of 35 N is pushing on a box placed on the horizontal
ground as shown in Figure 2.17a. If the force makes an angle of 40° above the
negative X axis, what are the X and y components of the force?
Fπ
F,
(a)
E
Figure 2.17 A pushing force
Solution
Force F can be A placed on the xy plane as shown in Figure 2.17b. Remember that
translation of a vector does not alter the magnitude and direction of the vector.
The X component of the force is Fx = F cos 40° = 35 N x (0.766) = 26.8 N, and the
y component is Fy = -F sin 40° = -35 N X (0.643) = -22.5 N
Finding the resultant of vectors by component method
In order to determine the resultant of two or
more vectors using component method, we
resolve each of the vectors into their x and y
y
components. The X component of the resultant,
TB
Rx, will be the sum of the X components of
X
the individual vectors and the y component
of the resultant, Ry, will be the sum of the y
Figure 2.18 Vectors \vec{A} and
components of the individual vectors, Figure
\vec{B} added by Component
2.18.
Method
31
Physics
I
Student Text Book
In terms of the vector components we write
R = Rx + Rᵥ, where Rx = + Bₓ, and Ry = Äᵥ + By
The magnitude of the resultant vector will be;
Rx = Ax + Bₓ, and Ry=Ay+By (taking the signs of the components into consideration)
The direction of the resultant is given in terms of the angle it makes with the X axis.
Place Řₓ and Ry on the xy-plane and find the angle as
tan Θ = R
Attention
if both Rx and Ry are positive numbers, angle Θ is above the +X axis
if Rx is negative number and Ry is positive number, angle Θ is above
the -X axis
if both Rx and Ry are negative numbers, angle Θ is below the -x axis
if Rx is positive number and Ry is negative number, angle Θ is be-
low the +X axis
Exercise 2.4
Under what circumstances would a vector have components that are equal in
magnitude?
Exercise 2.5
A vector has an x-component of - 35 units and a y-component of 40 units.
Find the magnitude and direction of the vector considering that the positive X
direction indicates East and that the positive y direction indicates North.
Example 2.6
Consider two displacement vectors À and B of magnitudes 100 m and 200
m respectively, Figure 2.21 Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant
displacement vector.
32
Grade 11
y
y
B
À
R
30°
50°
X
Ry
Θ
X
Rx
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.19
Solution
We first resolve the vectors into their X and y components.
Using trigonometry, we get Ax = A cos 50° = 100(0.643) m = 64.3 m, and
Ay = A sin 50° = 100(0.766) m = 76.6 m
Bx x = -B cos 30° = -200 (0.866) m = - -173.2 m, and
By = B sin 30° = 200(0.50)m = 100 m
The vector components of the resultant are Rx = Àₓ + Bₓ, and Rᵥ = Ä, + By
,
where Rx = Ax + Bx = 64.3 m + (-173.2 m) = -108.9 m and Ry = =Ay + By = 76.6
m + 100 m = 176.6 m.
Then we place the components of the resultant on the xy-plane as in Figure 2.19
(b). The magnitude of the resultant is
= √(- 108.9m) 2 + (176.6m)² = 207.5m
and Θ = tan -1 176.6m 108.9m = tan -1 (1.62) = 58.3°
Therefore, Ř = 207.5m, Θ = 58.3° above the negative x axis
Exercise 2.6
Vector À has a magnitude of 30 units and points in the positive y-direction.
When vector B is added to A, the resultant vector À + B points in the
negative y-direction with a magnitude of 10 units. Find the magnitude and
direction of B.
33
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 2.7
A girl walked across a large field through the following distance in the given
order:72 m toward 32° East of North, 57 m toward 37°South of West, 18 m toward
South. Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant displacement of the girl?
Solution
The displacement vectors are placed on the xy-plane as shown in Figure 2.20.
Y
37°
57m
B
A
À
N
72m
3Z
18
C
W-O-E
32°
I
S
7
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.20 (a) The actual path the girl followed, (b) Vector diagram
Solution
The components of the displacement vectors are calculated as in Table 2.2 below.
Table 2.2
X component
y component
S₁
72 (sin 32°) m = 38.2 m
72 (cos 32°) m = 61.1 m
S₂
-57|cos 37°) m = - 45.6 m
-57 (sin37°) m = -34.2 m
S₃
O m
-18 m
Rx = S₁y + S₂y + S₃y = 8.9 m
R =
= 7.4m)² + (8.9m)² = 11.6m
and Θ = tan⁻¹ (8.9m) (7.4m) = tan⁻¹ (1.2) = 50.2° above the nagative x axis
Therefore, R = 11.6m, Θ = 50.2° N of W
Did you know?
Analytic methods of vector algebra are used routinely in mechanics, electricity, and mag-
netism. They are important mathematical tools of physics.
34
Grade 11
Exercise 2.7
A car travels 20 km due north and then 25 km in a direction 60° West of North.
Use both graphical and algebraic methods to find the magnitude and direction of
a single vector that gives the net effect of the car's trip.
Unit Vectors
As we have seen in the previous discussion we defined a unit vector as a vector of
magnitude one, with no unit. Unit vectors are used to represent the direction of
vectors in space. The symbol of unit vectors is denoted by a 'hat' (^) to distinguish it
from ordinary vectors.
In an xy-coordinate system we define a unit vector i that points in the direction of
the positive x-axis and a unit vector \hat{j} that points in the direction of the positive
y-axis, see Figure 2.21.
Y
Y
À
Aⱼⱼ
j
,,
X
X
O
i
O
i
Axi
Figure 2.21 Unit vectors on the xy-plane
Vector components of vector \vec{A} and its components are related as
Äₓ = Aₓᵢ
Ä, = Aᵥⱼ
Vector A can be written in vector equation as
=
Using the unit vectors the resultant of two vectors A and B can be expressed as
R=A+B
=
35
Physics I Student Text Book
The unit vector along the direction of a given non-zero vector is defined as the vector
divided by its magnitude.
If vector A À = Aₓᵢ + Aⱼⱼ, then the unit vector along À is
Example 2.8
Given force vector F = (12i 16ⱼ) N, what is a unit vector along F ?
solution
of
See that the magnitude of ÜFis UF = √(0.6)² + (0.8)² = 1
Example 2.9
Vector À has X and y components of 4 units and 2 units, respectively and vector
B has the corresponding components of -9 units and 3 units respectively. Find
(a) the vector components of their resultant,
(b) the magnitude and direction of their resultant.
solution
Given À = + = (4i units
The resultant
Ř = i + (Ay = (4 9) i + (2 + 3) = (-5j+5j) units
(a) The X and y components of
(b) the magniture of
R is R = + R² = 2 + 5² = 50 = 5 √2 units
As Ř is along the negative X direction and Ry is along the positive y direction, we
see that Ř is in the second quadrant and it makes angle of 45° above the negative X
axis.
36
Grade 11
Example 2.10
An unknown vector D is added to vector C = (- 4i + 5j) units and the resultant
R = C+D has X and y components of each -1 and 1 units, respectively Find the
magnitude of the unknown vector.
Solution
Given C = (- 4ᵢ + 5ⱼ), D = and Ř = (-î+j)
For Ř = C + D, we have Rx = Cₓ + Dx, - 1 = - 4+Dx, Dₓ = 3 units
Ry = C₄ + Dy, 1 = 5 + Dy, Dy = 4 units
Vector D = (3i 4)) units
Exercise 2.8
The vector sum P + Q is a unit vector along the positive X axis. If Φ = i - j,
find Q.
Exercise 2.9
If vector 0.4 i + b j j is a unit vector, then what is the value of b?
Example 2.11
Traditional Maresha
A farmer is ploughing the field using traditional Maresha (plow) pulled by two
oxen Figure 2.24a. The two animals are pulling the beam (Mofer) with a force F2
of 1200 N at angle of 40° from the horizontal and the farmer's force F1 on the
handle (Erf) is 150 N at 60° above the horizontal as shown in Figure 2.24b. Find
the resultant horizontal pulling force exerted by the farmer and the oxen on the
Maresha? At this point assume all the forces are acting at point K.
For the whole system to work the resultant downward vertical force must be
slightly greater than the upward. Explain why.
37
Physics
I
Student Text Book
60
F2
k
Mofer
Erf
Figure 2.22 (a) A farmer plowing his
(b) Schematic diagram of the Maresha
farm
Solution
The forces that are acting on the Maresha are the force exerted by the farmer on the
Erf, F1, and the pulling force on the Mofer, F2.
Both F1 and F2 have X components and the sum of these components gives the
resultant horizontal pulling force. Both F1x and F2x are along the positive X direction.
Fx = F₁ₓ + F₂x = F₁ cos Θ₁ + cos
= 150N cos 60° + 1200N cos 40°
= 75N + 919N = 994.3 N.
If the upward forces on the marseha exceed the downward focrces(which is the
sum of weight of the plow and the downward component of the force exerted on
the Erf), the maresha will be lifted above the ground and plaughing will not be
possible.
Review Questions 2.3
1. Two vectors give a resultant of magnitude 8 units when are parallel and 2
units when they are antiparallel. Determine the possible values of each of the
vectors.
2. State the condition where the vector sum of two vectors is a null vector.
3. Suppose you are in a large hall and that you mark a point on the floor and
start walking the following distances in the given order: 50 m [forward],
10 m [backward], 10 m [forward], 10 m [backward], 20 m [forward], 10 m
[backward], 40 m [forward], and 10 m [backward].
A. What is the total distance you traveled?
B. What is the magnitude and direction of your displacement from the starting
point?
4. What vector must be added to vector C of 10km, East in order to give a
resultant vector of
A. 15 km, East?
B. 15 km, West
38
Grade 11
5. A sailor boards a paddle boat and heads the boat Westward directly across a
river. The river flows South at 50 cm/s and the woman paddles the boat with
a speed of 100 cm/s.
A. Determine the resultant velocity of the boat - - both magnitude and direction.
B. How far down stream relative to the straight-across direction will woman
be when she reaches the opposite shore?
6. Given three displacement vectors B, C, and D such that
B = i + 2j) m, C = 3i 2j) m D of unknown components, determine
the magnitude and direction of D for 3B - C + D = 0
7. Given displacement vectors of $₁ and √ₛ₂ as S₁ = (3ᵢ+ 6ⱼ) m, =
S₂ = 2i - 4j) m, find a unit vector along the direction of
8. Five displacement vectors A,B,C,D and È are placed on the coordinate
axes as shown in Figure 2.23. Fill Table 2.3 with the correct values of the
components of the vectors. (Hint: A vector on either of the coordinate axis has
only one component).
y
X component
y component
B
À
B
À
37°
X
30°
C
C
53°
È
D
DI
È
Figure 2.23 The five vectors on the xy plane
2.4 Product of Vectors
After completing this section, you should be able to:
define dot product of a vector
apply the technique of dot product to solve practical problems
In the previous sections you have learnt about different techniques of finding a
resultant vector. We can also express many physical relationships by using products
of vectors. Vectors are not ordinary numbers, so we can't directly apply ordinary
multiplication to vectors.
There are two different kinds of products of vectors: Scalar (Dot) product and Vector
(Cross) product. The scalar product of two vectors yields a result that is a scalar
quantity while the vector product of two vectors yields another vector. In this section
we will discuss the scalar product of two vectors.
39
Physics
I
Student Text Book
?
Brainstorming
Do you know any physical quantity that can be
expressed as a product of two vector quantities?
Multiplying or dividing a vector by a number or scalar
A vector quantity such as a force can be multiplied by a scalar quantity (an ordinary
number). Multiplying a vector by a number gives a vector. When we multiply a
vector À by a scalar c, the result c À has a magnitude equal to |c| À (the absolute
value of c multiplied by the magnitude of vector A). If c is positive, À and c À are in
the same direction (they are parallel) but if c is negative, A and c À are in opposite
directions (they are antiparallel).
For example, if vector À is multiplied by a scalar number 2, the result, represented
by 2 A, is a vector with magnitude two times that of À pointing along the direction
of À. On the other hand, if vector À is multiplied by a scalar number -2, the result,
represented by -2A, is a vector with magnitude two times that of À pointing in
opposite direction to A, see Figure 2.24.
À
À
2À
-2A
Figure 2.26 (a) À and 2\ À are parallel (b) À and -2 À are antiparallel
Example 2.12
Displacement vector given as $ =35km, towards 6060° North of east. Find the
magnitude direction of a) 1.2 S and b) -1.2 S ?
Solution
Given $ =35km, towards 6060° North of east
a) Vector 1.2 S is a displacement with magnitude 1.2 times that of S along the
direction of S.
1.2S= 1.2 X 35=42km and =42km, 60° North of East.
b) Vector -1.2 $ a displacement vector with magnitude 1.2 times that of $
pointing opptisite to the direction S. Therefore -1.2 $ =42km, 60° South of West.
40
Grade 11
Dot product
The scalar product of two vectors is denoted by A.B. Because of this notion, the
scalar product is also called the dot product. Although À and B are vectors, the
quantity A.B is a scalar.
The dot product of vectors À and B is defined as
A.B=ABcosΘ
where Θ is the angle between the vectors, Figure 2.25 notes that the righthand side
of the equation is a number (without direction).
B
Place the vectors tail to tail
Θ
À
Figure 2.25 Vectors are placed tail to tail to form angle Θ
The angle between the vectors ranges from 0° to 180° and it is the angle formed
when vectors are joined tail to tail.
Depending on the value of the cosine of the angle between the vectors, the scalar
product A B may be positive, negative, or zero.
Key terms
Scalar (dot) product: product of vectors that yields a scalar.
Angle between vectors: the angle two vectors form when placed tail to tail
As shown in Figure 2.26a, or the magnitude of the component of B in the direction
of À , as shown in Figure 2.26b.
B
Acos Θ
B
RO
RO
A
A
B cos Θ
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.26: Alternative ways of finding the dot product of À and B
41
Physics I Student Text Book
Exercise 2.10
The dot product of À and B can be defined alternatively as the magnitude
of multiplied by the component B of in the direction of À. Find the angle
between each of the following pairs of vectors.
a) 3i - jandi - 2j
b) 3i - 2j and i - 2j
c) 3i — 2ⱼ and 4i + 6ⱼ
?
Activity 2.6
Group discussion
Apply the definition of dot product to show that the dot product of a unit vector
with itself is one (unity) while the dot product of a unit vector with another unit
vector is zero, and use the result to prove that
P Q = where P = + and
Note that
There are two ways of writing the dot product of two vectors:
A.B=ABcos0
A.B=AB+AB
y
Exercise 2.11
Given a position vector What is the cosine of the angle between P
and (a) the x-axis? (b) the y-axis? (The cosine of the angle between a vector and
the positive coordibate axis is called direction cosine of the vector.
Example 2.13
Vector À = i + and vector B + 3j.
What is (a) the scalar product of À and B?
(b) the nagle between À and B?
Solution
(a) A.B = + Ay.By = (1) + (1) (3)
(b) From A.B = AB cosΘ = A.B AB
=
cos AB AB = 1 = 0.196, A = (0.196) = 78.7ᵃ
42
Grade 11
Example.2.14:
Force and displacement
Consider a block placed on a horizontal surface and that force F is applied on the
block to move the block through displacement S. The work done by the force is
defined as the dot product of the force and the displacement. If F = (5i + 3j) N
and $ = (- 2î + 4ⱼ) m, what is the work done by the applied force?
solution
Work W = F.S = (5i + 3j) N. 2i + 4j) m = 2) + 3 (4) = 2Nm = 2J
Example 2.15:
Force and velocity
Consider force F of a certain machine is applied on a body to move the body
with an average velocity V. The power developed by the machine is defined as
the dot product of the force and the average velocity. If F = (50i + 30j) and
V = (3î+4j) m/s, what is the power developed by the machine?
Solution
The power
= 50 (3) + 30 (4) = 270Nm/s = 270W
Review Questions 2.4
1. What is the dot product of vector À with itself?
2. Show that the dot product of two vectors obeys:
(a) commutative property, A.B=B.A?
(b) distributive property, A. (B + C) = (A. B) + (A C)
3. Is B = B.A?
4. For what angle between À and B will A.B be equal to B.A
5. The force applied on a body and the displacement it underwent are given
respectively as F = (25i 30j) N and $ = (-2î-3j) m. What is the work
done by the force?
6. For what values of the angle between À and B will the dot product A.B be
positive, negative or zero?
7. If D = (5î-3j) N and È = (2î+j), what is the angle between D+E and
the X axis?
8. If P.Q = PQ, what is the angle between P and Q ?
43
Physics I Student Text Book
UNIT2SUMMARY
c
When a physical quantity is described by a single number, we call it a scalar
quantity. In contrast, a quantity described by both a magnitude (the "how much"
or "how big" part) and direction in space is a vector.
c
Depending on their direction, magnitude and orientation we can categorize
vectors as collinear, coplanar, parallel, antiparallel, equal, null, unit vector etc.
c
Graphical method of vector addition makes use of translation of vectors.
c
Triangle law - Vectors are connected head to tail to form a triangle.
c
Parallelogram law - vectors are connected tail to tail and a parallelogram is
constructed using the vectors as its sides.
c
Polygon law - used to find the resultant of more than two vectors. The vectors are
joined head to tail without regard to the order they are taken. The vector drawn
from the tail of the first vector to the head of the final vector represents the resultant.
C
Analytic methods of vector addition/subtraction allow us to find resultant of sums
or differences of vectors without having to draw them. They are exact, contrary to
graphical methods which are approximate.
c
The resultant of two vectors in the same direction has a magnitude equal to the
sum of the magnitude of each of the vectors and it is directed along the direction
of any one of the vectors.
C
The resultant of two vectors at right angles has a magnitude equal to the square
root of the sum of the squares of the magnitude of each of the vectors and the
direction of the resultant is determined by the angle it makes with respect to a
reference line (commonly the X axis).
C
A unit vector vector along the X axis is denoted by i and that along the y axis is
denoted by j A vector that is represented by its vector components as À = Aₓ Aᵥ
can also be represented interms of its components as =
c
If Ř is the resultant of À and B then Ř = Rₓᵢ + Rⱼⱼ, where
Ry = Aᵥ + By. The angle that Ř makes with the X axis is Θ = tan -1 (R)
c
The scalar product of two vectors À and Bis defined as A.B = AB COS and also
c
The scalar product of two vectors can be used to determine the angle between the
vectors and it can also be used to determine the component of one of the vectors
in the direction of the other.
44
Grade 11
END OF UNIT 2 QUESTION
1. Identify the following quantities as vectors and scalars: Speed, velocity, Displace-
ment, Volume, Acceleration, Power.
2. Which one of the following is not true about the three vectors shown in Figure
2.27?
a. -A=B+C
À
B
c. c=-A-B
C
d. A+B-C=0
Figure 2.27
3. If you and your friend have to apply a force to move an object, what would be the
best way to apply the forces to maximize your resultant force?
4. What is the least number of unequal vectors required to produce a zero resultant?
5. If you and your friend have to apply a force to move an object, what would be the
best way to apply the forces to maximize your resultant force?
6. What is the least number of unequal vectors required to produce a zero resultant?
7. Suppose you are adding two vectors P and Q, how would you add them to get the
resultant with the least magnitude?
8. What will happen to the magnitude of the resultant of two vectors as the angle
between them increases from 0° to 180?
9. A vector À lies in the xy plane. For what orientations of À will both of its compo-
nents be negative? For what orientations will its components have opposite signs?
10. Two vectors have unequal magnitudes. Can their sum be zero? Explain.
11. Given
displacement
vectors
S₁ = + 3j) m. Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant displace-
ment
12. Three force vectors A, B and C are acting at a point. If À = 4i 3j, B = 2i
, ,andA+B-C=0.Find
a) the magnitude and direction of vector C and
b) a unit vector along C.
13. Determine a velocity vector that has a magnitude of 5 m/s directed along the di-
rection of vector D=1.5î+2ⱼ.
14. The angle between vector À and vector B is 20°. If the magnitude of vector À is
6 units and that of B is 4 units, what is the component of vector along the direc-
tion of vector B
15. The initial position vector of a particle on the xy plane is (5,2) and its final position
vector is (-2,-3). If distance is measured in centimeter,
a) what is the displacement of the particle?
b) what is the magnitude and direction of the displacement?
45
Physics
I Student Text Book
16. A postal employee drives a delivery truck
N
STOP
W-O-E
along the route shown in Figure 2.30. De-
S
2 km
termine the magnitude and direction of the
4 km
45°
resultant displacement by drawing a scale
diagram.
3 km
N
W-O-E
START
S
Figure 2.28 Path of the truck
17. A girl pushes a box placed on the floor with
a force of 50 N at an angle of 37° below the horizontal. If the box moves toward the
positive X direction, what are the vector components of the force?
18. The Tug-of-War Game
Four dogs nicknamed A, B, C, and D play a tug-of-war game with a toy, Figure
2.31. A pulls strongly with a force of magnitude A = 160 N. B pulls even stronger
than A with a force of magnitude B = 200 N, and C pulls with a force of magnitude
C = 140 N. When D pulls on the toy in such a way that his force balances out the re-
sultant of the other three forces, the toy does not move in any direction. With how
big a force and in what direction must D pull on the toy for this to happen? (Hint:
If the toy does not move, the vector sum of the four forces, FA + FB + Fc + FD = 0.
North
У
y = 55°
ß = 60
C
B
East
A
a = 55°
D
Figure 2.29 Dogs enjoying the tug-of-war game
19. Given two vectors X and Y such that X = 4i + and Y = 6i + 3j, ,
(a) what is the angle between the two vectors?
(b) Find the component of X along the direction of Y ?
20. What is the vector product A.B of the
vectors shown in Figure 2.30?
y
130
À
i
Figure 2.32 Vectors on the xy
53.°
x
plane - x axis as a reference line
i
for measuring angles
46
HAILE
UNIT 3
MOTION IN ONE AND TWO
DIMENSIONS
Introduction
Motion is one of the significant topics in physics. Everything in the universe moves. If
you give a glimpse to your environment, you might see several things in motion: a car
on a road, children playing on a playground, an airplane flying in the sky, even an ant
crawling on the ground. An object is said to be in motion if its position changes with
time.
The concept of motion is a relative. A body that may be in motion relative to one
reference system, may be at rest relative to another. For example, if you are sitting in the
classroom, you are at rest with respect to the earth; but actually, you are in motion with
respect to the Sun.
In this unit we will learn about motion in one dimension relative to any fixed reference
frame, and its applications in our day-to-day life. In addition to motion in 1D, we will
also discuss uniform circular motion as an example of motion in 2D.
Learning outcomes: Students will be able to:
gain an understanding of the fundamental principles of kinematics in one
and two dimensions.
develop skills in applying equations of motions to solve practical
problems.
recognize the effect of air resistance and force of gravity on motion of a
body.
describe technological advances related to motion; and identify the effects
of societal influences on transportation and safety issues.
47
Physics
Student Text Book
3.1 Uniformly Accelerated Motion in 1D
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
explain a uniformly accelerated motion in 1D;
explain the difference between average velocity and instantaneous velocity;
and
solve problems involving average velocity, instantaneous velocity and
acceleration.
?
Brainstorming
After revising what you have learnt in grades 9 and 10 about motion in a straight
line and uniformly accelerated motion discuss about the following questions in
group and present your group's answers to the class.
1. Define the terms position, distance, displacement, speed, and velocity in
motion.
2. Explain the relationship between
U
position and displacement,
U
distance and displacement,
U
distance and speed,
U
displacement and velocity,
U
average velocity and instantaneous velocity.
3. When do we say an object is accelerating?
4. How will it be possible for a car to move but not accelerating?
Acceleration
An object is said to accelerate when its velocity changes in magnitude, in direction
or both in magnitude and direction. Acceleration is a vector quantity, and is defined
as the rate of change of velocity or change in velocity per unit time. The SI unit of
acceleration is m/s².
Negative acceleration may or may not be deceleration, and deceleration may or may
not be considered negative acceleration. If the velocity and acceleration have the same
sign whether positive or negative it is speeding up. If the velocity and acceleration
have different signs, then the object is slowing down.
48
Grade 11
?
Activity 3.1:
Discuss in group and present your group's understanding of the following
questions to the class.
1. Does negative acceleration necessarily mean slowing down?
2. Does positive acceleration necessarily mean speeding up?
Average acceleration
The average acceleration, aₐᵥ of a particle is defined as the ratio of the change in
velocity to the time interval
a
where vf is the final velocity, vᵢ is the initial velocity and t is the time interval. The
SI unit of acceleration is m/s² = ms⁻²
Key term
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity. It is a vector quantity, with a unit of
m/s².
Example: 3.1
If the speed of a certain car is increased from rest to 20m/s in 6 seconds, what is
the average acceleration of the car?
Solution
We have v₀ = 0, = at and at t₀ =0, = , and Vf = at tf = 6s
1 3.67m/s²
Instantaneous acceleration
1
Instantaneous acceleration, ains or acceleration at a specific instant in time, is
obtained using the same process discussed for instantaneous velocity. That is, we
calculate the average acceleration between two points in time separated by At and
let At approach zero.
49
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 3.2.
The velocity of a particle that moves along a straight line varies as a function
of time with a velocity equation as: v(t) = t² - 2t. Find the acceleration of the
particle at t = 2 s.
Solution:
To find the acceleration at t =2s, we first find the acceleration at any time t, that is
a
Since,v(t) = t² - 2t
a
=
=
= t0 tim(21)
= = im(2r+(At)-2)),SinceAt0 ≈
= (2t-2)
This expression is the acceleration of the particle at any time t. Substituting the
given time t = 2s in this expression gives us the acceleration of the particle at t =2s.
Therefore a(t= 2s)=2(2)-2=2m/ s²
Motion with Constant Acceleration
Although there is a possibility to have varying acceleration (non-uniform
acceleration) in reality, in many common types of one-dimensional motion, the
acceleration is assumed to be constant or uniform. It means that, the velocity of the
object is changing by equal amount in equal interval of time. Such a motion is known
as a uniformly accelerated rectilinear motion. In this case, the average acceleration
equals the instantaneous acceleration, and the average velocity is the average of the
initial and final velocities.
50
Grade 11
Exercise 3.1:
A Cheetah, shown in the figure, is
the fastest land animals. It could run
up to 120 km/h. Starting from rest a
Cheetah can reach to a speed of 96.6
km/h in only three seconds. What is
its (a) average acceleration? and (b)
average velocity in these 3 seconds?
?
Activity 3.2:
Experiment
In this experiment the acceleration of a ball/wooden block/trolley/tin can
is determined by rolling or sliding it down a slight incline plane. To do so, the
distances they covered in successive time intervals is measured.
Apparatus and Materials
Ball/wooden block/trolley/tin can
Ramp,
meter stick.
electronic stopwatch
Ticker-timer with power supply unit
Ticker-tape
Sellotape
Ramp Construction
For the ramp you can use any flat, level object such as a board or a cardboard box.
It should be at least 1.25 meters long. If you don't have anything like that then you
will have to improvise. It doesn't matter what the ramp is made of as long as it is flat
and strong enough to support your rolling/sliding object without bending.
To raise one end of the ramp, use a pile of books. You may not be able to get the top
of the ramp at exactly the height given in the instructions. Get it as close as you can
and record the actual height in data tables A and B.
51
Physics
Student Text Book
Figure 3.1
Objectives
1. Become familiar with the concept of hypothesis testing by experiment.
2. Observe and measure motion on an inclined plane.
3. Understand the relationships between distance, time, and acceleration.
4. Understand how to draw and interpret a "best fit" or regression line on a graph
of experimental data.
5. Appreciate the difficulties in analyzing experimental data to make conclusions,
even if the data is carefully and correctly collected.
Procedure
1. Measure distance, d along the ramp with arbitrary starting point.
2. Set up the ramp with h = 0.10 m above the table, (as shown in Figure 3.9)
3. Starting with the ball/wooden block/trolley/cylinder at rest, use the stopwatch
to measure the time to roll distance d = 1.8 meter down the ramp.
4. Take 6, time measurements, record in data table. Cross out the highest and
lowest times and determine the average of the remaining four times. (Sum four
times and divide by four to find the average.)
5. Repeat steps 2 to 4 for distances of 1.6 m, 1.4 m, 1.2 m, and 1.0 m (see data
table).
6. Using cell-phone record the video of the motion and use it for plotting the S vs.
t, V vs. t and a vs. t graphs.
A countdown of "3, 2, 1" is a good way to begin the timing whether there is one
person or two involved in the experiment.
To stop the timing, it is best to use a flat object such as a ruler or the cover of a book
52
Grade 11
as a physical stop. This allows you to use your sense of hearing along with sight to
coordinate the stopwatch with the stopping point.
Data Table
Make six trials and discard the highest and lowest in each trial so you will average
the middle three values. Enter the average time in the data table. In each case use
t(avg) for the times to calculate t squared.
d (m)
t₁
t₂
t₃
4
t₅
t₆
tₐᵥ
t²ₐv
a=2d
II
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
1. Draw a graph of distance versus average time squared for your data, (d vs. t2)
2. Determine the slope the best fit line.
3. The value of acceleration is twice the slope.
4. Analyze the data using spreadsheet (Microsoft excel).
5. Using distance 'd' and average time draw: distance vs. time, velocity vs. time
and acceleration vs. time graph of the motion using spreadsheet (Microsoft
excel).
N.B. Contact your IT teacher to get an assistance about how to use Microsoft
excel in analyzing your data and draw graphs.
1. Compare the measured acceleration with the theoretical estimate
(a= = g sin Θ) , friction neglected by making the surface as smooth as possible.
2. Write a report on your findings.
53
Physics
|
Student Text Book
Review Questions 3.1
1. Define the terms average and instantaneous acceleration.
2. State the conditions in which an object is said to speed up and slow down.
3. What is the relationship between acceleration and deceleration?
4. A car driver accelerates her car by 1.4 m/s², starting from rest. (a) How long
does it take her to reach a speed of 2.0 m/s? (b) If she then brakes to a stop in
0.8 seconds, what is her deceleration?
5. A particle is in motion and is accelerating. The velocity of the motion as a
function of time is given by: v(t) = 20t - m/s. Find (a) the functional
form of the acceleration, (b) the instantaneous velocity at t = 3s, and (c) the
instantaneous acceleration at t = 3 S.
3.2 Equations of Uniformly Accelerated Motion in 1D
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
derive and apply the equations of uniformly accelerated motion in 1D.
solve various problems of uniformly accelerated motion in 1d.
Derivation of equations of motion for uniformly accelerated motion
in a straight line.
The symbols used have the following meanings:
S = displacement, vᵢ = initial velocity, vƒ = final velocity,
t = time for the acceleration, and a = acceleration
Directly from the definition of acceleration, we get
, which can be written as
vf = vᵢ + at
Equation 1
From the definition of average velocity, we get
s = vₐᵥt, =
but for uniformly accelerated motion,
Equation 2
54
Grade 11
Remember that average velocity and instantaneous velocities are different.
Instantaneous velocity is the velocity at a particular instant of time, but average
velocity is the velocity that represents a motion in a certain interval of time.
Substituting this equation of average velocity into the above equation of displacement
gives
Equation 3
By substituting for final velocity from equation 1 into equation 2 and rearranging
gives
S
(1)
Equation 4
Instead of final velocity if we substitute for initial velocity into equation 2 and
rearranging gives
s=v,t-1at²
Equation 5
Rearranging equation 1 for time (t) and substituting into equation 2 gives
(-)-
v² = vᵢ² + 2as
Equation 6
Note that, the above 6 equations all refer to uniformly accelerated motion in a
straight line. It means that, they do not apply if the acceleration is changing.
The above equations are important kinematics equations to solve any problem of
motion with constant acceleration. They summarized in Table 3.1 below.
Table 3.1: Kinematics equations for uniformly accelerated motion
Equation
Missing quantity
vf = vᵢ + at
Displacement (S)
Displacement (s), acceleration (a), and time (t)
55
Physics I Student Text Book
Acceleration (a)
Final velocity (vƒ)
s=v,t-1at²
Initial velocity (vᵢ)
v²ⱼ = v² + 2as
Time (t)
Note that the above equations are vector equations, it means that we need to take of
the direction of the quantities to be added. If they are in the same direction we add,
but if they point in opposite directions we subtract.
Example 3.3
A car accelerates uniformly from rest to a speed of 72 km/h in 8.0 S. (a) Find the
acceleration of the car. (b) Find the distance the car travels. (c) If the car brakes to
a stop over a distance of 50 m, then find its uniform deceleration.
Solution:
(a) In this problem we are given vᵢ = 0,vƒ = / h = 20m/ and t = 8.0 s
Using the equation
(b) To find the distance that the car travelled, we can use the equation:
thus
The distance can also be found from the equation: S
So that
(c) In this case the car breaks from 20m/s to a stop over a distance of 50 m, then
its deceleration will be:
This negative acceleration implies that the car's speed decreases from time to time.
56
Grade 11
Misconception Alert !!!
Note that all negative accelerations are not always decelerations. Negative acceleration
can also occur due to the change in direction with respect to a certain fixed reference
point.
Example: 3.4
The Ethiopian Airlines Boeing airplane lands on one of the Bole international
airport runways with an initial velocity of 40.0 m/s and then decelerates at 1.50
m/s². (a) What length of runway will it need? (b) For how long will it move on the
runway?
Solution:
Identify the known quantities: Vᵢ = 70m/s, a = -1.5m Vf = 0
S = 2a = 2(-1.5) -1600 -3.0 = 533.3m
The time to stop is
:
Determining the stopping distance of a vehicle
What is stopping distance?
When brakes are applied to a moving vehicle, the distance it travels before stopping
is called stopping distance. Calculating stopping distance is important for avoiding
potential hazardous situations. There are many factors that can affect the stopping
distance of a moving vehicle. Here are some;
Speed of the vehicle
Weight of the vehicle
Road conditions (slick, icy, snow, dry, wet)
Vehicle brake conditions (old or worn pads and rotors)
Braking technology in the vehicle
Tire conditions
This leads us to the actual formula for working out braking distances. The formula
is based on the velocity (speed) of the vehicle and the coefficient of friction between
the wheels and the road (µ).
Braking distance
57
Physics I Student Text Book
This is because, for a car coming to a stop due to friction: a = µg. Experiments have
shown that for dry roads, the coefficient of friction is about 0.7, and for wet roads it
is about 0.4. The stopping distance is then the sum of reaction distance and braking
distance.
Stopping distance
Reaction
distance
Braking distance
Hazard
Braking
The car
detected
begins
stands still
Figure 3.2: Stopping distance
The reaction distance is the distance you travel from the point of detecting a hazard
until you begin braking or swerving. The time between being where we first start
measuring, and where the car begins braking, is called the reaction time. As an
equation, looking at the car's speed, v, the distance v it travels over a period of
time v is:
The reaction distance = The car's speed X reaction time.
Reaction distance (sᵣ) =
Stopping distance = reaction distance + braking distance
Stoppind distance = vt +
Example 3.2:
(a) Compare the stopping distance for the following speeds of an automobile.
Assumes the road is dry and the co-efficient of friction between the tire and
the road is 0.70. (b) Discuss the potential damage that could be caused by the
automobile running with 80 km/h compared to that moving with 20 km/h.
reaction distance
Speedometer
Speedometer
braking
Stopping
distance
distance
reading
reading
=
(km/h)
(m/s)
t = your reactiontime
Sb 2 v²
Sr
80 km/h
60 km/h
30 km/h
20 km/h
58
Grade 11
?
Activity 3.3:
1. Discuss in group about the meanings of the traffic signs shown in the figure
below and the consequences resulted if one is going to miss it.
2. Discuss about the main causes of car accidents in your area, and the ways to
reduce the accidents. Your teacher can invite a guest from traffic offices.
RCP 9168 00318
HThChe and
me one
OVERTAKING LANE
PASSENGER CAR LANE
TRUCK LANE
120
80
100
80
80
60
30
km/h
Figure 3.3: Traffic sign
Review Questions 3.2
1. Derive the five kinematic equations.
2. It is found experimentally that, if a street surface is dry, a good driver can
safely decelerate an automobile with reasonably good tires at the rate of about
4.57 m/s². So, for a car moving at 60 km/h what should be the minimum
distance between two cars so that they won't crash during a sudden stop?
3. A driver of a vehicle traveling at a speed of 30 m/s on a motorway brake
sharply to a standstill in a distance of 100m. Calculate the deceleration of the
vehicle.
4. A motorist travelling at 18 m/s approaches traffic lights. When he is 30 m from
the stop line, they turn red. It takes 0.7 S before he can react by applying the
brakes. The car slows down at a rate of 4.6 m/s². How far from the stop line
will he come to rest and on which side of it?
5. The driver of a train travelling at 40 m/s applies the brakes as the train enters
a station. The train slows down at a rate of 2m/s. The platform is 400 m long.
Will the train stop in time?
6. The distance covered in n seconds and the distance covered in the nth second
are different questions. Derive the equation for the distance covered in the nth
second.
59
Physics
I Student Text Book
3.3 Graphical Representation of Uniformly
accelerated Motion in 1 D
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
graphically, represent position versus time graph, displacement time graph,
velocity time graph, and acceleration time graph of a uniformly accelerated
motion in 1d.
interpret a graph of velocity vs. time, displacement vs. time and acceleration
vs. time.
draw graphs from the kinematic equations.
determine the velocity of a motion from the slope of displacement-time graph,
and acceleration from the slope of velocity - time graph.
determine the displacement covered from the area under velocity - time
graph.
In this section, we will discuss about graphs that help us picture the concepts of
displacement, velocity and acceleration.
3.3.1 Displacement-Time Graphs
?
Brainstorming
What are dependent and independent variables in drawing graphs, and what
is the relationship between them?
Displacement-Time Graph
A displacement-time graph shows how displacement changes with time. In drawing
displacement-time graph, we record displacement and time for the motion, and
the displacement (the dependent variable) is plotted on the Y-axis, and time (the
independent variable) is plotted on the X-axis.
The slope of displacement-time graph
Slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. It is given by the equation:
Slope = run Horizontal Vertical increase increase x₂ t₂⁻t₁
60
Grade 11
x (m)
x2
rise
run
T1
t₁
t₂
t (s)
Figure 3.4: Slope of Position-time graph
This expression for slope is the same as the definition of velocity:
velocity =
So, the slope of a position-time graph equals the velocity of the motion.
a. Displacement-time graph for uniform motion
For a body moving at constant velocity (uniform motion), its graph of displacement
against time is a straight line with a constant slope/gradient, Figure 3.5 (b). This is
because distance is directly proportional to time =
b. Displacement-time graph for uniformly accelerated motion
For a body moving at constant acceleration, its graph of displacement against time
is a parabola (curved upward), Figure 3.5 (c). This is because distance is directly
proportional to the square of time In this case slope is increasing (sloping
up or getting steeper), hence velocity is increasing resulting in a positive acceleration.
Displacement-time graph for uniformly decelerated motion
Figure 3.5 (d), shows the case where the velocity of an object is decreasing, slope is
decreasing, resulting to a deceleration.
61
Physics
Student Text Book
Displacement
Displacement
Displacement
Displacement
Time
Time
Time
Time
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 3.5: Some common displacement-time graphs
Interpreting a displacement-time graphs
In interpreting or describing the motion of an object, we decide whether the object
is moving at a constant speed, accelerating or decelerating or is the object stationary
(at rest). To understand how to interpret these graphs, we need to know something
about the slope of a line. The slope of a line on a graph tells you how quickly the
quantity being graphed is increasing or decreasing. For this purpose, we use the
following properties of the slope of a dispacement time-graph.
A flat line (slope equals zero), means that the object is at rest.
An upwards straight line means that the object is moving forwards at a
constant speed.
For an upward curved line, for each second that ticks on the horizontal
time axis, the distance travelled is greater than the second before. In
other words, distance is increasing at an increasing rate. We say that
the object is accelerating.
If the line on the distance-time graph curves the other way (when the
slope becomes flatter), then the object will be decelerating, as each
second the distance travelled is less than the previous second.
So, the displacement vs. time graphs of Figure 3.5 are interpreted as follows.
a. shows the graph for an object stationary over a period of time. The slope is
zero, so the object has zero velocity.
b. shows the graph for an object moving at a constant velocity. You can see
that the displacement is increasing as time goes on. The slope, however,
stays constant (remember: it's the slope of a straight line), so the velocity is
constant. Here the slope is positive, so the object is moving in the direction we
have defined as positive.
62
Grade 11
c. shows the graph for an object moving at a constant acceleration. You can see
that the slope of the curve increases with time (becomes more vertical); thus,
the velocity is increasing with time and the object is accelerating.
d. shows the graph for an object moving at a constant deceleration. You can see
that the slope of the curve decreases with time (becomes more horizontal);
thus, the velocity is decreases with time and the object is decelerating.
Example 3.5:
Draw the displacement-time graph of a ball thrown directly upwards and caught
when it returns.
Solution:
Immediately after leaving the throwers hand, the velocity is positive and
large so the slope is positive and large.
As the ball rises, its velocity decreases so the slope decreases.
At the maximum height, its velocity is zero so the slope is zero.
As the ball descends, its velocity becomes increasingly negative,
corresponding to increasing speed in a downward direction. So, the slope
becomes increasingly negative.
The slope of the line represents the object's acceleration. This is constant and
negative, equal to the acceleration of free fall, g. The acceleration of the object
is the same when it descends as when it ascends so the slope of the line is always
equal to -9.8m/
The area under the line represents the displacement of the object from its starting
position.
The area between the positive
displacement
section of the line and the time
maximuum
axis represents the displacement
height
during the ascend.
The area under the negative
section of the line and the time
axis represents the displacement
during the descent.
Summing up theses two areas gives
0
0
time
zero. This corresponds to zero total
displacement, because it returns back
Figure 3.6: Displacement-time graph of an
to the thrown point.
object thrown vertically upward
63
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Exercise 3.2:
For the motion of a ball thrown vertically upward whose displacement-time
graph is shown in Figure 3.13, draw its distance time graph.
Velocity-Time Graph
A velocity-time graph shows how velocity
changes with time. In drawing velocity-time
graph, we record velocity and time for the
motion, and the velocity (the dependent
variable) is plotted on the Y-axis, and time (the
independent variable) is plotted on the X-axis.
That is vertical axis represents the velocity of the
velocity
object, and the horizontal axis represents the
At
time taken. Figure 3.7, shows the velocity-time
time
graph of a motion with a constant acceleration,
Figure 3.7: Slope of
i.e., the velocity increases by equal amount in
velocity-time graph
equal interval of time.
slope = Vertical increase At
Horizontal increase
This is just the expression for acceleration. So, the slope of a velocity graph represents
the acceleration of the motion. Because the slope is the same at all points on this
graph, the acceleration is constant.
We can also get the displacement travelled from the velocity vs. time graph by finding
the area of the region between the line and the time axis.
Note:
The slope of a velocity-time graph gives the acceleration.
The area between a velocity-time graph and the `time' axis gives the
displacement of the object.
The velocity-time graph for (a) uniform motion, (b) uniformly accelerated motion,
and (c) uniformly decelerated motion is shown in the Figure 3.8, below.
64
Grade 11
Velocity
Velocity
Velocity
Time
Time
Time
(For body moving
(For uniform
(For uniform
with constant velocity)
accelerated motion
accelerated motion
with increasing velocity)
with decreasing
velocity)
Figure 3.8: Some common velocity-time graphs:
Key terms
Slope of displacement-time graph give average velocity.
Slope of velocity-time graph give the acceleration of the motion.
The area under the velocity-time curve and the time axis gives the magnitude of
the displacement covered.
Exercise 3.4
By looking a velocity vs. time graph, you can tell if an object is accelerating,
decelerating, or moving at a constant velocity. Forming a group with 5 members
make a discussion and interpret the above three velocity vs. time graphs.
Example 3.6
Draw the velocity-time graph of a ball thrown directly upwards and caught when
it returns.
Solution:
The velocity of the ball decreases from
maximum height occurs
its initial positive (upward) value
at time I = u/g
to zero at a maximum height then
increases in the negative (downwards)
velocity
o
time
direction as it falls. Figure 3.9 shows
how the velocity of the ball changes
with time.
Figure 3.9 Velocity-time graph of a ball
thrown vertically up and came back to
the throwers hand
65
Physics
Student Text Book
Exercise 3.5
There is a difference between displacement vs. time graph and distance vs. time
graph of a motion, and also between velocity vs. time and speed vs. time graph
of a motion. Draw (a) distance vs. time, and (b) speed vs. time graph of a ball
thrown vertically upward and returns back to the throwers hand.
Acceleration-Time Graph
Acceleration-time graph shows how acceleration changes with time. In drawing
acceleration-time graph, we record acceleration and time for the motion, and
the acceleration (the dependent variable) is plotted on the Y-axis, and time (the
independent variable) is plotted on the X-axis. In this section, we will only deal
with objects moving at a constant acceleration, thus all acceleration-time graphs are
parallel to the time axis. Figure 3.10 below shows acceleration vs. time graph of a
uniform motion (a), a uniformly accelerated motion (b), and a uniformly decelerated
motion (c).
acceleration
acceleration
0
Time (s)
a)
time
b)
time
Figure 3.10 acceleration-time graph of (a) uniform motion, (b) uniformly
accelerated motion, (c) uniformly decelerated motion.
Example 3.7:
A car starts from rest and accelerates at a rate of 2.0m/s² for 5seconds, then
maintains its speed for 4 seconds. It then applied the brakes and stopped within
2 seconds. Then it moves at a constant speed of 15m/s in the opposite direction
until it reaches the starting point.
Determine the position of the car for each interval of time.
a) Draw the displacement versus time, velocity versus time and acceleration b)
versus time graph of the motion of the car.
c) From the velocity time graph, show that the displacement is zero.
66
Grade 11
Solution:
a) The car has different motions in the four intervals of time.
In the first interval of time between t = 0 and t = 5s it accelerates from
rest at a rate of 2.0m/s2. The displacement S in this interval will then be:
In the second interval of time, it maintains its speed for 4 seconds (i.e. between
t=5s and t = 9s). The constant speed it attained is the final speed at t = 5s. That
speed is
=
The displacement in the second interval will then be
s₂ = vt = (10m/ s)(4s) = 40m
Since S = X2 - X1 then the position of the car x² at the end of the second interval
will be
x =S₂+S₁=40m+25m = 65m
In the third interval of time, the car applied its brakes and reduces its speed at
a constant rate for 2 seconds until its velocity becomes zero from 10m/s. The
acceleration during this time interval is
0-10m/s
The displacement during this time interval will therefore be
S₃ -100m² / s² -10m/s² = 10m
The position of the car at the end of the third interval will be
x₃ = x₂ +s₂ = 65m+ 10m= 75m
In the fourth interval of time, the car moves at a constant speed of 15m/s in
opposite direction until it reaches Xf = 0 to the place where it started the motion.
(i.e. V = 15m/s since it is moving in the opposite direction.)
The final position xf = 0 and the time it takes to the initial position can be obtained
from the equation,
t = =
67
Physics I Student Text Book
b) The displacement vs time graph, and the corresponding velocity vs. time
graph is shown below.
The displacement-time graph will have
a parabolic shape in the first interval
x(m)
(speeding up); straight line with a positive
7
6
slope in the second interval (constant
2
speed); parabola inverted downward in
0
5
9
11
16
t(s)
the third interval which indicates the
v(m/s)
10
decreasing of speed in magnitude (slowing
0
5
9
11
16
t(s)
down); and in the last interval, it is a straight
line with a negative slope that indicates the
reverse in direction.
One of the three features of the velocity versus time graph is the area under the
curve is the displacement. From the lower part of the graph in Figure 3.18, the
sum of the area of the regions sum up to give us the displacement.
The area of the triangle in region 1 is: Area₁ = 2 1 = 25m
The area of the triangle in region 2 is: Area₂ = (10m/s)x(4s)=40,
The area of the triangle in region 3 is: Area₃ = 2 1 =
The area of the triangle in region 4 is: Area₁ = -(15m/s)(5s) = -75m
The total area is: Area₁ + Area₂ + Area₃ + Area₄ = 25m + 40m + 10m - 75m = O
This value of the displacement coincides with the value clearly seen in the
displacement vs. time graph.
Review Questions 3.4
1. Interpret the following the following velocity-time graphs.
2. Interpret the following displacement (s) VS. time graphs.
68
Grade 11
S
S
S
S
S
1
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
3. By finding the area of the region
Vf
between the velocity-time curve
and the time axis of the velocity
VS, time graph shown below, derive
Velocity
the equation for displacement:
Vi
S = vᵢ 2 t
Time
4. Starting from rest a car moves along a straight level road with uniformly
increasing velocity for 20 minutes, until its velocity becomes 15 m/s, north.
Then it maintained this velocity for half an hour. In the next 10 minutes, its
velocity uniformly decreases until it becomes zero. Then it continuous moving
in the opposite direction for 20 minutes until its velocity is equal to 20 m/s,
south. (a) Draw the velocity VS. time, and displacement VS. time graph of the
motion. (b) determine the distance and the magnitude of the displacement
covered during the motion.
?
Activity 3.4:
Phet simulation for motion graphs
Learning Objectives
Examine velocity-time graphs and compare them to position-time graphs.
In addition, compare the slopes of the position-time and velocity-time graphs, as
well as the area to the time axis of the velocity-time and acceleration-time graphs.
Procedure:
Use the following links to run the simulation. https://phet.colorado.edu/en/
simulation/legacy/moving-man for more information.
69
Physics
Student Text Book
Then navigate to https://phet.colorado.edu/en/legacy/moving-man.
Beginning at rest, a man walks eastward over a straight level road at a constant
velocity of 2 m/s for 10 meters. The object then goes continually in the opposite
direction at a constant velocity of 1 m/s, which is apparent in the simulation graph
below. In the simulation, the motion is represented by a displacement vs. time
graph and a velocity vs. time graph. The total required time is 15 seconds.
a. Compute the distance covered in each motion using the formula the area of
the region in the graph and compare them.
b. Determine the time required to go east, t₁ = , the time necessary to go
west,
t₂ = S₂ , and compute the total duration? V₁
c. Why is the acceleration V₂ 0 in the motion?
d. What are your thoughts on the computed and simulated st values?
Displacement-time graph
10.0
5.0
0.0
-5.0
-10.0
Velocity-time graph
4.8
2.4
0.0
-2.4
-4.8
3.4 Vertical Motion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
describe what vertical motion is.
solve various problems of vertical motion
describe the motion of objects that are in free fall.
calculate the time, position and velocity of an object given the initial velocity
of an object under vertical motion
solve problems related to an object thrown vertically upwards, downwards,
and a freely falling bodies.
Freely Falling Bodies
When things move vertically either up or down under the force of gravity alone,
the resulting motion is called free fall. The acceleration of a freely falling body is
constant and is known as acceleration due to gravity, denoted by the letter g. When
70
Grade 11
air resistance is negligible, all objects dropped under the influence of gravity near
Earth's surface fall toward Earth with this acceleration. Near the surface of the Earth
its magnitude is constant and is equal to 9.8 m/s². Therefore, for free fall near the
surface of the earth the equations of motion with constant acceleration discussed so
far can be applied. The only change in those equations is the replacement of a by g,
and taking care of directions.
The expression freely falling object doesn't necessarily refer to an object dropped
from rest. A freely falling object is any object moving freely under the influence of
gravity alone, regardless of its initial motion. Objects thrown upward or downward
and those released from rest are all considered freely falling
1.v=u+gt
3. v² = +
Note that these equations are vector equations, meaning that we need to take care
of the directions of the vector quantities such as velocities, displacements and
acceleration.
One way to investigate the free fall of an object is to make a multiflash photo of
the object's flight as it falls after being released from rest (Figure 3.11). As seen in
the figure the displacement the ball covered in equal intervals of time is increased
from time to time uniformly. That means the velocity of the falling ball is increased
uniformly through time and hence it is accelerating.
cm
orm
#4
10
5
#6
20
#7
30
#8
40
09
50
Figure 3.11: Motion of freely falling bodies
For an object thrown vertically upward the initial velocity, и is directed up and is
taken as positive, but because g is always directed down towards the center of the
71
Physics I Student Text Book
Earth it is taken as negative. Thus, for an object thrown vertically upward, the above
equation may be written in scalar form as follows:
v=u-gt
y=ut-18t²
v² = u² - 2gy
Here y is the height above the origin at time t, u is the initial velocity in the
y-direction at t = 0.
For an object thrown vertically downward, since both й and g have the same
downward directions, the above equations become:
v=u+gt
v² = u² + 2gy
Example 3.8:
Consider a particle projected vertically
LevelB
upwards with an initial velocity V₀ =20m/s
h
Vo
from the top of a 15m building as shown in
LevelA
the figure below. How long does it take for the
particle to reach to: A) level A, the initial
Level C
point, B) level B 5m above the initial point,
C) level C, 5m below the initial point and D)
Vi
LevelD
level D, the building bottom?
Figure 3.12:
Motion diagram of a particle thrown vertically upward from the top of a building
at level A passes through level B reaches to maximum height (hₘₐ), and finally hits
the ground at level C.
To find the time of flight at different levels: A, B and C, take the value of the y-
coordinate of y=0,a=-g
At level A: The kinematic equation for y then becomes,
20t - 5t² = 0
t = 0, = or t = 4s *
72
Grade 11
These two solutions of the time t indicate that the particle appears on the same place
at two different instants of time. The former one is the initial condition at the instant
the particle was projected. The later one is the one which is the time it takes to cover
the entire path to return to its original position.
At Level B: y = +5m a = - g = -10m/s²
The kinematic equation for t by replacing y= +5m then becomes
which is a quadratic equation of the form: 5t² - 20t +5 = 0.
Solving this equation with the general quadratic formula, we get two roots for t.
(What are the physical implications of the two roots for t in the solution?)
At Level C: y = - 5m, a = - g = -10m/s²
The kinematic equation for t by replacing y = -5m then becomes:
Which is a quadratic equation of the form 5t² - 20t - 5 = 0. The time solution can
be obtained from the general quadratic formula.
t =
-b = 4(5)(-5)
2a
2(5)
t = -5+22.36 2(5) = = 2(5) 22.36 = -2.73sec
Since, time is a scalar quantity, it can never be negative and the answer will be 1.73
seconds.
Exercise 3.6:
A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 10m/s from the balcony of a
tall building. The balcony is 15m above the ground and gravitational acceleration
is 10m/s². Find (a) the time required for the ball to hit the ground, and (b) the
velocity with which it hits the ground.
73
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 3.5:
Experiment
Measurement of acceleration due to gravity (g) using the freefall meth-
od
Objectives
The objectives of this experiment are as follows:
1. To know the meaning of free fall and the conditions under which it occurs.
2. To know the value for the acceleration of gravity (g).
3. Corelate the motion of a free-falling object to the graphical descriptions of its
motion.
4. To understand that the acceleration of gravity is independent of the mass of the
free-falling object.
5. To test the hypothesis that the acceleration of a freely falling object is uniform,
Apparatus: Millisecond timer, power supply, metal ball, trapdoor and electromagnet.
Diagram
Switch closed before
start so electromagnet holds ball
Off to start
Electromagnet
A
Timer
Steel ball
Off to stop
S
B
Figure 3.12: Laboratory set up to measure
Procedure
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 3.21. The millisecond timer starts
when the ball is released and stops when the ball hits the trapdoor at B.
2. When switch A is turned off the steel ball starts to fall and the timer starts. The
ball falls onto switch B and when it breaks the circuit the timer stops.
3. Measure the distance S using a meter stick.
74
Grade 11
4. Flick the switch to release the ball and record the time t from the millisecond
timer.
5. Repeat for different values of s.
6. Calculate the values for g using the equation 2h/t Obtain an average value
for g.
7. Draw a graph of h against t² and use the slope to find a value for g (g will be
twice the slope).
Precautions
1. For each height h repeat three times and take the smallest time as the correct
value for t.
2. Place a piece of paper between the ball bearing and the electromagnet to ensure
a quick release.
3. Remember to convert from milliseconds to seconds.
Note
Both points 1 and 2 above are associated with the problem that even though you
switch off the power for the electromagnet (and in so doing switch on the timer)
it will not lose its magnetism immediately, therefore the ball will not fall straight
away. This means that the reading on the timer will always be (slightly) longer than
the time for which the ball was dropping.
Purpose
The purpose of this laboratory activity is to measure the acceleration of a falling
object assuming that the only force acting on the object is the gravitational force.
Data
h (m)
(s)
t² (s²)
8=2h
g
gavg
75
Physics
Student Text Book
Conclusion: Report your findings.
?
Activity 3.6:
Drop two balls of different mass (basketball, and tennis ball) from the same
height. Which will hit the ground first?
Terminal velocity
When a solid body is inside a liquid or gas, its entire surface is in contact with the
particles of the fluid. For this reason, during its motion in a fluid, the body experiences
a resistive force. These resistance force which the fluid exerted on the body is called
fluid friction or drag force.
Thus, a body falling in air moves under the action of two forces (ignoring buoyancy):
the downward gravitational force (its weight) and the upward drag force.
At the beginning of the fall the downward gravitational force would be larger than
the drag force (mg > Fd) and hence it will make an accelerated downward motion,
which resulted to an increase in velocity. As the velocity the falling object increases,
so does the drag force. At some velocity, the drag force of resistance will be equal to
the gravitational pull on the object. At this point the object stops accelerating and
continues falling at a constant velocity called the terminal velocity. Thus, terminal
velocity is defined as the point at which the velocity of a falling object is no longer
getting greater. An object at terminal velocity has zero acceleration.
Besides weight, terminal velocity depends on other factors such as shape and cross
sectional area of the falling object and the nature of the fluid.
2ᵀ
force from
d
air resistance
force from
gravity
F
σᵀ
(a)
(b)
(c)
g
Figure 3.13: A free body diagram showing the forces on a particle at different times
during its fall: (a) at the start of the fall; (b) during the fall; (c) at the end of the fall.
76
Grade 11
Key term
Terminal velocity is the maximum velocity of a freely falling body where its
velocity no more increases, or the acceleration of the motion is zero.
?
Activity 3.7
Assume a drop of rain is falling from a height of 450m. If the drag force were not
there, what would be it velocity on reaching the surface of the Earth. Discuss the
effect of this velocity on living things on Earth.
Galileo Galilei and the Motion of Objects
In contrary to Aristotle (384-322 b.c.) view ofmotion,
which states that heavier objects fell faster than lighter
ones, Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) Italian Physicist
and Astronomer, postulated that, regardless of their
size and mass all bodies falling through empty space
(vacuum) have the same acceleration. He was the first
person to determine the correct mathematical law for
acceleration: the total distance covered, starting from
rest, is proportional to the square of the time.
Galileo also investigated the motion of an object on an inclined plane, established
the concept of relative motion, invented the thermometer, and discovered that the
motion of a swinging pendulum could be used to measure time intervals. After
designing and constructing his own telescope, he discovered four of Jupiter's moons,
found that our own Moon's surface is rough, discovered sunspots and the phases of
Venus, and showed that the Milky Way consists of an enormous number of stars.
He is also known for the assertion that the Sun is at the center of the Universe (the
heliocentric system), not Earth.
?
Activity 3.8: Experiment
Calculating Reaction time
Reaction time is the time a person takes to observe, think and act. Reaction time
is the time it takes you to react to a hazard. For example, if a person is driving and
suddenly a boy appears on the road, then the time elapsed before he/she applies
the brakes of the car is the reaction time. Studies reflect that a person's reaction
time is anywhere from one to three seconds. You can measure your reaction time
by a simple experiment.
77
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Materials required
You need two people (one dropper and one catcher), plus a meter ruler.
Procedure
The dropper holds the ruler, letting it dangle vertically. The catcher's hand should
be about chest high, with the ruler passing between the thumb and fingers as shown
in Figure 3.14. The thumb should be horizontal, so that the top of the thumb can
be used as a reference. To perform it, have your friend hold the ruler at the very
top and you hold your fingers at the zero mark. Your friend then drops it, and you
then catch it as fast as you can, as shown below.
Catch point
Figure 3.14: Measuring reaction time
The difference in distance between where your fingers initially were, at the zero
mark, and where you catch it, the catch point, gives you the total distance traveled.
Then, calculate the reaction time using the equation:
t =
g
Reaction distance is the distance you travel during your reaction time. It depends on
the reaction time and speed. It is calculated as:
Reaction Distance = Reaction Time x Speed
S = vt.
Key term
Reaction time is the time taken for a person to react to a sudden event.
78
Grade 11
?
Activity 3.9: Project work
Make a group containing 4 to 5 members in your class. Search internet or books
and came up comparing the difference between Aristotle's, Galileo's and Newtons
view of motion.
Review Questions 3.4
1. Describe the motion of a freely falling bodies.
2. A ball is thrown vertically upward with a velocity of 20 m/s from the top of a
building. The height of the point from where the ball is thrown is 25 m from
the ground. (a) how high will the ball rise? (b) how long will it take for the
ball to hit the ground?
3. A ball is dropped on the floor from a height of 10 m. It rebounds to a height of
2.5 m. If the ball is in contact with the floor for 0.01 sec, what is the average
acceleration during contact?
4. If a stone is thrown vertically downward into a well with a speed of 10 m/s,
how long will it take it to reach the water surface 60 m below?
3.5 Uniform Circular Motion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define a uniform circular motion
calculate for angular and tangential displacement, angular and tangential
velocity, and centripetal acceleration,
explain uniform circular motion in the horizontal plane,
identify the force required for circular motion to take place
?
Brainstorming Questions
1. When do we say an object is accelerating?
2. Can an object accelerate if it's moving with constant speed?
3. Mention an example in which an object accelerates due to a change in the
direction of velocity without a change in its magnitude.
Uniform Circular Motion
Uniform circular motion is a special type of curvilinear motion in which an object
travels in a circle with a constant speed but its direction of motion continuously
79
Physics
I
Student Text Book
changes. A mass attached to the end of a string and moves in a horizontal circle,
the second, minute, and hour hands of a watch, the motion of a turntable, and any
point on a propeller spinning at a constant rate are examples that could demonstrate
uniform circular motion.
Angular and tangential displacement
While moving in a circular path, the angle made by the radius 'r' of the circle is
known as angular displacement (Θ). It is a vector quantity, hence have a direction.
The direction of the circular arrow pointing from the initial position to the final
position will indicate the direction of angular displacement. It can be either clockwise
or anticlockwise.
Θ
S
Figure 3.15: Angular displacement
If the arc of the circle in which the body is moving is 's' and the radius of the circle
is 'r' then, angular displacement
After one complete revolution, the rotating object will travel a distance equal to the
circumference of the circular path. Which is equal to 2wr where r is the radius.
Therefore,
Θ = S r = r = radian
Thus, lrev = 2wrad = 360⁰.
The unit of angular displacement in the SI system is radian. Since angular
displacement is the ratio of these two quantities hence it is dimensionless.
On the other hand, tangential displacement (s) is the distance covered by the rotating
object along the curved path (circumference of a circle), see Figure 3.15
80
Grade 11
Key terms
Uniform circular motion is a circular motion with constant speed but continuously
changing direction.
Angular displacement is the angle swept by the rotating object.
Tangential displacement the tangential distance on the circumference of the circle.
Angular velocity and tangential velocity
Angular velocity measures the rate at which angular displacement changes. It is
denoted by Greek letter omega (w) and its standard unit is radians per second.
=
w
Angular velocity is a vector quantity. The direction of angular velocity is determined by
right hand rule. According to right hand rule, if you hold the axis with your right
hand and rotate the fingers in the direction of motion of the rotating body, then
thumb will point the direction of the angular velocity.
3
3
Right
Direction
hand
of rotation
Direction
of rotation
Figure 3.16: RHR for the direction of angular velocity
Vt
A tangent is a line that touches a curve at a single
point. As the name suggests, tangential velocity
describes the motion of an object along the edge
Γ
of the circle whose direction at any given point
(+)
on the circle is always along the tangent to that
point. It is the linear component of angular
velocity at any point along the circular path.
Figure 3.17: Tangential velocity
Tangential velocity is equal to the tangential distance divided by time.
v₁=f₁
81
Physics
I
Student Text Book
After one complete rotation, the tangential displacement is equal to the circumference
of the circle, and time taken for one complete circle is called the period, T. With this
the equation for tangential velocity will be:
v₁ = 2πr
The SI unit of tangential velocity is meters per second.
Key term
Centripetal acceleration is an acceleration in circular motion caused by the
change in the direction of velocity. Its direction is always towards the center of the
circle.
The relationship between angular and tangential velocity
There is a connection between tangential velocity and angular velocity. To find the
relationship between them let us start from the equation for tangential velocity:
where r is the radius, and w (omega) is the angular velocity of the rotating object.
Note that, angular velocity is the same for all points on the rotating object, while
tangential velocity depends directly on its distance from the axis of rotation.
Examples 3.9:
If the angular velocity of a wheel is 40 rad/s, and the wheel diameter is 60 cm.
Determine the tangential velocity of the wheel.
Solution:
v,= ~r = 40rad / sx0.3m = 12m/s =
82
Grade 11
Centripetal Acceleration: Acceleration in Uniform Circular Motion
We know from kinematics that acceleration is
caused by a change in velocity, either in
magnitude or in direction or both. Therefore,
an object undergoing uniform circular motion
ac
is always accelerating, because it always
changes it direction of motion. We call the
acceleration of an object moving in uniform
circular motion the centripetal acceleration,
ac. Centripetal means center seeking or Figure 3.18: Centripetal accelera-
towards the center.
tion
Centripetal acceleration is in the direction of the change in velocity, which points
directly toward the center of the circular path. Because ii is directed towards the
center of a curved path along the radius it is also called radial acceleration. This
direction is shown with the vector diagram in the Figure 3.18.
Key term
Centripetal acceleration is an acceleration in circular motion caused by the
change in the direction of velocity. Its direction is always towards the center
of the circle.
Is seen first at point P with velocity Vᵢ at time tᵢ and then at point Q with velocity
Vƒ at time where vi|=|vₛ that is they differ only in direction, thus
v1|=|v/|=v. In order to calculate the acceleration, we start with the definition of
average acceleration.
a
Where V can be obtained graphically by the property of parallel shifting of vectors
without affecting the direction and the magnitude; so that we can make a parallel
shift of the tail of Vf from Q to the tail of Vᵢ at P as shown as shown in Figure 3.19.
83
Physics
I
Student Text Book
2
DI
1,
&
(a)
(b)
(e)
Figure 3.19: (a) Circular motion with constant speed V. (b) Velocity vectors at P and Q. (c)
Graphical method of the application of vector subtraction so that, Since 0
is the same in (b) and (c), the ratio of the sides of the two triangles are equal.
The triangle OPQ in Figure 3.19 (b), which has sides and r, is similar to the triangle
ABC of Figure 3.19 (c), which has sides and ДѴ. Then the pair of corresponding sides
are proportional, i.e.,
Which we can obtain the expression for as:
Substituting this value in the equation for average acceleration we get:
at
and the average acceleration becomes r , the instantaneous
acceleration in the direction of V which is directed towards the center. Thus, the
equation for centripetal acceleration becomes:
a.=v²
Since, v = wr, in terms of angular velocity, the equation for tangential velocity is:
ac = w² r
The SI unit of centripetal acceleration is m/s².
?
Activity 3.10
Forming a group of 3 to 5 students discuss the following questions.
1. State some real-life examples of circular motion.
2. Mention the cases in which the effect of centripetal acceleration could be made
to be larger.
84
Grade 11
Example 3.10
An automobile moves with a constant speed of 50.4 km/h around a circular track
that has a diameter of 40 m. (a) what is the angular speed of the automobile? (b)
What is the period of the motion?
Solution:
v=504km/h=14m/s,r=d2=20m
(a) w v 14m/s = /
vₜ
(b) T vₜ 2x3.14 14m/s S
Exercise 3.7
By how much would the centripetal acceleration change if the speed of a car
changes from 30 km/h to 90 km/h?
Centripetal Force
The force which causes centripetal acceleration is called a centripetal force. Without
a centripetal force, an object would continue to travel in a straight line and never
deviate from its direction. Yet, with the centripetal force directed towards the center
of the circle, the object always changing its direction and undergoing a circular
motion. Centripetal force is perpendicular to the tangential velocity vector.
From Newton's second law: Centripetal force = mass X centripetal acceleration.
Fc = mac
Example 3.11
A 100 g ball is whirled in a horizontal circle of radius 40 cm. With what maximum
speed can it travel if the breaking strength of the rod is 50 N?
Solution:
m = 100 g = =0.1kg, r = 40 cm = 0.4m, F = 50 N
F
F = m²
V 50 0.1kg =14.14m/s
85
Physics I Student Text Book
Key term
Centripetal force is a force that causes centripetal acceleration. It is always
perpendicular to the direction of motion of the object.
Applications
A centrifuge is medical laboratory equipment that is used to separate particles
suspended in a liquid such as blood or urine according to particle size and density,
viscosity of the medium, and rotor speed.
Example 3.12:
(a)
Calculate the centripetal acceleration of a point 7.50
cm from the axis of a centrifuge spinning at 7.5x10⁴ rev / min.
(b)
Determine the ratio of this acceleration to the
acceleration due to gravity.
Solution:
r = 7.5cm = 075m
v = 7.5x10⁴ rev/min = 7.5 x10¹
1
= 589m/s.
(b) In order to compare centripetal acceleration, to that of acceleration due to
gravity, we need to compare the centripetal force with the weight of the object. i.e.
Substituting values gives:
& X
This last result shows that the centripetal acceleration is 472,000 times larger than
the acceleration due to gravity, g. Such high-speed centrifuges are called ultra-
centrifuges. The extremely large accelerations involved greatly decreases the time
needed to cause the sedimentation of blood cells or other materials in laboratory
examinations.
86
Grade 11
A merry-go round is a popular amusement ride
in many kids' play yards. In such play, kids feel
more uneasy when the wheels are rotated fast
in a short diameter wheel than when the wheels
are rotated slow in a long diameter wheel. This
is because of the fact that the radial acceleration
is very high for short diameter and high-speed
rotors.
Figure 3.20: In the merry go round play kids enjoy the feeling of the effect of
the radial acceleration as they go round.
Exercise 3.8
Suppose the diameter of the merry go round in Figure 3.20 is 4.0 m.
(a) What will be the radial acceleration of the kid if she rotates one rotation
every 3 seconds?
(b) Draw schematic circular path that shows the direction of the centripetal
acceleration of the circular motion by applying vector subtraction method.
Uniform Circular Motion in a Horizontal Plane
Horizontal circular motion indicates circular
motion across a horizontal surface. There are
various day-to-day examples such as the motion of
a mass attached to the end of a string and made to
rotate in a horizontal circle, Figure 3.21. In this case
the centripetal force is provided by the tension (T)
in the string. Hence,
T
Figure 3.21: Amass attached
the end of a string and rotate in
a horizontal plane
Example 3.13:
A string cam withstand a tension of 25 N. What is the greatest speed at which a
body of mass 1 kg can be whirled in a horizontal circle using a string of length
1.0m?
Solution:
F =T =25 N,m= 1kg,l= r = 1.0m
=5m/s
87
Physics
I
Student Text Book
When a car moves around a roundabout, Figure
N
3.22, the centripetal force is provided by the
frictional force between the road and the tires of the
car. Hence,
mg
Figure 3.22: A car travelling
on a roundabout
Where Fₙ is the normal force, ad exerts on the car.
?
Activity 3.11:
It is a common experience to see cars
skidding out of a roundabout and
collide with anything in the nearby
the road. Discuss in group about the
causes of such accidents and suggest
the remedy. Present your group's
opinion to the class and make class
level discussion.
Example 3.14
Find the maximum speed of a car with which it can be safely driven along a curve
of radius 40 m and the coefficient of friction between tires and road is
0.7. (Take g = 10 m/s²)
Solution:
r=10m,µ=0.2,v=?
Since the centripetal force is provided by frictional force,
Ff = m v²
µmg = m²
µmg = m²
v = µgr = X X 40m = 16.73m/ S
88
Grade 11
The conical pendulum
Suppose a particle of mass m is tied to a string of length l and then whirled round
in a horizontal circle of radius r, with O fixed directly above the center B of the
circle, Figure 3.23. If the circular speed of the particle is constant, the string turns at
a constant angle Θ to the vertical. This is called a conical pendulum.
0
F Cose
F
h
0
Sing
mg
Figure 3.23: A conical pendulum
The horizontal component of the tension in the string (T), points towards the center
of the circle, hence it provides the centripetal force.
T sin Θ = mv²
The weight (mg) of the particle is balanced by the vertical component of the tension
in the string.
T cos Θ = mg
Dividing the above equation by the lower one gives:
tan Θ = rg
Motion of a car Round a Banked Road
Suppose a car is moving round a banked road in a horizontal circular path of radius,
r, Figure 3.24. If the only forces at the wheels are the normal reaction forces Fₙ, that is
there is no side-slip or strain at the wheels, the force towards the center of the track is :
89
Physics
I
Student Text Book
N cos Θ
Nsin 0 = m²
N
A
The vertical equilibrium gives: N COS È = mg
Dividing the top equation by the bottom one gives:
Nsin 8
tan Θ =
00
mg
Figure 3.24: Banking of a road
The angle of banking is then,
Exercise 3.9
Calculate the maximum speed with which a car can be driven safely along a
curved road of a radius of 30m and banked at an angle of 30° with the horizontal.
(take g = 9.8m/s²)
Review Questions 3.5
1. What does it mean by uniform circular motion?
2. Define the terms centripetal or radial acceleration and force.
3. What is the direction of centripetal acceleration?
4. How it is possible for a body to be accelerated if its speed is constant?
5. What is (a) the tangential velocity? (b) the angular velocity? and (c) the
centripetal acceleration, due to the Earth's rotation, of a body on the equator?
Radius of Earth = 6,400 km.
6. The wheel of a bicycle has a radius of 40 cm. Calculate its period of revolution
if the bicycle moves with a speed of 20 km/h. How much is the angular
velocity?
7. Find the banking angle of the railway track with a radius of curvature of
1500m. If the train's maximum speed is 15m/s. If the distance between the
two tracks is 1.8m, calculate the elevation of the outer track over the inner
track.
90
Grade 11
SUMMARY:
c
Acceleration is a vector quantity, and is defined as the rate of change of velocity or
change in velocity per unit time. The SI unit of acceleration is m/s2.
C
Average acceleration:
a
C
Instantaneous acceleration, ains or acceleration at a specific instant in time. It is
determined by taking the time interval between the two points (t) approach zero.
c
A motion with a constant acceleration refers to a motion where, the velocity of the
object is changing by equal amount in equal interval of time.
C
The equations of motion with a constant acceleration:
v² = vᵢ² + 2as
Braking distance Stoppind distance = vt+2us v²
c
A displacement-time graph shows how displacement changes with time.
C
The slope of displacement-time graph gives velocity.
c
A velocity-time graph shows how velocity changes with time.
c
The slope of a velocity-time graph gives the acceleration.
c
The area between a velocity-time graph and the 'time' axis gives the displacement
of the object.
c
Acceleration-time graph shows how acceleration changes with time.
C
When things move vertically either up or down under the force of gravity alone,
the resulting motion is called free fall. The acceleration of a freely falling body is
constant and is known as acceleration due to gravity, denoted by the letter g.
c
Equations of freely falling
1.v=u+gt
3.v² = u² + 2gy
91
Physics I Student Text Book
c
Terminal velocity is defined as the point at which the velocity of a falling object is
no longer getting greater. An object at terminal velocity has zero acceleration.
Uniform circular motion is a special type of curvilinear motion in which an object
travels in a circle with a constant speed but its direction of motion continuously
changes.
c
While moving in a circular path, the angle made by the radius 'r' of the circle is
known as angular displacement (Θ).
c
Tangential displacement (s) is the distance covered by the rotating object along
the curved path (circumference of a circle).
c
Angular displacement 0=5
c
Angular velocity measures the rate at which angular displacement changes.
It is denoted by Greek letter omega (w) and its standard unit is radians per
second.
w=4θ
c
A velocity describes the motion of an object along the edge of the circle whose
direction at any given point on the circle is always along the tangent to that point.
state
Centripetal Acceleration that acceleration an object moving in uniform circular
motion the centripetal acceleration, ac. Centripetal means center seeking or
towards the center.
C
The force which causes centripetal acceleration is called a centripetal force.
Fc = mac
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS
1. Which one of the following pairs of concepts cannot both simultaneously be
constant and non-zero for a body?
A. The speed and velocity
B. Magnitude of acceleration and acceleration
C. Total distance and displacement
D. Velocity and acceleration
2. Can an object can have variable speed but constant velocity? Explain.
3. Can an object can have constant speed but variable velocity? Explain.
4. What do you mean by motion in one and two dimensions? Give examples of each type.
92
Grade 11
5. Can the displacement be greater than the distance travelled by an object? Give reason.
6. Can the direction of velocity of an object change, while its acceleration is constant?
Explain with example.
7. Is it possible for a body to be accelerated without speeding up or slowing down? If so,
give an example.
8. To get to school, a girl walks 1 km North in 15 minutes. She then walks 200 m South-
west in 160 seconds. What is the girl's average velocity for her walk to school?
9. Very large magnitude of acceleration can be achieved in some devices such as in a
gun. A bullet in a gun is accelerated from the firing chamber to the end of the barrel
at an average rate of 6.20 x 10³ m/s² for 8.10 x 10⁴ S. What is its muzzle velocity (that is, its
final velocity)?
10. It is very common for drivers when they
Mary
enter the express road, they increase
ADAMA
their speed. While entering to the ex-
press road on its travel from Addis Aba-
ba to Adama , a car accelerates from rest
at a rate of 2.40 m/s2 for 12.0 S.
(a) Draw a sketch of the situation.
(b) List the knowns in this problem.
(c) How far does the car travel in those 12.0 s? (d) What is the car's final
velocity?
11. A particle moving at 25 m/s in a straight line slows uniformly at a rate of 2 m/s every
second. In an interval of 10 s, find: (a) the acceleration, (b) the final velocity, (c) the
distance moved.
12. At the instant the traffic light turns green, an automobile starts moving with a constant
acceleration of 5.0 m/s2. At the same instant a truck, travelling with a constant speed
of 10 m/s, overtakes and passes the automobile. (a) How far beyond the traffic signal
will the automobile overtake the truck? (b) How fast will the automobile be at that
instant?
13. Describe the motion in each interval of the velocity-time graph shown in the figures
below.
velocity
(m/min)
80
60
40
20
time
(min)
-20
40
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 3.22
93
Physics
Student Text Book
14. On its way along a straight line, a car starts from rest and accelerated at a rate of 2.5
m/s2 for 10s. It maintained its speed for further 5 S and decelerated by 0.5m/s2 to
come to rest. What is the time taken for the entire motion? How far did it travel?
Draw the position vs time, and velocity vs time graph of the motion of the car.
15. On a user's manual of a motorbike you see a specification labeled as "the bike
can accelerate to 100km/h from rest in 4seconds." A) what can you say about the
maximum average acceleration of the bike? B) How far does it travel in this time?
16. The head quarter of Commercial Bank of Ethiopia
having a height of 198m is the tallest building in
Ethiopia and one of the top ten tallest buildings in
Africa. If the engineer's helmet is suddenly dropped
from the roof during the final topping, A) How long
does it take for the helmet to reach to the ground?
B) If someone needs to throw the helmet up to the
top, what minimum initial velocity is needed? Can
this initial velocity be achieved by a human being?
(neglect air resistance in all cases)
Figure 3.22
17. A stone strikes the ground with a speed of 25 m/s. (a) From what height was it
released? (b) How long was it falling? (c) If the stone is thrown down with a speed
of 10 m/s from the same height, then what will be its speed just before hitting the
ground?
18. Calculate the height of a building if it takes 4.0s for a ball to reach to the ground
when it is thrown straight up from the top of the building with an initial velocity
of 8.0 m/s. (Sketch the motion diagram.)
19. A kangaroo can vertically jump over an object
2.5m high.
A. What is its initial vertical speed to reach
this height?
B. How long will it stay in the air if it is jump-
ing on a level ground?
Figure 3.23
20. Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration of a particle moving in a circle of
radius r = 0.5 m with a constant speed of 10 m/s.
21. A 0.525 kg ball is attached to a 1.25 m string and swings in a circular path, making
2.00 revolutions per second. The angle of the string is nearly horizontal. Find the
tension in the string.
22. A 0.525 kg ball is attached to a 1.25 m string and swings in a circular path. The
angle of the string away from vertical is 30.0°. Find the centripetal force acting on
the ball and the speed of the ball.
94
T
R
S
S
UNIT 4
DYNAMICS
Introduction
Motion is an important element in studying Physics. Naturally, the race of athletes, the
flying of a bird, and the jumping of a dolphin out from the water, the trajectory of a soccer
ball or a basketball and the like are examples of motion in nature. The motion of a fast
driving car, or an airplane or a fast magnetic levitated (Maglev) train, or a supersonic
jet, or a satellite orbiting the Earth are all fascinating developments of human beings in
the advancement of motion.
.In unit three of this textbook, you studied kinematics: the study of motion that
only describes the way objects move-their velocity and their acceleration but not what
causes the motions. However, motions have causes and that cause is a force. The study
of motion with its cause is dynamics. In this unit, we study about motion, how motion
is created by a force, what the impact of force is on moving or stationary objects and
the like.
At the end of this unit you should be able to:
demonstrate an understanding of the relationship between net force and
the acceleration of an object in linear motion
analyze the effect of a net force in quantitative terms, using graphs, free-
body diagrams, and vector diagrams
describe the first condition of equilibrium quantitatively.
demonstrate an understanding, in qualitative and quantitative terms, of
the concepts of work, energy, energy transformations and power
design and carry out experiments and solve problems involving energy
transformations and the law of conservation of energy.
realize that momentum is an inherent property of moving objects
express the relationship between impulse and momentum.
95
Physics
Student Text Book
4.1 The Concept of Force and Newton's Laws of
motion
The concept of force
At the end of completion of this section you should be able to:
discuss what the concept of force means in physics, and why forces are
vectors.
define force and discuss its effects on a body.
distinguish between contact forces and field forces.
discuss the four fundamental forces in nature and their real life
application.
state newton's laws of motion
demonstrate the cause effect relationship of force and acceleration.
apply newton's second law to determine the weight of an object.
demonstrate the relationship between weight and normal force.
?
Brainstorming
1. How do you define the term force in your own words? Mention some of the
natural phenomena that show the action of a force on or between objects in
your surroundings.
2. How does force affect every moment in your life?
To understand dynamics, the study of motion and its causes, we need to start with
the working definition of force. In everyday language a force is a push or a pull,
as when you push or pull a table on the floor or a player kicks a ball, Figure 4.1.
The speed and direction of motion of both the ball and the table are determined
by the magnitude and direction of the applied force. So force is a vector quantity,
just like velocity and acceleration.
The SI unit of measurement of force is newton (N).
Where 1N = 1kg.m/s²
Push
Pull
F
F
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1 (a) Force exerted on the table (b) Force exerted on the ball
96
Grade 11
Apart from changing the speed or direction of motion of a body or both, force can
also change the shape or size of a body. A tennis ball hit by a racket is deformed to
some extent. Such an effect is called deformation.
A force can be either a contact force or a field force. Forces that result from
physical contact between two bodies are called contact forces. A girl stretching a
spring, a man pulling a box on the floor, and a girl kicking a ball are few examples
of contact forces.
On the other hand forces like gravitational attraction between the Sun and the
Earth, the electrostatic force between charged particles, and magnetic force
between a magnet and magnetic substances that operate at a distance are known
as field forces.
The known fundamental forces in nature are all field forces. These are, in order
of decreasing strength:
1. the strong nuclear force between subatomic particles;
2. the electromagnetic forces between electric charges;
3. the weak nuclear force, which arises in certain radioactive decay processes; and
4. the gravitational force between objects.
The strong force keeps the nucleus of an atom from flying apart due to the
repulsive electric force of the protons. The weak force is involved in most
radioactive processes and plays an important role in the nuclear reactions that
generate the Sun's energy output. The strong and weak forces operate only on the
nuclear scale, with a very short range on the order of 10-15 m.
In this section we will use two new concepts, force and mass, to analyze the
principles of dynamics. These principles were clearly stated for the first time by
Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727); today we call them Newton's laws of motion.
Key terms
Dynamics: The subdivision of mechanics that deals with the motion of objects in
relation to the physical factor that causes the motion, the force.
Force: An external agent of a body that changes state of rest or state of motion
of that body.
97
Physics
Student Text Book
Isaac Newton was one of the most brilliant scientists in
history. Before the age of 30, he formulated the basic
concepts and laws of mechanics, discovered the law of
universal gravitation, and invented the mathematical
methods of calculus. As a consequence of his theories,
Newton was able to explain the motions of the planets,
the ebb and flow of the tides, and many special
features of the motions of the Moon and the Earth.
He also interpreted many fundamental observations
concerning the nature of light. His contributions to
Figure 4.2 Isaac Newton
physical theories dominated scientific thought for two
English physicist and math-
centuries and remain important today. (Giraudon/Art
ematician
Resource)
Laws of Motion
Newton's First Law of Motion
?
Brainstorming
Suppose you are in a stationary car. What will happen to you if the car suddenly
starts to move forward? Suppose now you are in a moving car. What will
happen to you if the driver hits the pedal and the car suddenly brakes to stop?
How do the forces that act on a body affect its motion? To begin to answer this
question, let's first consider what happens when the net force on a body is zero.
Consider a book placed on your desk. What will happen to the book if you leave
it there for a long time? Your response will obviously be 'it will remain at rest'. You
would almost certainly agree that if a body is at rest, and if no net force acts on it
(that is, no net push or pull), that body will remain at rest. But what if there is zero
net force acting on a body in motion.
To see what happens in this case, do the following activity.
?
Activity 4.1
1. Slide a hockey puck along a horizontal tabletop as described following the
three steps:
(a) Place the puck on the table Figure 4.3 a. Apply a horizontal force and
once it is in motion stop pushing it.
98
Grade 11
(b) Repeat step (a) but now cover the table top with a smooth surface of ice,
Figure 4.3b.
(c) Repeat step (a) by putting the puck on an air-hockey table, where it floats
on a thin cushion of air, Figure 4.3 c.
Write down your observation in each of the three cases. Is there a difference in
distance covered by the puck before it stopped? What do you think is the reason for
this?
1s,
Is2
S3
Puck on a table
Puck on an icy surface S₁ > S₂
Puck on an air-hockey table S3 S₂
Figure 4.3 A puck pushed horizontally on three surfaces of different nature. Compare the
distances.
From the results of the above activity, one can conclude that if we could eliminate
friction completely, the puck would never slow down, and we would need no force
at all to keep the puck moving once it had been started. Once a body has been set in
motion, no net force is needed to keep it moving. We call this observation Newton's
first law of motion:
Newton's first law of motion
"An object at rest remains in a state of rest and an object in motion continues in To-
tion along a straight line with constant speed unless an external force acts upon it.
"
Newton's first law of motion is also called the law of inertia. The property of a body
to remain at rest or to remain in motion with constant velocity is called inertia.
Key term
Inertia: The tendency of a body to oppose any change in its state of rest or its state
of uniform motion.
It is more difficult to change the state of motion of a truck than that of a small bajaj
(a three wheel taxi in many parts of Ethiopia). This is because the mass of the truck
is much larger than that of the bajaj, Figure 4.4. As the mass of the bajaj is small, a
single person can pull or push it which is unthinkable for the truck. This property of
99
Physics
I
Student Text Book
maintaining state of motion is called the inertia. mass is a measure of imertia.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4 Inertia is larger for large masses than for small masses.
?
Activity 4.2
Material required: Two medium-size cans, tow strings and a horizontal fixed beam
from which the cans can be suspended, Figure 4.5.
Procedure
Fill one of the cans with sand and leave the other one empty.
a) Try to set the cans in motion. What difference did you observe?
b) Now pull the cans to one side (to the same height) and release themTry to
stop the cans one after the other. What did you experience? Discuss with
your classmates about the difficulties you faced in terms of the forces you
are required to set the cans in motion (case (a)) or to stop them (case
(b)).
Figure 4.5 Large masses have larger inertia than small masses
100
Grade 11
Some examples of Applications of Newton's first law
You have heard about the importance of safety belts to protect passengers in a car
or in an airplane or in a bus from severe damage during accidents. The probability
of facing severe injury to the extent of death when an accident occurs is very high
on people who do not fasten seat belts.
The question is: Why Seat belts? What is the physics behind Seat belts?
The answer is Newton's first law of motion. If a car is moving with a speed of
80km/h, all passengers in the car are moving with a speed of 80km/h. If the car
suddenly stops for reasonable case, the passenger who fastened seat belt remains
intact with the body of the car and stops with the car safely, Figure 4.6a. On the
other case, the passenger who doesn't fasten seat belt is in a loose state from the
body of the car and when the car abruptly stops, according to Newton's first law,
the passenger continues its motion with 80km/h and collide to anything in front
of him such as to the steering wheel, Figure 4.6b or even may smash againes the
windshied of the car which may lead to severe injury and death. Modern cars
have airbags on the steering wheel or on the dashboard, Figure 4.7, to protect
passengers from severe injury by giving cushion during accidents. However,
airbags are designed to emerge automatically only when the car collided with
something. Therefore, passengers should always fasten their seatbelts.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6 A passenger without a seat belt will suffer injury during an accident.
Figure 4.7 Airbag systems in vehicles are designed to deply during vehicle collision
101
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 4.3
Fun with Inertia
Materials
Glass tumbler
Small, stiff piece of cardboard
Coins
Ruller
(a)
Figure 4.8 Inertia at rest
Procedure 1: Refer Figure 4.8a.
(a) Put a playing card on top of the plastic cup
(b) Put a coin on top of the card
(c) With a sharp flick, hit the card out from under the coin.
Question: What happened to the coin? Explain your observation interms of
Newton's First law of motion.
The motion of a body can only be described relative to other bodies. Bodies with
which motion of a body can be compared are known as frames of reference. Frame
of reference can be catagorized as Inertial frame of reference and Non-inertial frame
of reference.
A frame reference which is at rest or moves with a constant velocity is known as an
inertial frame of reference. A stationary car or a car traveling at constant velocity
is an inertial frame of reference. A car slowing down for a stoplight, or speeding
up after the light turns green, will be accelerating and is not an inertial frame of
reference. Such a frame of reference is known as Non-inertial frame of reference.
An inertial frame of reference is the type of frame where Newton's laws hold true.
If no outside force is exerted on an object, it will continue to stay in state of rest or
uniform motion.
102
Grade 11
Newton's Second Law of Motion
?
Brainstorming
Based on your knowledge of kinematics discuss the difference between moving
with uniform velocity and having acceleration.
What is the cause of acceleration?
A net external force and a system are the main focus of this section in which the
cause effect relation of net force and acceleration will be discussed. The concepts of
weight, normal force, and friction force and how they are related to each other and
some applications of Newton's law are also the focus of interest in this section.
Newton's second law of motion is closely related to and is a consequence of Newton's
first law of motion. According to the first law, a body persists to its state of motion
or rest unless an unbalanced force acts on it." The question is: What will happen to
the object if an unbalanced force acts on it? The answer was given by Newton after
simple experiments and inquiries (refer Figure 4.9.)
+
m
THE
m
a
+
m
m
m
m
1
b
m
m
m
1
m
à
m
m
m
m
Figure 4.9 Demonstrating Newton's second law of motion. See how the acceleration is af-
fected (a) when the force is changed for a constant mass and (b) when the mass is changed
for a constant force
Inquiry I: What will happen if a force F is applied to an object of mass m which
is initially at rest on a horizontal smooth surface where friction is
negligible?
(Answer): By observation, it moves with some velocity in the direction of the applied
force.)
Inquiry II: How does it move as long as the force is maintained? (Answer: The velocity
is increasing uniformly through time. That means it is accelerating
uniformly).
103
Physics | Student Text Book
Inquiry III: What will happen to the magnitude of the acceleration if the force
is doubled, or tripled, while the mass is kept unchanged? (Answer:
Experimentally as the force is doubled the acceleration is doubled as
shown in Figure 4.9a a. The acceleration is therefore directly proportional
to the applied force.)
Inquiry IV: What will happen to the magnitude of the acceleration if the mass is
doubled, or tripled, while the force is kept unchanged? (Experimentally,
for the constant force, as the mass is doubled the acceleration is reduced
by half, when the mass is tripled, the acceleration is reduced by one-
third and so on as shown in Figure 4.9 b. The acceleration is therefore
inversely proportional to the mass.)
The answers for inquiries I through IV with an illustrative demonstration of Figure
4.9 collectively give the full statement of Newton's second law that can be stated as
follows.
Newton's Second Law of motion
"When an unbalanced force acts on an object of mass T, the object accelerates in the
direction of the applied force with the magnitude of acceleration directly proportional to
the net applied force and inversely proportional to the mass of the object."
Mathematically Newton's second law can be expressed as
a~F~anda~1
We write a
The constant of proportionality k is equal to one, so in mathematical terms the
preceding statement can be written
a = k m
Rearranging in a linear form,
Key terms
Net force: The sum of two or more forces (Resultant force)
Acceleration: The time rate of change of velocity. It could happen when a body
changes its speed or direction of motion or both.
System: A collection of objects, elements or components that are organized for a
common purpose. Anything outside the system is the surrounding.
The SI unit of force, newton, in terms of the three basic quantities of measurement
in mechanics: length mass and time is expressed as
104
Grade 11
1 newton = 1kg m²
(SI unit of force in terms the basic units)
Large quantities of forces can also be expressed in kilo newton (kN); 1kN=1000N
?
Activity 4.4
Group work
Explore the relationship between Force, Mass, and Acceleration.
Problem
If you pull an object with a force, how do force and mass affect the acceleration
of the object?
Materials
Dynamics cart with hook, two 200-g standard masses, one 1 kg standard mass,
spring scale (0 -5 N) smooth, and a flat surface (about 2 m long), Figure 4.10.
Loaded cart
Spring scale
Force
Figure 4.10 Set up of the materials
Procedure
A. Place the 200 g standard masses on the cart and attach the spring scale to
the hook on the cart.
B. Pull the spring scale so that the cart starts to accelerate forward. Pull the
spring with a constant force of 3 N. Keep the force as constant as possible
while pulling the cart and observe the acceleration of the cart.
C. Replace the 200 g masses on the cart with the 1kg standard mass. Then
pull the cart applying the same force you used in step B. Observe the
acceleration of the cart.
D. Place the 1 kg standard mass on the cart and now pull the cart applying a
constant force of 4 N. Observe the acceleration of the cart.
105
Physics
Student Text Book
E. Repeat step D but this time pull with a force of 2 N. Observe the acceleration
of the cart.
Answer the following questions based on your observation.
1. What can you say from your observation in steps B and C? How did the mass
affect the acceleration for a constant force?
2. What can you conclude from what you observed in steps D and E? How did
the force affect the acceleration for a constant mass?
3. What did you find difficult in this activity? What other techniques can you
suggest to keep the force applied on the spring constant? Discuss with your
group members.
Newton's third Law of Motion
?
Brainstorming
If you drop your pencil at a certain height, it falls downward due to the force that the
Earth exerts on the pencil. Can you say that the pencil in turn exerts force on Earth?
Why is it difficult to walk on sand than on a solid ground?
When a body exerts a force on a second body, the second body exerts a force on the
first body which is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. Figure 4.11 shows
some of the common action-reaction pairs.
If you hit down a nail with a hammer, the nail hits the hammer back with a force
of the same size. A typical application of Newton's third law is the propulsion of a
rocket while hot gas is exhausted from the rocket.
Reaction:
Reaction: Rocket
Force of nail on
moving upward
the hammer
Action:
Force on the
Force of hamme
on the nail
Action:
gas
Hot gas ejected
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11 Action and reaction pairs. Forces are always in pairs and for every action
there is an equal and opposite reaction
Key terms
Action and reaction: During an ineaction between two objects the force one exerts
on the other is Action and the force it is acted upon by the other is Reaction
106
Grade 11
Exercise 4.1
Discribe the action and reaction pairs a) as you walk on the ground,
b) as a player kicks a ball
Newton's third law is popularly expressed as:
"For every action there is always an equal and opposite reaction."
In Figure 4.12, it is clearly seen that the boy is pushing the girl but it is not obvious
that the girl is pushing back on the boy. In fact when both the boy and the girl move
in opposite directions immediately after interaction, it becomes clear that the boy is
affected by the force that the girl exerted on him. Can you identify the action and
reaction forces in this case?
FGB
F
BG
Boy
Girl
Figure 4.12 Action and reaction are equal and opposite F BG--FBG
?
Activity 4.5
Discuss with your classmate
Imagine a fat person and a thin person that are running in opposite directions
accidentally collide with each other. If the thin person falls backward while the fat
person stands still, what can you say about the forces the persons exerted on one
another? Give your reason in terms of Newton's third law of motion.
Misconception alert
Action and reaction forces, though they are equal in magnitude and opposite in
direction, they act on two different bodies. Therefore they cannot be added to give
a zero resultant!!!
107
Physics I Student Text Book
Weight and the Gravitational Force
When an object is dropped, it accelerates toward the center of the Earth. According
to Newton's second law, acceleration is the effect caused by a force. Therefore, a
falling object, experiences a downward force known as weight of the object denoted
by w. The magnitude of the weight is the product of mass (m) and the value of
acceleration due to gravity g. Weight is a vector whose direction is always down
towards the center of the Earth.
Mathematically,
Weight = (mass) (acceleration due to gravity)
W = mg
Near to the surface of the earth, the magnitude of g is 9.8m/s²
Question
Is weight of a body the same everywhere? Discuss you answer.
Example 4.1
What is the weight of a 1 kg block on the surface of the moon where acceleration
due to gravity is only one-sixth of its value on the surface of the Earth?
Solution
Weight W = mgm, where gm = 1 (g) = (9.8m/s²) = 1.6m/s²
W = (1kg) (1.6m/s²) = 1.6N
An object on the moon weighs one-sixth as much as it does on the surface of the
Earth.
This example depicts that the weight of an object is not an intrinsic property, as its
value varies from place to place depending on the value of acceleration due to gravity
g.
When an object is released in air, it experiences a downward force due to its weight
and a drug force due to friction with the air. When the net force acting on the object
is assumed to be gravity only, we say that the body is in free fall. The gravitational
force (Fg) on a freely falling body is thus its weight (W).
(F) = W = mg
108
Grade 11
Misconception Alert
In everyday language, it is common to interchangeably use mass and weight.
However in science, these terms are different from one another. Mass, measured in
kilograms, is the measure of how much matter is in an object and it characterizes
the inertial properties of a body. Weight on the other hand is a measure of the force
of gravity acting on an object and measured in newton.
Normal Force
If you place your book on a table top as shown in the Figure 4.13, then a downward
gravitational force, m, is exerted on the book, but the book is still intact on the table.
What keeps the book intact on
FN
the table? The upward force that
supports the book is the Normal
Force, denoted by FN. The normal
force is perpendicular to the surface
that supports the book.
Weight
W
Figure 4.13 Normal force and weight for a
book placed on a horizontal surface.
Normal force is a type of contact force - two objects or surfaces have to touch for
there to be a normal force.
Since the book is in equilibrium, the net force acting on the book is zero. Therefore,
on a level surface the normal force is equal to the weight.
F = w = mg
Note that as the name implies normal force is always normal (perpendicular) to
the surface. Thus the weight and the normal force are equal only when the object is
placed on a level surface. In most cases objects are placed on non-leveled surfaces
such as on an inclined plane as shown in Figure 4.14. The normal force is less than
the weight by a factor of cos Θ. As Θ is increased the normal force that supports the
object is decreased and it will be zero when Θ is 90⁰. When Θ is 0°, as in Figure 4.14
the inclined plane becomes a level surface and obviously the normal force will be
equal to the weight.
109
Physics
I
Student Text Book
F
N
W sin Θ
Θ
W cos Θ
Θ
W
Figure 4.14 A block on an inclined plane
Fₙ = W cos Θ = mg cos Θ
Key terms
Weight: The gravitational pull on an object
Normal forces: A force with which to objects push one another and acting
perpendicularly at the surface of contact
?
Activity 4.6
Place your book on a horizontal surface, Figure 4.15a. What is the normal force on
the block? Now raise one side of the surface slowly as in Figure 4.15b and answer
the following questions based on your observation.
a) What is the force that tends to slide the block down the surface?
c) What is the force that keeps the block on the inclined surface?
d) Did the block slide down the plane the moment you started to raise the
surface? If your answer is no, what kept the block from sliding at that
instant?
e) For what angle of elevation did the block start sliding?
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.15 A block on a horizontal surface and inclined surface
110
Grade 11
Example 4.2
If in figure 4.15b, the mass of the block is 6 kg resting on top of a 37° inclined
plane, determine the weight and the normal force.
Solution:
The weight of the block is: W = mg = (6 kg) (9.8 m/s²) = 58.8 N.
The normal force is: FN = mgcosΘ = (6 kg) (9.8 m/s²) cos37° = 47 N
Review Questions 4.1
1. What are contact forces and field forces? Give examples of each.
2. List down the four fundamental forces in nature and arrange them in the order
of increasing strength.
3. State the three Newton's laws of motion.
4. How are inertia and mass related?
FGB
FBG
5. Discuss the advantages of wearing seat belt in a car?
6. What is the advantage of having airbag in a car?
7. Discuss the dependence of acceleration of a body with its mass and net force
applied on it.
8. What is the relationship between weight and mass? Which is an intrinsic,
unchanging property of a body?
9. Identify the action and reaction forces in the following situations: (a) Earth
attracts the Moon, (b) a boy kicks a football, (c) a rocket accelerates upward,
(d) a car accelerates forward, (e) a high jumper leaps, and (f) a bullet is shot
from a gun.
10. A block of mass m is placed on a horizontal surface as shown in Figure 4.16.
What is the normal force in each of the following cases?
m
m
m
Fig 4.16
11. (a) If gold were sold by weight, would you rather buy it in Addis Ababa or in
Alaska?
(b) If it were sold by mass, in which of the two locations would you prefer to
buy it? Why?
111
Physics
Student Text Book
4.2 Frictional Force
At the end of completion of this section you should be able to:
describe the general characteristics of friction
list the various types of friction
calculate the magnitude of static and kinetic friction, and use these in
problems involving Newton's laws of motion
solve more complex acceleration problems involving Newton's laws of
motion.
use free-body diagrams to solve problems on Newton's Laws of motion.
?
Brainstorming
What is the role of friction in our daily life?
Can you get rid of friction?
Mention pros and cons of frictional force?
Friction is a type of force that We experience in our everyday activity. Friction,
in simple terms is a force that opposes motion. It occurs when two surfaces are in
contact with each other and when one surface slides or attempts to slide over the
other. Friction occurs due to the roughness of the surfaces in contact. Even if the
surface seem very smooth, it is not so at micro or nano scale, Figure 4.17.
Direction of motion
or attempted motion
F
Magnified view of
Contacting surfaces
F ᵉ
Figure 4.17 Magnified view of surfaces in contact
Friction helps us to move while we walk by preventing us from slipping. Without
friction between the tires and the road we couldn't drive or turn the car. Without the
frictional force exerted by the air on a body moving through it (air drag), parachutes
do not work. Without friction nails would pull out, light bulbs would unscrew
effortlessly. See Figure 4.18.
112
Grade 11
Direction of mtion
of the person
The foot exerts force
The ground applies a
backward against the
static frictional force
ground
forward against the foot
Air resistance
(Drag force)
Direction of motion
of the car
Rotation of
the wheel
Frictional force betweer
tire and the ground
Gravitational force
(Weight)
Figure 4.18 Friction force in action (a) Friction on the foot of a walking person
(b) Friction on the wheel of a moving car (c) Drag force on a parachute
There are two types of friction:Static friction and Kinetic friction. Static friction is
the friction between two surfaces when there is no movement. Suppose you pull a
block slightly along a table top, Figure 4.19a. The block will not move with such a
small force that you apply. What do you think is the reason for this? The force that
keeps the block form sliding is the force of static friction denoted by (F) and is
directed opposite to the applied force.
Motion
Applied force
Applied force
Fs
Fₖ
Static frictional force
Kinetic frictional force
(a) The block at rest
(b) The block in motion
Figure 4.19 Static friction and kinetic friction
Kinetic friction: Kinetic friction is the friction between two surfaces when one of
them is sliding over the other. For example, when the block that you push begins
to slide over the table, Figure 4.19b, there is force of kinetic friction denoted by (Ft)
between the bottom surface of the block and the table top.
113
Physics
I Student Text Book
Key terms
Friction: a force that opposes the motion of one surface over another.
Static friction: Friction between two contacting surfaces at rest.
Kinetic friction: Friction between two surfaces while one slides over the other.
Frictional force is directly related to the normal force and its value depends upon
the property of the surfaces in contact. This property of material that resists motion
is called the coefficient of friction (µ), which is defined as the ratio between the
friction force and the normal force. Mathematically,
Frictional force
Coefficient of friction = Normal force
or symbolically
Coefficient of friction is a dimensionless number.
We write Fₛ = µₛ, for static frictional force, where µₛ is coefficient of static friction.
Fₖ = µₖFₙ, for kinetic frictional force, where Uₖ is coefficient of kinetic friction.
The maximum value of static friction
The maximum value of static friction is known as limiting friction and it is the
frictional force between the surfaces when the body just begins to slide. Static friction
is less than or equal to the product of coefficient of static friction (µs) and the normal
force (Fₙ).
The maximum value being Fs = µsFN
Once the static friction gives way to kinetic friction, i.e., the block is in motion, it
is easier to keep it in motion than it was to get it started, indicating that the kinetic
frictional force is less than the static frictional force.
Kinetic friction is less than static friction.
Fₖ < Fs <
and H<Mk <
Note that
Unlike the kinetic friction force, the static friction force takes on any value between
zero and its maximum value of µₛFₙ, depending on the magnitude of the applied
force. It could take any value between zero to its limiting value.
114
Grade 11
Group work
Consider a block of wood placed at rest on a horizontal laboratory table and that
a horizontal force is applied on the block to get it moving along the surface. The
applied force versus frictional force is plotted as in Figure 4.20. Discuss the graph
with your classmates.
FN
FN
motion
F
F
F,
F,
mg
mg
Frictional force
F. max = Hs. FN
THE
Fx = P& FN
o
Applied force
Static region
Kinetic region
Figure 4.20 Plotting frictional force versus applied force
?
Activity 4.7
Relating static friction and normal force
Materials: Four identical blocks of known mass
A horizontal board
A spring scale
A graph paper
Procedure
1. Place one of the blocks on the board.
2. Attach the spring scale to the block, Figure 4.21a. Pull the block with an ever-
increasing horizontal force until the block just begins to move. Take the reading
of the scale.
115
Physics I Student Text Book
3. Increase the mass of the system by placing an identical block over the first
block, Figure 4.21b. Repeat step 2 and take the reading of the scale.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.21
4. Repeat step 3 two more times first with three blocks and then with four blocks.
5. Prepare a table and fill in the scale readings and the corresponding masses
used.
6. On a graph paper draw a graph of the reading of the scale versus the weight.
Draw a line of best fit and calculate the slope of the graph.
Question: What is the relationship between the maximum magnitude of the force
of static friction and the magnitude of the normal force? Write this as a
proportionality statement.
Example 4.3
An 8 kg block is placed on a horizontal surface. The coefficient of static friction
and that of kinetic friction between the block and surface are 0.4, and 0.35,
respectively.
A) What is the horizontal force just enough to start moving the block?
B) What horizontal force must be applied on the block to keep it
uniformly accelerating at 4 m/s2?
Solution
Given: m = 8 kg, µₛ = 0.4, µₖ = 0.3
A) The block is in a limiting equilibrium, so that the friction force will be
Fₛ = µₛFₙ, but FN = mg (since the block is on a level surface the
normal force is equal to the weight).
Therefore, Fs = µₘg = (0.4) (8 kg) (9.8 m/s²) = 31.4 N
B) As the block accelerates the net force that accelerates the block is the
vector sum of the applied force and the kinetic frictional force.
That is Fₙₑₜ = F app - Fₖ Fₙₑₜ = ma = (8kg)(4m/s²) = 32N, and Fₖ =
µₖᵐg = (0.3) (8 kg) (9.8 m/s²) = 23.5 N
thus, F app = F + = 32 N + 23.5 N = 55.5 N
116
Grade 11
Table 4.1 Coefficient of static and kinetic friction of some materials
Material
Against Material
Static friction
Kinetic friction
Glass
Glass
0.94
0.4
Rubber
Asphalt (dry)
0.85
0.67
Rubber
Asphalt (wet)
0.58
Rubber
Concrete(dry)
0.90
0.68
Wood
Wood
0.42
0.3
Steel
Aluminum
0.61
0.47
Steel
Copper
0.53
0.36
Steel
Steel
0.74
0.57
?
Activity 4.8
Group work
Set up an experiment to verify that of smoothness or roughness of a surface affects
the frictional fore between objects in contact?
?
Activity 4.9
In order to minimize accidents, it is advisable to drive slower during rainy season
than during dry season. What application of physics can you relate to this traffic
advice?
?
Activity 4.10
Interleave your books to each other
until they reach to approximately
3cm in thickness as shown in Figure
4.22. Try to separate the books after
interleaving by pulling them apart.
MANING
Why do you think it is very hard to
separate the books by pulling?
Figure 4.22 Interleaving the pages of two
books
117
Physics I Student Text Book
Did you know?
Natural lubricants include saliva produced in our mouth to aid in the swallowing process,
and the slippery mucus found between organs in the body, allowing them to move freely
past each other during heartbeats, during breathing, and when a person moves.
Example 4.4
A 6 kg block is placed on a ramp that makes an angle of 30° above the horizontal,
Figure 4.23a. If the block remains at rest,
A) what is the static friction that supports the block from sliding down the
ramp?
B) what is the coefficient of static friction between the block and the ramp?
Fs
mg sin Θ
30°
30°
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.23 A block on a ramp
As shown in Figure 4.23b, the force that tends to move the block down the ramp
is mg sinΘ and the one that prevented sliding is static friction Fₛ. The normal force
between the ramp and the block is FN = mg cosΘ.
A) Under the condition where the block is at rest we write,
Fₙₑₜ = 0 mg sinΘ-Fₛ = 0
Fₛ S = mg sinΘ = (6 kg) 30°) = 29.4 N
mg (6kg)(9.8m/s²)(cos30°) 29.4N = 0.58
See that mg sin Θ - Fs = 0, we have mg sin Θ - µₛmg Θ = 0
118
Grade 11
Example 4.5
A 6 kg block is placed on a ramp that makes an angle of 30° above the horizontal,
Figure 4.23a. If the block remains at rest,
A) what is the static friction that supports the block from sliding down
the ramp?
B) what is the coefficient of static friction between the block and the
ramp?
Some applications of Newton's Laws of motion
A free-body diagram
In order to easily understand and apply Newton's laws to solve practical problems
we need to know the use of a free-body diagram. A free-body diagram is a graphic,
dematerialized, symbolic representation of the body. In a free-body diagram, the
size of the arrow denotes the magnitude of the force. While the direction of the
arrow denotes the direction in which the force acts, Figure 4.24. For the block
of example 4.4, what acceleration would the block attain once it is set in motion
down the plane? (Take µₖ = 0.5)
FN
FN
y
Fy
F
F
X
Θ
Θ
Fx
Θ
W
W
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.24 (a) A moving sled (b) free-body diagram (c) free-body diagram with force
components
Solution:
When the block accelerates down the plane, we write
F net = ma
mg sin Θ - Fₖ = ma
mg (sin Θ - µₖ cos = ma
To draw a free-body diagram, we draw the object of interest, draw all forces acting
on the object, and resolve all force vectors into X and y components as required. We
119
Physics I Student Text Book
must draw a separate free-body diagram for each object in the problem. There are
many advantages of drawing free-body diagram. It is a medium to convert ideas into
a physical model. It also helps in understanding all facts of a problem. It assists in
building up suitable mathematical equations between various forces acting upon
link.
Key term
Free-Body Diagram: The most important step in solving a problem by means of
Newton's second law. It is a drawing that includes only those forces that act
directly on the object of interest
Example 4.6
Two blocks of identical materials are connected by a light string on a level surface
(Figure 4.25). Assuming no friction between the blocks and the level surface, find
the acceleration of the masses and the tension in the connecting string when the
string attached to m₁ is pulled to the right by a 36 N force. Use m1 = 4 kg and m2 =
8 kg.
m₂
m1
a
a
F
T
(a)
m₁
m₂
(b)
Figure 4.25
Solution:
Given: m₁ = 4 kg, m2 = 8 kg, F = 36 N
The blocks move together to the right under the action of force F. Writing Newton's
second law for each block we have
For m₁, F - T = m₁a
For m₂, T = m₂a
Adding the above equations we get
F=m,a+m,a=(m,+m,)a
F
a =
m₁ + m₂
Substituting the given values we obtain a = 3 m/s².
Using a 3 m/s² in T = m2a we get T = 24 N
120
Grade 11
Example 4.7
For the system of masses in Example 4.6, find the acceleration of the masses if the
coefficient of kinetic friction between each of the blocks and the level surface is
0.25.
Solution
given: m₁ = 4 kg, m2 = 8 kg, F = 36 N, µₖ = 0.25
This time the free-body diagram will include frictional forces on the blocks as in
Figure 4.26.
a
a
a
a
T
F
T
T
F
T
my
m₂
Ff1
Ff2
m₁
F12
m₂
F11
Figure 4.26 Free-body diagram
Writing Newton's second law of motion for each of the blocks as:
Adding these two equations, we get
Substituting values, we obtain
m₁ +m₂
Example 4.8
Two masses (m₁ = 4kg and m2 = 6kg), are connected by a light cord that passes over
a massless, frictionless pulley as shown in Figure 4.27a. This arrangement is called
Atwood's machine and sometimes is used to measure the acceleration due to gravity.
Find the magnitude of acceleration of the two masses and the tension in the cord.
Solution:
We construct a free-body diagram for the two masses as shown in Figure 4.27b,
and we identify the forces acting on each of the masses separately. m₁ is under the
action of the tension force on the string and its own weight while m₂ is under the
action of the tension force and its weight.
121
Physics I Student Text Book
When the system is released, m₁ moves upward while m2 moves downward.
Newton's second law is applied to m₁ in part (b) of the figure, we find:
Fₙₑₜ = m₁a
T - m₁g = m₁a
Also, we do the same for m2 of part (c) of the figure, to get:
Fₙₑₜ = m₂a
m₂g - T = m₁a
T
T
a
m₁
m₂
a
m₁
4 kg
6 kg
m₂
mig
m₂g
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.27: a) System of masses m₂ > m₁ attached by a rope over a friction-
less pulley, b)free-body diagram and direction of acceleration for m1
c) free body diagram and the direction of the acceleration for m₂
In the above two equations we have two unknowns the acceleration and the tension.
Adding the equations T = m₁a and T = m₂a, T will be cancelled out and
we get:
m₂g -m₁g = m₂a+ma
g(m₂-m₁)=(m₁+m₂)a
The acceleration is therefore,
m₁
m₂ and m₁ in the equation we get
Substituting this value of acceleration into one of the equations T m₁g = we
get
122
Grade 11
Tension Forces
When an object attached to a string (or a cable) is pulled by means of a pulling force
exerted on the string, the force on the string is called a tension force. The tension
force acts along the direction of the string and exerts a force both on the object and
on the person exerting force on the cable, as illustrated in Figure 4.28. If the mass of
the given cable is neglected, the same tension acts on both the object and the person
T
Figure 4.28 A man pulling a block
Vertical Tension force on a static object
The mass in Figure 4.29 is suspended from a vertical string. As the mass is not moving
it is in equilibrium and its acceleration is zero. Applying Newton's second law along
the y direction we write
Fₙₑₜ = ma
TE-
T - mg = ma
m
T-mg=0
Figure 4.29 The tension in the string supports the weight
Vertical tension force on an accelerating mass
The string attached to an object is pulled upward under such tension that it accelerates
the object upward (Figure 4.30). In this case the tension supports the weight and also
accelerates the object upward. Applying Newton's second law along the y axis we
write
123
Physics
I
Student Text Book
T
TE-
a
Fₙₑₜ = ma
a
m
T - mg = ma
T-mg=0
mg
T = m (g + a)
Figure 4.30 An object hangs by a string in an elevator accelerating upward
Exercise 4.2
What would the tension in the string be if the elevator of Figure 4.30
(a) is at rest?
(b) accelerates downward?
(c) accelerates upward?
(d) decelerates downward?
Review Questions 4.2
1. Walking on horizontal slippery ice can be much more tiring than walking on
ordinary pavement. Why?
2. You often hear people say that "friction always opposes motion." Give at least
one example where (a) static friction causes motion, and (b) kinetic friction
causes motion
3. If you push on a heavy box that is at rest, you must exert some force to start its
motion. Once the box is sliding, why does a smaller force maintain its motion?
4. A 25 kg block is initially at rest on a horizontal surface. A horizontal force of
75 N is required to set the block in motion. After it is in motion, a horizontal
force of 60 N is required to keep the block moving with constant speed. Find
the coefficients of static and kinetic friction from this information.
5. If a car is traveling westward with a constant speed of 20 m/s, what is the
resultant force acting on it?
6. What will happen to the tension in the string of Figure 4.30, if the cables of the
elevator suddenly break and the elevator falls freely?
7. A person weighs a fish of mass m on a spring scale attached to the ceiling of
an elevator. What can you say about the motion of the elevator if the reading
of the scale is (a) equal to mg? (b) greater that mg? (c) less than mg?
8. A block is placed on a smooth inclined plane shown in Figure 4.31. What
124
Grade 11
force parallel to the surface of the inclined plane is require to move the block
up the plane at (a) a constant speed? (b) a constant acceleration of 0.5 m/s2?
È
8
Figure 4.31 A mass on an inclined surface
9. Repeat question 8 if the coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and
the inclined surface is 0.25.
10. A ball of mass m1 and a block of mass m2 are attached by a lightweight cord
that passes over a frictionless pulley of negligible mass, as in Figure 4.32.
The block lies on a frictionless incline of angle Θ. Find the magnitude of the
acceleration of the two objects in terms of m₁, m2, g and Θ
ta
mg
F
8
Figure 4.32
11. The driver of a speeding empty truck slams on the brakes and skids to a stop
through a distance d. (a) If the truck carried a load that doubled its mass, what
would be the truck's skidding distance? (b) If the initial speed of the truck
were halved, what would be the truck's skidding distance?
125
Physics I Student Text Book
4.3 The First Condition of Equilibrium
At the end of completion of this section you should be able to:
define the term equilibrium
explain the first condition of equilibrium
apply the first condition of equilibrium to solve practical problems.
?
Brainstorming
What will happen to an object when it is under the action of balanced set of forces?
If an object is either at rest or moves uniformly including translational (linear) as
well as rotational motion it is said to be in equilibrium. In this section we shall focus
on one dimensional motion. If a body is at rest or moves at a constant speed in a fixed
direction (constant velocity) then it is in translational equilibrium. This statement
defines the first condition of equilibrium.
If an object is in equilibrium, its acceleration is zero and according to Newton's
second law of motion, the vector sum of all the forces acting on it must be zero.
ΣF=0 (The first condition of equilibrium)
For n number of forces acting on a object, we write
This equation can be written component wise as
and
Key term:
Equilibrium: a word that describes a state of rest or uniform motion along a fixed
direction of a body.
Example 4.9
A traffic light weighing 100 N hangs from a vertical cable tied to two other cables
that are fastened to a support, as in Figure 4.33a. The upper cables make angles of
37° and 53° with the horizontal. Find the tension in each of the three cables.
126
Grade 11
T,
37°
53°
T,
T2
T1
T2
37°
53°
T3
W
T,
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.33 A traffic light suspended from two strings Solution
Solution
Drawing a free-body diagram is highly helpful in solving problems involving
Newton's laws. As shown in the free-body diagram, the traffic light is under the
action of three tension forces, T1, T2 and T3. For it is in equilibrium, we write
Σ F = 0
But from Figure b, T₃ = W and we have T1 + T2 + W = 0
Breaking the forces into their components and applying the first condition of
equilibrium we have
T₂cos 53° - T₁ COS 37° = 0 0.6T2 - 0.8T₁ = 0
Σ Fy = 0, T₂y - T₁y - W = 0 T₂sin 53° - T₂sin 37° = W 0.8T2 - 0.6T₁ = 100N
Solving for T₁ and T₂ we get T₁ = 60N and T2 = 80N
?
Activity 4.11
If an object is at rest, it is necessarily in equilibrium. Is this statement correct?
Discuss your answer.
Review questions 4.3
1. If only one force acts on an object, can it be in equilibrium?
Explain.
2. If an object is in equilibrium, which of the following statements is not true?
(a) The speed of the object remains constant
(b) The acceleration of the object is zero.
(c) The net force acting on the object is zero.
(d) The object must be at rest.
(e) The velocity is constant.
127
Physics
Student Text Book
3. What is wrong with the
statement "Because the car is at
rest, there are no forces acting on it"?
e
How would you correct this sentence?
4. Can an object be in equilibrium if it is
in motion? Explain.
5. Mass m= 10kg is supported by two
M
strings is in equilibrium as shown in
Figure 4.34. Find the tension in the
horizontal string. Take Θ = 53°
Figure 4.34 A mass in equilibrium
4.4 Work, Energy and Power
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define work in terms of the applied force and the displacement.
calculate the work done by a constant force, by a varying force.
demonstrate by examples that maximum work is done when the applied force
is parallel to the displacement vector.
apply work-energy theorem to solve problems.
calculate kinetic energy and potential energy of a body.
differentiate between conservative and non-conservative forces.
explain the law of the conservation of energy.
solve problems by applying the law of conservation of energy.
define power and solve problems involving power.
?
Brainstorming
What do you mean by the term work in your everyday language? When do you
consider that you did some work?
Work, in general, is the means of transferring energy from one body to another or a
means of transforming energy from one form to another. For instance, if you raise a
load from the floor to the top of a shelf, energy is transferred from your muscles to
the load and in the process chemical energy is converted into potential energy of the
128
Grade 11
load. Energy, which is defined as the capacity to do work, has important features:
it exists in different forms and it is converted from one form to another with the
total amount being constant. It cannot be created or destroyed. In an automobile
engine, chemical energy stored in the fuel is converted partially to the energy of
the automobile's motion and partially to thermal energy. In a microwave oven,
electromagnetic energy obtained from the mains is converted to thermal energy of
the food being cooked. In these and all other processes, the total energy-the sum of
all energy present in all different forms-remains the same. No exception has ever
been found.
Work done by a constant force
?
Brainstorming
If your friend carried your 35 N bag and walked horizontally through 10 m, did
she do some work for you? How about carrying the same bag upstairs to the
second floor?
Work has a different meaning in physics than it does in everyday usage. In physics
doing work involves applying a force to an object while moving it a given distance.
In other words, work is done when a force acts on something that undergoes a
displacement from one position to another.
The definition for work W might be taken as W = F S, where F is the magnitude of
the force acting on the object and S is the magnitude of the object's displacement.
That definition, however, gives only the magnitude of work done on an object when
the force is constant and parallel to the displacement, which must be along a line,
Figure 4.35. For a more general case work is defined as the scalar product of the force
and the displacement produced.
W = F.S
W = F.S COS Θ, where Θ is the angle between F and $
$
Figure 4.35 A constant force moves the mass through displacement ,
W = F.S cos (0°) = S
129
Physics
Student Text Book
For a force F acting at an angle, Figure 4.36, the work done is W = FS cos Θ, which
can also be written as
W = (F cos Θ) S
where Fcos Θ is the component of the force along the direction of the displacement.
See that the component of the force along the direction perpendicular to the
displacement (F sinΘ) does no work (for Θ = 90°, cos 90° = 0).
The
FcosΘ
$
Figure 4.36 Force at angle, W = (F cos Θ) S
The SI unit of work is joule, abbreviated as J.
1 joule = lnewton.meter
Other unit of work in the (centimeter-gram-second) cgs unit is erg where 1 erg =
1dyne. cm.
1joule = 10⁷erg
Example 4.10
What is the work done on a block of mass 10kg, when a force of 20 N 30° above
the horizontal displaces the block by 5m?
Solution:
The givens are F = 20 N, Θ = 30° and S = 5m.
We are required to find the work done.
W = FS cos Θ = (20N) (5m) (cos 30°) = (100 Nm) (0.866) =86.6 J
Exercise 4.3
A man pushes a stalled vehicle with a steady force = (150i - 40j) N and the
displacement of the car is = (14i + 11ⱼ) m. How much work does the man do on
the car?
?
Activity 4.12
Can work done be positive, negative or zero? Specify the conditions in which work
130
Grade 11
can be positive, negative or zero.
Example 4.11
A man pulls a package along a horizontal floor with a force of 400 N at an angle
of 30° as shown in Figure 4.37a. A constant frictional force of 100 N acts between
the package and the floor. Find the work done by each force acting on the sled and
the total work done by all the forces.
F
12
N
F
le
*Fₖ
10
T b.
b
a
Figure 4.37
Solution
The forces that are acting on the package are shown in Figure 4.37b.
Work done by the applied force
WF = FS cos 30° = (400 N) (10 m) (0.866) = 3464 J
Work done by frictional force
Wf = Fₖ S cos (180°) = (100 N) (10 m) (-1) = - 1000 J
The gravitational force (Fg = mg) and the normal force FN are both perpendicular to
the displacement and therefore,
Wg = WFN = 0.
The total work Wtot done on the package by all forces is the algebraic sum of the
work done by the individual forces.
Wₜₒₜ = WF + Wf + W₈ + WF, N = 3464 J + (-1000 J) + 0 + 0 = 2464 J
?
Activity 4.13
1. Based on your knowledge of dynamics determine the net force acting on the
package of Example above to show that the total work done on the package is
also equal to the net force on the package times the displacement.
Wₜₒₜ=FₙₑₜS
131
Physics I Student Text Book
Work Done by the Gravitational Force
We next examine the work done on an object by the gravitational force acting on
it. Figure 4.38 shows an object of mass m that is thrown upward with initial speed
V₀ and thus with initial kinetic energy K₀ o = ½ mv². As the object rises, it is slowed
down by a gravitational force F,; that is, the object's initial kinetic energy decreases
because F, does work on the object as it rises. The work done by the gravitational
force is
The force magnitude is mg and we write
Wᵍ = mg d cosΘ (work done by gravitational force)
With Θ = 180°, work done by gravitational force is
W₈ = mgd
V₀
V
The
F &
a
a
The
F &
F &
V₀
V
F &
The
F &
Figure 4.38 Work done by gravitational force: (a) A mass raised through
vertical distance d (b) a mass lowered through vertical distance d
The minus sign tells us that during the object's rise, the gravitational force acting
on the object transfers energy equal to mgd from the initial kinetic energy that it had
at the beginning of its motion.
After the object has reached its maximum height and is falling back down, the angle
Θ between force and displacement is zero. Thus, the work done by the gravitational
force will be W₈ = mgd cos0° = + mgd
The plus sign tells us that the gravitational force now transfers energy in the amount
mgd to the kinetic energy of the object.
132
Grade 11
Example 4.12
A 5 kg bag is raised to a height of 2.5 m above the ground. What is the work done
by the applied force and by the gravitational force?
Solution
The work done by the applied force is
Wf = Ff S cos 0° = F S
The force required to raise the bag is the weight
W = mg.
Taking vertical distance as height h, we write WF = mgh
= (5 kg) (9.8 m/s²) (2.5 m) = 122.5 J
The work done by gravitational force is
W₈ = F ₂ S cos 180° = - mgh = - 122.5 J
How would the answer change if the bag were lowered from the same height to
the ground?
Example 4.13
Consider a block of mass m is pushed up a rough inclined plane of angle Θ by a
constant Force F parallel to the incline, as shown in Figure 4.39. The displacement of
the block up the incline is d.
a. by the applied force
b. by the force of gravity
c. by the normal force
d. by the kinetic friction
FN
a
h
14
yr
misso
yi
Θ
0
Figure 4.39 A block is pushed up a rough inclined plane with a constant force F parallel
to the incline. The normal is perpendicular to the surface. A mark is on mg to show that
the weight is decomposed to its parallel and perpendicular components.
Solution:
(a) The work done by the applied force W F
W₁ = F S cos 0° = F d (since F is in the same direction as d)
133
Physics I Student Text Book
(b) The work done by gravity W₈ is: W₈ = (mg sin Θ) (S) cos 180° = - mgd cosΘ, (mg
sin Θ is the component of the weight parallel to the displacement and 180° is the
angle between mg sinΘ and the displacement)
(c) The work done by the normal force is:
WN = FN S cos90° = 0 (The normal force is perpendicular to the displacement)
(d) The work done by the kinetic friction is:
Wf = Fₖ S cos180° = (mgcosΘ) (d) (-1) = - µₘₘgdcosΘ
?
Activity 4.14
Suppose you apply a constant force F on a mass to displace the mass through
distance S. If you plot the Force-Displacement graph and determine the area of the
region enclosed by the graph, what quantity would you obtain?
Work done by a variable force
In general, a force that acts on a body may vary in magnitude and direction as it
displaces the body between two points in space. Let us consider a varying force F
acting on a body to displace the body along the X axis. In this case using the expression
W = F.S will not be appropriate. Instead we calculate the infinitesimal work done by
the variable force and add those values to get the total work done. Figure 4.40a,
shows an example of the F vs S curve of the case of a variable force acting to produce
displacement S.
Fx
Fx
Ffx
F2x
Fdx
Fcx
F1x
F2x
Fbx
Fax
F1x
x
x
x
x1
x2
o
Ir
x2
o
x1
Дга
Дх
Are
X2
x2 x₁
Arb
Ar,
4x,
(a) Forec F varies with X
(b) F VS X graph
(c) Estimate the area of
the graph to get the work
Figure 4.40 Work done by a varying forces = Area under F vs S graph
Key terms
Constant force: A force that does not vary with time or position
Variable force: A force that varies with time or position
134
Grade 11
?
Activity 4.15
One of the common examples where varying force acts on a body is the case of a
force applied on a spring. Show that the work required to stretch a spring (spring
constant k) from initial elongation X1 to a final elongation X2 is W = ½ k (x2² - x₁²).
?
Activity 4.16
Group work
Work done by a varying force
Aim: To determine the work done by a varying force.
Apparatus:
Clamp Stand
Helical Spring of force constant 100 N/m
Mass Hanger
Pointer
Meter Ruler
Five equal masses each weighing 5 N
Figure 4.41 Setup of apparatus
Method:
(a) Hang a helical spring from a clamp stand, Figure 4.41.
(b) Attach a mass directly to the bottom of the helical spring and record the
135
Physics I Student Text Book
position of the bottom of the mass hanger relative to a meter ruler. Take
that reading as X1.
(c) Add the second mass to the first and record the new position of the mass
hanger relative to the meter rule as X2.
(d) Repeat step (c) for the third, fourth and fifth masses to the spring and
record the position of the bottom of the mass hanger, as X₃, X₄, and X₅,
Table 4.2
Table 4.2
F (N)
F1 =
F2 =
F3 =
F4=
F₅=
X (m)
X1
=
X2 =
X3 =
X₄=
X5=
Questions:
(1) Plot the Force (weight) versus extension (elongation) X.
(2) What quantity do you get from the slope of the graph?
Note that according to Hooke's law, the extension of the force is directly
proportional to the force applied, F = k X, where k is the spring constant).
(3) What is the area of the graph?
(4) Compare the result you obtained in step (3) with the result you get by the
doing product ½ kx2, which is equal to the work done on the spring.
Kinetic energy
One of the common types of energy that we encounter in our daily activities is kinetic
energy. Kinetic energy is the energy a body possesses due to its motion. A body of
mass m moving with velocity V is said to have kinetic energy of KE = ½ mv2.
Example 4.14
A 1200 kg car traveling at 30 m/s has a kinetic energy of
KE = ½ (1200 kg) (30 m/s)² = 540 kJ
Kinetic energy is a scalar quantity.
The work -energy Theorem
The total work done on a body by external forces is related to the body's displacement-
that is, to changes in its position. But the total work is also related to changes in the
speed of the body.
136
Grade 11
Consider a particle of mass m, moving with an acceleration a under the effect of a
net constant force F along the X axis, Figure 4.42.
F
Xo
X,
Figure 4.42: The work done by the applied force as it displaces the mass from x₀ to xf
The work done by the applied force is
W = F(x - x₀)
We know that the effect of the force in moving an object is the acceleration, thus:
W = ma(x-x x₀)
From kinematic equations, the relation of the acceleration can be expressed in
terms of the displacement and the velocity as:
Substituting this value of the acceleration into the above equation, the work done will be
Simplifying and rearranging we get
The quantity ¹ᵐv² is called the kinetic energy of the moving object having mass m
and velocity V denoted by K with SI unit joule (kg.m2/s2).
(Kinetic energy of a moving object)
Therefore, is the change in kinetic energy of the moving object as its
velocity is changed from vi to vf. Therefore, the work done by a net force is equal
to the change in kinetic energy. This principle is called the work-energy theorem.
Mathematically,
137
Physics
I Student Text Book
W (The work-energy theorem)
That is, the work done by the net force in displacing a particle equals the change in
its kinetic energy.
Potential energy
The energy of a body due to its relative position or shape is known as potential
energy
The energy due to the relative position of a body is called Gravitational potential
energy while the potential energy due to change in shape of the body is called Elastic
potential energy.
Gravitational potential energy of a body of mass m placed at a height above a
reference level is given by PE = mgh.
Elastic potential energy of a body such as a spring that is stretched through X is given
by
PE = ½ kx²
The sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy of a body is termed as the total
mechanical energy of the body.
ME = KE + PE
Suppose you throw a ball vertically upward. We already discussed that as the ball
rises, the work W₈ done on the ball by the gravitational force is negative because the
force transfers energy from the kinetic energy of the ball. We say that this energy
is transferred by the gravitational force to the gravitational potential energy of the
ball-Earth system.
On its way up, the ball slows (decelerates) and finally stops, and then begins to fall
back down because of the gravitational force. During the fall, the transfer is reversed:
The work Wg done on the body by the gravitational force is now positive-that force
transfers energy from the gravitational potential energy of the ball-Earth system to
the kinetic energy of the ball.
For either rise or fall, the change U in gravitational potential energy is defined as
being equal to the negative of the work done on the ball by the gravitational for
ce.
U=-W
138
Grade 11
Key terms
Kinetic energy: Energy due to motion
Potential energy: Energy due to position or shape
The above conclusion can also apply to a block-spring system shown in Figure
4.43. Initially the block moving to the right hits the spring. The spring force
acts toward left causing deceleration of the block doing negative work on the
block and transferring energy from the kinetic energy of the block to the elastic
potential energy of the spring-block system. The block then begins to move
leftward because the spring force is still leftward. The transfer of energy is then
reversed-it is from potential energy of the spring-block system to kinetic
energy of the block.
x
0
0
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.43 (a) As the block moves to the right the spring force does negative work on it
(b) As the block moves backward, the spring force does positive work on it.
Conservative and non-conservative Forces
There are generally two kinds of forces namely, Conservative forces and non-
conservative forces.
Conservative forces have these two equivalent properties:
1. The work done by a conservative force on a particle moving between any two points
is independent of the path taken by the particle.
2. The work done by a conservative force on a particle moving through any closed path
is zero. (A closed path is one in which the beginning and end points are identical).
Gravitational force is an example of a conservative force, and the force that a spring
exerts on any object attached to the spring is also conservative.
A force is non-conservative if it does not satisfy properties 1 and 2 for conservative
forces. Non-conservative forces acting within a system cause a change in the
mechanical energy ME of the system. The work done on a system by a non-
139
Physics I Student Text Book
conservative force is equal to the change in mechanical energy of the system. Typical
example of non-conservative force (also known as dissipative force) is frictional
force. Wᵈ is work done by dissipative forces.
Wᵈ = ME, Wᵈ
fₖ d = AKE + ДРЕ
Where fₖ is frictional force, d is the distance through which frictional force acted.
Where KE = ½ mv² , gravitational PE = mgh, and Elastic PE = ½ kx²
Key terms
Conservative force: A force in which work done is independent of the path
followed.
Non-conservative force: A force in which work done is path dependent.
Power
In the previous section we have seen that the quantity of work has to do with a force
causing a displacement. Work has nothing to do with the amount of time that this
force acts to cause the displacement. Sometimes, the work is done very quickly and
other times the work is done rather slowly. If you dig a well using a mattock, it may
take several hours. The same amount of work can be done in very few minutes if it is
dug by an excavator machine (Figure 4.44). The excavator can complete the work in
a shorter time than the same work done by the mattock digger.
Figure 4.44 A ditch dug by a mattock (less powerful machine) and by an excavator (a very
powerful machine)
We express the relation between work done and the time interval involved in doing
it, by introducing the concept of power. Since work can vary as a function of time, we
first define average power as the work done during a time interval, as:
Work done
Average power = Time taken
Sybmolically
The SI unit of power is watt. 1 W = 1 J/s
140
Grade 11
Metric prefix multipliers of units of power are usually used Such as kilo watt (kW)
in rating our home electric stove , mega watt (MW) and giga watt (GW) in rating
power generating plants such as the Great Ethiopian Rainnasence Dam (GERD).
Key term
Power : the rate of conversion of energy or the rate of doing work
All machines are typically described by their power rating. The power rating indicates
the rate at which that machine can do work upon other objects. Thus, the power of
a machine is the work to time ratio for that particular machine.
Another non SI unit of power is the horsepower.
1 horsepower = 746 watts
Exercise 4.4
Consider a boy and a girl of equal mass of 50 kg run upstairs to the fourth floor to
a height of 20 m above the ground floor.
(a) Compare the work done by each of them.
(b) Compare the power developed by each of them.
?
Activity 4.17
Discuss
Does the work done in lifting an object depend on how fast it is lifted? Does the
power expended depend on how fast it is lifted?
Another expression for power
Using the expression work = Force x displacement
Power = work time , we get
Force x displacement
Average power =
time
displacement
Average power = Force X
time
Average power = Force x average velocity
Pav = Fxv av
The instantanous power can be written in terms of instantaneous velocity as
P = F v, where V is instantaneous velocity
We can also express instantaneous power in terms of the scalar product as
P = F.v
141
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 4.15
Motor
A 1000 kg elevator car carries a maximum load
TE
of 800 kg, Figure 4.45a. As the elevator moves
upward a constant frictional fore of 4000 N
retards its motion. What minimum power must
the motor deliver to lift the loaded elevator car
Ft
at a constant speed of 2.5 m/s?
mg
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.45 Work done on an elevator and its load
As the elevator and its load are moving upward at a constant speed, Newton's
second law of motion applied on the system shown in the free-body diagram
(Figure 4 45 b), is written as
Fₙₑₜ = ma T+mg+F=ma
T - mg - Ff = ma, for motion at a constant velocity a = 0 and we have,
T - mg - Ff = 0
T = mg + Ff = (1000 kg + 800 kg) (9.8 m/s²) + 4000 N = 21640 N
The power P = F V = (21640 N) ( 2.5 m/s) = 54100 W = 54.1 KW
Example 4.16
Two forces F1 = 5N and F2 = 2N along the
directions indicated are acting on a box that slides
horizontally to the right across a frictionless
surface, as shown in Figure 4.46. Force F₁ makes
Moti
e
an angle Θ = 60° with the horizontal. Force F2 is
F2
against the motion. The speed V of the box at a
certain instant is 4 m/s. What is the power due to
each force that acts on the box at that instant, and
Figure 4.46
what is the net power? Is the net power changing
with time?
Solution:
The weight m t as and the normal force FN are perpendicular to the velocity V.
Thus, their work done is zero, and hence the power due to each of them on the
block is zero.
142
Grade 11
The power delivered by F1 is:
P₁ = F1.V = COS 60° = 10W
which indicates that the force F1 is transferring energy to the box at a
rate of 10 J/s.
The power delivered by F2 is:
P₂ = F2.V = cos 180° = 8W
which indicates that the force F₁ is transferring energy from the box at a rate of
8 J/s.
The net power is the sum of the individual powers. Thus,
=
This indicates that the net rate of energy transfer to the box is positive. So, the kinetic
energy of the box will increase, and hence its speed. Consequently, the net power
will increase with time.
Review questions 4.4
1. Write down two examples in which a force is exerted on an object without
doing any work on the object.
2. A bullet has twice the mass of a second bullet. If both are fired so that they
have the same speed, which has more kinetic energy? What is the ratio of the
kinetic energies of the two bullets?
3.
(a) If the speed of a particle is doubled, what happens to its kinetic energy?
(b) What can be said about the speed of a particle if the net work done on it
is zero?
4. Can kinetic energy be negative? Explain.
5. The force acting on a particle varies as in Figure 4.47. Find the work done by
the force on the particle as it moves
Fx(N)
(a) from X = 0 to X = 8 m,
6
(b) From X = 8 m to x = 10 m, and
4
(c) From X = 0 to X = 10 m.
2
x(m)
2
4
6
8
10
-2
Figure 4.47
6.
Elastic potential energy depends on the spring constant and the distance the
spring is stretched or compressed. By what factor does the elastic potential
energy change if the spring's stretch is (a) doubled or (b) tripled?
7. Calculate the elastic potential energy of a spring with spring constant = 225 N/m
that is (a) compressed and (b) stretched by 1cm.
8. A diver drops from a board 15 m above the surface of water. Neglecting air
143
Physics
Student Text Book
resistance, (a) use conservation of mechanical energy to find his speed as he
is 5 m above the water's surface, and (b) find his speed as he hits the water.
9. What average power must be supplied to push a 10 kg block from rest to
20 m/s in 5 S when the coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and
surface is 0.2? Assume the acceleration is uniform.
10. An advertisement claims that a certain 1200 kg car can accelerate from rest to
a speed of 25 m/s in a time of 8 S. What average power must the motor develop
to produce this acceleration?
4.5 Conservation of mechanical energy
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define mechanical energy.
state the law of conservation of mechanical energy.
apply the law of conservation of mechanical energy to solve problems
?
Brainstorming
If you drop a ball from the top of the whiteboard, discuss the energy conversion
that takes place as the ball falls down.
Suppose a car traveling along the road suddenly brakes to a stop. What kind of
energy conversion takes place in the process?
The law of conservation of mechanical energy states that in the absence of dissipative
forces like air resistance and friction, the total mechanical energy of an object or
system of objects remains unchanged.
ME = 0
AKE + PE = 0
(KE₆ KEi) + (PE₆ PEᵢ) = 0
KEᵢ + PEᵢ = KE₆ + PE₆
Example 4.17
A 10 kg block is released from rest at the top of a
smooth inclined plane 10 m in length, as shown
1
h
in Figure 4.48. Find the speed of the block as it
30°
reaches the bottom of the inclined plane.
Figure 4.48
144
Grade 11
Solution
There is no friction between the block and the inclined surface. Applying the law
of conservation of mechanical energy we write
AKE + ДРЕ = 0
The block starts from rest so that KEᵢ = 0, and at the bottom of the incline PE₆ = 0
PEᵢ = KE₆
mgh = ½ mv²
v = √2gh, h = lsin 30° = (10m) (0.5) = 5m
Therefore V = 2 (9.8m/s² (5m) = 9.9m/s
Example 4.18
Repeat the question in Example 4.17 if the inclined plane is rough and the
coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and the surface is 0.2.
Solution
In the presence of dissipative forces the work done by these forces equals the
change of mechanical energy of the system.
Wd = ME
-fₖd = (KEf — KEᵢ) + (PEf — PEᵢ)
Taking KEi = 0, PEf = 0 we have
- fₖd = KEf - PEᵢ
- (µₖN) =
= 1 2 mv² = mgh - (µₖN) l
= 1/2mv2 = mgh (µₖmgcos (30°)) = mg [ h - (µₖcos (30°) l]
v² = 2g[h - (µkcos (30°) l = 2g[h (µk (30o)
= 2 (9.8m/s²) [5 m - (0.2) (0.866) (10m) (10 m)] = 64 m/s
v = 8 m/s
145
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 4.19
A 2 kg block sliding over a smooth horizontal
V
surface with a constant speed of 8 m/s hits a
horizontal spring whose one end is fixed as shown
in Figure 4.49. If the maximum compression of the
spring just before the block comes to rest is 20 cm,
what is the spring constant of the spring?
Figure 4.49
Solution
Given
Speed of the block V = 8 m/s, compression of the spring x = 20 cm = 0.2 m.
Required is spring constant k
Initially the spring has no compression, X1 = 0, PEᵢ = 0 and after being compressed
through X2 = 0.2 m, it possesses elastic potential energy PEf = ½ kx= 2 ½ kx2
The block has initial KEᵢ = ½ mvᵢ² = ½ mv² and it stops after compressing the
spring Vf = 0 and KE₆ = 0.
In the absence of dissipative forces we write
ДКЕ + PE = 0
KEi = PEf
KEᵢ of the block = PEf of the spring
½ mv² = 1/ kx,²
k= mv² X = 2 (0.2)² / 3200N/m.
Review Questions 4.5
1. A ball is thrown straight up into the air. Where will it attain its minimum
kinetic energy? At what position is the gravitational potential energy of the
ball-Earth system a maximum?
2. A 1 kg ball is released from the top of an 18 m high tower. Neglecting air
resistance, where above the ground will the ball have its kinetic energy twice
its potential energy at that location?
3. A particle of mass m = 8 kg is released from point A and slides on the
146
Grade 11
frictionless track shown in Figure 4.50. Determine
(a) the particle's speed at points B and C and
(b) the net work done by the gravitational force in moving the particle from
A to C.
m
A
B
C
8 m
6m
4.5 m
Figure 4.50
4. A 5 kg block is set into motion up an inclined plane shown (Figure 4.51) with
initial velocity of 10 m/s. How far up along the plane does the block go before
coming to rest assuming?
(a) no friction between the block and the surface of the inclined plane?
(b) the coefficient of friction between block and the surface is 0.25?
Vi = 2 m/s
30
Figure 4.51
5. A 0.50 kg block slides across a tabletop with an initial velocity of 20 cm/s
and comes to rest in a distance of 50 cm. Find the average friction force that
retarded its motion.
6. Suppose a car traveling at a speed V skids a distance d after its brakes lock.
Estimate how far it would skid if it were traveling at speed 2v when its brakes
locked.
147
Physics
Student Text Book
4.6 Impulse and Linear Momentum
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
discuss impulse and linear momentum
relate impulses to collisions
apply the impulse-momentum theorem to solve problems
differentiate elastic and inelastic collisions
state the law of conservation of linear momentum
explain the meaning and usefulness of the concept of center of mass
calculate the center of mass of a given system
calculate the velocity of the center of mass
apply the law of conservation of linear momentum to solve problems
involving collision in one dimension.
?
Brainstorming
Suppose you are riding a bicycle at a speed of 15 m/s. How different is the effort
you are required to exert when you want to stop in 5 second or when you want to
stop in 9 seconds? Give your answer in terms of the force you apply on the brakes
and the time taken to stop.
Linear momentum is the property of a moving object that describes how hard it is to
set a body in motion or to stop it. It is hard to stop a fast moving object than a slow
moving object. Similarly, it is hard to stop a larger mass than a smaller mass provided
that they move with the same speed. The Linear momentum of a body is defined as
the product of its mass and its velocity.
Mathematically, Momentum = mass x Velocity
Linear mumentum denoted by P and
P = mv
Momentum is a vector quantity directed along the direction of the velocity and its
SI unit is kgm/s.
Exercise 4.5
How would the momentum of an object change if
a. the mass is doubled but the velocity remains the same?
b. the velocity is reduced to one-third of its original magnitude?
c. the direction of the velocity changes from South to East?
148
Grade 11
Example 4.20
What is the linear momentum of a 0.5 kg match box that is moving at a constant
speed of 6m/s toward the positive X direction?
Solution:
Given; m = 0.5kg V = 6 m/s + x direction
Required = ?
Usin g the equation P = mv
The magnitude of the momentum is P = mv = (0.5kg) (6m/s) = 3kgm/s.
The momentum takes the direction of velocity and we have P = 3 kg m/s, toward
+X direction.
Example 4.21
If the box in the above example is acted by an external force and its velocity is
increased from 6m/s to 15m/s along the same direction, what is the change in
momentum?
Solution:
The given are m = 0.5kg, Vᵢ = 6m/s, Vf = 15m/s
Required ДР = ?
The change momentum P = (mv)
= m (vf vᵢ)
= (0.5kg) (15m/s south - 6m/s south)
= 1.5kg m/s, south
Example 4.22
A 1.5 kg ball that was moving along a smooth horizontal floor at 5 m/s toward East
hits a hard surface and rebounds with the same speed along the same line. What is
the change in momentum of the ball?
149
Physics I Student Text Book
Solution
Given
Mass m = 1.5 kg,
Vᵢ = 5 m/s, East, vf = 5 m/s, West
ДР = (mv)
= m vf - vᵢ) = (1.5kg) (5 m/s, West - 5 m/s, East)
= (1.5kg) (5 m/s, West + 5 m/s, West)
= (1.5kg) (10 m/s, West) = 15 kgm/s, West
Changing the momentum of a body require application of a force. According to
Newton's second law, velocity of a moving object changes when a non-zero net force
acts on it. Starting from the common version of Newton's second law we define an
equivalent expression as follows.
F At At
F = p (Newton's second law in terms of momentum)
The net force (vector sum of all forces) acting on a particle equals the time rate of
change of momentum of the particle.
Rearranging the above equation we have
ДР = F At
?
Activity 4.18
Group discussion
According to the equation P = + t, a rapid change in momentum requires a large
net force, while a gradual change in momentum requires less net force. How is this
used in the design of automobile safety devices such as air bags that help to reduce
the possibility of injury of the driver?
J = F At
The product of the net force and the time interval, È t, is known as Impulse of the
net force, denoted by j.
The change in momentum of a particle during a time interval equals the impulse of
150
Grade 11
the net force that acts on the particle during that interval. This statement defines the
Impulse-Momentum theory.
Key term
Momentum: describe the effort require to get a body moving or to stop it.
Impulse: is change of momentum
Example 4.23
A 2 kg ball that was moving along a smooth horizontal floor at 2.5 m/s toward East
hits a hard surface and rebounds with a speed of 2.3 m/s along the same line. If the
time of interaction between the ball and the wall is 0.20 s,
(a) What is the change in momentum of the ball?
(b) What is the impulse imparted to the ball?
(b) What is the net force exerted on the ball by the surface?
Solution
Given
Mass m = 2 kg,
vᵢ = 2.5 m/s, East, vf = 2.3 m/s, West, t = 0.2 s
(a) ДР = mAv = (vf
= (2 kg) (2.3 m/s, West 2.5 m/s, East)
= (2 kg) (2.3 m/s, West + 2.5 m/s, West)
= 9.6 kg m/s, West
(b) Impulse = Change of momentum
J = ДР = 9.6 kg m/s, West
(c) From J = FA we have
F = J = 9.6kgm/s 0.2s west 48 kg m/s2, West = 48 N, West
Exercise 4.6
To improve the safety of a motorist, modern cars are built so the front end cramps
upon impact. A 1500 kg car is traveling at a constant speed of 10 m/s due East. It
hits a rigid wall and comes to rest in 0.25s.
a. Determine the impulse provided to the car.
b. What is the average net force exerted on the car?
c. For the same impulse, what would be the average net force exerted on the car
if it had a rigid bumper and frame that stopped the car in 0.04 s?
151
Physics I Student Text Book
?
Activity 4.19
Suppose you are standing on a table top that is 1 m high above the floor and that
you jump off the table and land on the floor. It is common experience that your
feet experience an upward force of the floor. What action do you take at the instant
you land on the floor in order to minimize the effect (magnitude) of the force on
your feet?
Example 4.24
The force that an average football player can exert on a ball is 1200N. Such a
football striker shoots a penalty from a penalty spot 1 1m from the goal line. The
average mass of a soccer ball is 400g. If the time of contact between the ball and
the foot is 0.02s, what is the velocity of the ball as it leaves the spot?
Solution:
The given are: magnitude of the force F = 1200 N, At = 0.02s m = 400g = 0.4kg.
Required: V =?
Reasoning: The ball is accelerating from rest to a velocity TV as long as the force
is applied on it for 0.02 S. After it leaves the foot of the striker, the only forces
are gravity and air resistance. As the ball accelerates from 12 i=0 to vf = v , the
momentum of the ball is changed from Pi to Pf.
Therefore using the equation,
Since the ball is initially at rest on the penalty spot, pi=0 = and p f = mv.
Thus, V = 0.4kg = 30 m/s.
Exercise 4.7
What is the acceleration of the ball in the above example while it was in contact
with the striker's foot? How long does it take for the ball to pass the goal line?
(Assume the ball obtained a slight air clearance on its path to the goal line so that
friction can be neglected.)
152
Grade 11
One way to calculate the impulse
Fnet (N)
provided to an object is to graph
the net force on the object as a
function of the interaction time
as in Figure 4.52. The area of
10 20 30 40
the net force versus time graph
t (s)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
is equal to the magnitude of the
impulse provided.
Figure 4.52 Magnitude of net force (Fₙₑₜ) versus
time graph of a model rocket. The area under the
graph equals the impulse provided to the rocket.
In reality, many interactions occur for a very short period of time that accurate
measurement of the net force is difficult. The net force increases from zero to a very
large value in a short period of time like in the case of the baseball bat hitting the
ball, Figure 4.53. The area bounded by the dotted line equals the impulse provided
by the bat.
Fnot
Average Fnot)
t
At
Figure 4.53 the bat exerts non-linear net force on the ball. The product (average net force)
x (time interval) gives the impulse.
Exercise 4.8
Calculating Force: Venus Williams' Tennis Serve
During the 2007 French Open, Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a
premier women's match, reaching a speed of 209 km/). What is the average force
exerted on the 0.057 kg tennis ball by Venus Williams' racquet? Assume that the
ball's speed just after impact is 58 m/s, as shown in Figure 4.54, that the initial
horizontal component of the velocity before impact is negligible, and that the ball
remained in contact with the racquet for 5 ms.
153
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Vₜ
Figure 4.54 The tennis ball acquires a final velocity of 209 km/h (58 m/s).
Law of Conservation of Linear Momentum
If two bodies collide or push each other apart and no forces act except for each one
pushing on the other, the total momentum of the two bodies does not change. That
is the initial total momentum is equal to the final total momentum.
Mathematically, 1=1,
For two bodies in motion having initial and final velocities each,
Consider what happens if the masses of two colliding objects are more similar such
as two identical cars for example, one car bumping into another, as shown in Figure
4.55. Both cars are moving in the same direction when the lead car (labeled m₂) is
bumped by the trailing car (labeled m₁). The only unbalanced force on each car is the
force of the collision. (Assume that the effects due to friction are negligible.) Car 1
slows down as a result of the collision, losing some momentum, while car 2 speeds
up and gains some momentum. We shall now show that the total momentum of the
two-car system remains constant.
Before
Fₙₑₜ = 0
System of
interest
P1 + P2ᵢ = P
u1
U2
m1
m2
154
After
Fnet = 0
Grade 11
System of
interest
st
Nit
m1
m2
Figure 4.55. Car of mass m1 moving with a velocity of u₁ bumps into another car of mass
m2 and velocity ū₂ that it is following. As a result, the first car slows down to a velocit of
v₁ and the second speeds up to a velocity of v₂. The momentum of each car is changed,
but the total momentum Pₜₒₜ of the cars is the same before and after the collision (if you
assum friction is negligigle)
Using the definition of impulse, the change in momentum of car 1 is given by
where F₁ is the force on car 1 due to car 2, and At is the time the force acts (the
duration of the collision).
Similarly, the change in momentum of car 2 is
where+, 2 is the force on car 2 due to car 1, and we assume the duration of the colli-
sion At is the same for both cars. We know from Newton's third law that
Pᵢ= Pᵢ = (The law of conservation of momentum)
Collisions in One Dimension
The term collision is used to represent an event during which two particles come
close to each other and interact by means of forces. The time interval during which
the velocities of the particles change from initial to final values (time of interaction)
is assumed to be short so that the interaction forces are assumed to be much greater
than any external forces present.
In the previous section we have discussed that the total momentum of an isolated
system just before a collision equals the total momentum of the system just after the
collision.
In contrast, depending on the type of collision, the total kinetic energy of the system
of particles may or may not be conserved. Collisions are classified as Elastic and
155
Physics
Student Text Book
Inelastic depending on whether or not kinetic energy of the system is conserved.
A collision in which both total momentum and total kinetic energy are conserved
is known as Elastic collision. Elastic collisions occur between atomic and subatomic
particles. Collisions between two billiard balls are some of the practical collisions
that are only approximately elastic.
A collision in which total momentum is conserved but total kinetic energy is not
conserved is known as inelastic collision. When the colliding objects stick together
after interaction, the collision is said to be completely inelastic.
?
Activity 4.20
Discuss
Momentum of an isolated system is conserved in all collisions. Kinetic energy of
an isolated system is conserved only in elastic collisions. Why?
Elastic collision
Consider two masses m₁ and
m₂ moving along the same
V1i
V2
line in opposite direction
i
12
Before collision
as shown in Figure 4.56. If
the masses make a head-
on elastic collision, how do
we determine the velocities
V1f
V2f
After collision
of each of the masses after
collision?
Figure 4.56 Two masses making an elastic head-on collision
In an elastic collision both kinetic energy and momentum are conserved and we
have
As the masses are moving along the same line in opposite directions, velocities
directed to the right can be taken positive and velocities directed to the left can be
taken negative. With this consideration we write
And for the conservation of kinetic energy, we write
156
Grade 11
,
m₁ (v₁ᵢ V₁ƒ) (v₁ᵢ + V₁ƒ) = M₂ (v₂ƒ v₂ᵢ) (v₂ƒ +
m₁ (v₁ᵢ V₁ƒ) + V₁ƒ)
=
m₂(v₂f - v₂ᵢ)
This equation, in combination with the equation of the law of conservation of
momentum can be can be used to solve problems dealing with elastic collisions. See
that (v₁₁ - v₂ᵢ) is the relative velocity of the masses before collision and is
the relative velocity of the masses after collision.
?
Activity 4.21
Give real life examples of elastic collisions,
inelastic collisions and
perfectly inelastic collisions.
Example 4.25
Consider two masses m₁ of 4 kg and m2 of 6 kg moving along the same line in
opposite direction as shown in Figure 4.56, with velocities of 2 m/s and 1 m/s
respectively, along the directions indicated. If the masses make an elastic collision,
what are the velocities of each of the masses after collision?
Given
m₁ = 4kg,v₁ = + 2m/s
m₂ = 6kg,v₂ = - 1 m/s
For an elastic collision both momentum and kinetic energy are conserved and we
write
And also
157
Physics I Student Text Book
Solving the simul tan eous equation
2v1f + 3v2f = 1 and
V2f V1f = 3,
we get
v1f = - 00/15 m/s and V2f = 7/15 m/s
The final results show that after collision m1 moves to the left with a speed
of 00/15 m/s and M₂ moves to the right with a speed of 7/15 m/s.
Key terms
Elastic collision: a collision in which both kinetic energy E and momentum are
conserved
Inelastic collision: a collision in which momentum is conserved but kinetic energy is
not.
Example 4.26
Two gliders A and B with masses of 0.5 kg and 0.3 kg, respectively, move toward
each other on a frictionless air track (Figure 4.57 a). After they collide (Figure 4.57
b), glider B has a final velocity of 2 m/s toward the positive X direction (Figure
4.57 c).
1ª
VBi
VAf
V af
B
x
A
A
B
A
B
MA
mB
(a) Before collision
(b) Collision
(c) After collision
Figure 4.57 Gliders on an air track
(a) What is the final velocity of glider A?
(b) How do the changes in momentum and in velocity compare?
Solution
Given
mA = 0.5 kg, VAi = 2 m/s
(a) Applying The law of conservation of linear momentum,
158
Grade 11
(0.5 kg) (2 m/s) + (0.3 kg) (-2 m/s) = (0.5 kg) (VAƒ) + ( 0.3 kg)(2 m/s)
1 kg m/s - 0.6 kgm/s = (0.5 kg) (Vₐƒ) + 0.6 kg m/s
Solving for VAť we get Vₐƒ = - 0.4 m/s
(b) Change of velocity of glider A is
VA = Vₐf - VAi = (-0.4 m/s) - (2 m/s) = - 2.4 m/s
Change of velocity of glider B is
VB = - VBi = (2 m/s) - (-2 m/s) = + 4 m/s
See that VA 1 AvB
Change of momentum of glider A is
mA (AvA) = (0.5 kg)( 2.4 m/s) = -1.2 kgm/s
Change of momentum of glider B is
1B(AvB) = (0.3 kg)( + 4 m/s) = 1.2 kgm/s
The gliders experience equal and opposite forces and according to Newton's second
law the one with the smaller mass will have acceleration of larger magnitude. By the
impulse-momentum theorem, the gliders experienced equal and opposite impulses
and therefore equal and opposite changes in momentum.
Inelastic collision
Inelastic collisions are of two types. When the colliding objects stick together after
the collision, the collision is called perfectly inelastic. When the colliding objects do
not stick together, but some kinetic energy is lost the collision is called inelastic.
For a perfectly inelastic collision where the masses stick together after collision we
use
m₁v₁ᵢ + m₂V₂ᵢ = (m₁ + m₂) V, V is the common velocity of the masses after colli-
sion.
Example 4.27
A 700 g pistol loaded with a 180 g bullet rests on a smooth table, Figure 4.58. If the
bullet suddenly goes off with a speed of 300 m/s, with what speed will the pistol
recoil?
159
Physics I Student Text Book
Bullet
Pistol
V21
12
Figure 4.58 Recoil velocity of a Pistol
Solution
Given:
Mass of the Pistol-bullet system before interaction m = 700 g + 180 g = 880 g = 0.88 kg
Initial velocity of the system 7i=0 Ti =
Final velocity of the bullet V2f= 350 m/s, forward
To find the final velocity with which the pistol recoils just after interaction we
apply the law of conservation of momentum as
v
Substituting the given values we write
0 = (0.7 kg)( 1f) + 0.18 kg)(300 m/s)
Substituting the given values we write
0 = (0.7 kg) (v + 0.18 kg) (300 m/s)
Rearranging this equation and solving for V₁ƒ, we obtain
The minus sign indicates that as the bullet goes off forward, the pistol recoils
backward.
V1f = 77 m/s, backward
?
Activity 4.22
A physics student (mass 60 kg) carrying a 2 kg book is standing in the middle of a
frozen pond. What can he do in order to go toward the shore of the pond?
160
Grade 11
Example 4.28
Perfectly inelastic collision
A fully loaded dump truck with a mass of 25000 kg is moving at 72 km/h on
a level paved road. On its way, it suddenly collides head on with a 150 kg bajaj
which was moving at 54 km/h in the opposite direction. What will be the final
velocity of the truck-bajaj system after collision?
Given: m₁ = 25000kg,
v₁₁ = 72km/h = 20m/s
m2 = 150 kg
V₂ᵢ = 54 km/h = 15m/s (initially moving in opposite direction to the track's
motion)
Required: Vf = ?
Solution:
By conservation of linear momentum for a head-on collision,
Total momentum before collision = Total momentum after collision
Since the dump truck and the bajaj stick and go together to have a common final
velocity, we
Therefore:
(25000 kg)(20 m/s) + (150 kg)(-15 m/s) = (25000 kg + 150 kg)vf
Solving for the final velocity we get Vf = 19.7 m/s
The value is positive indicating that after collision the truck-bajaj system moves
along the initial direction of motion of the truck.
Example 4.29
Ballistic pendulum
Consider a ballistic pendulum, a type of pendulum used to determine the speed
of bullets before electronic timing devices were invented (Figure 4.59).
161
Physics
I
Student Text Book
ceiling
suspension
wire
pistol
bullet
block
height
of swing
Figure 4.59 A Ballistic pendulum
A stationary block of wood is suspended from the ceiling by light ropes. When a
bullet is fired at the block, the bullet becomes embedded in the wood upon impact.
Just after interaction the pendulum-bullet system starting from rest, rises up to a
certain height of swing before stopping. Derive an expression for the velocity of
the bullet in terms of mass of its own mass, mass of the block, g and swing height.
Solution
On impact some of the kinetic energy of the bullet is transferred to the pendulum-
bullet system so that the system will have speed Vf just after interaction. As
the pendulum-bullet system swings upward, its kinetic energy is converted to
gravitational potential energy.
Taking mass of bullet = m₁,
mass of the block = m₂
velocity of bullet before impact V₁ᵢ = v,
initial velocity of the block = 0,
swing height = h
The law of conservation of momentum can be written as
m₁v₁ᵢ+ m₂V₂i= = (m₁ + m₂) ( perfectly inelastic collision)
m₁v=(m₁ + m₂) f
my
162
Grade 11
f (perfectly inelastic collision)
m₁v=(m₁ + m₂) v₁
This is the velocity with which the pendulum-bullet system starts just after interaction.
Starting off with speed Vƒ the system rises up to swing height h so that the kinetic
energy of the pendulum-bullet system is changed to gravitational potential energy
of the system.
vf²= 2gh
Rearranging the equation we write the speed of the bullet as
?
Activity 4.23
In the solution for Example 4.29, we have assumed some of the initial kinetic
energy of the bullet being transferred to the pendulum-bullet system emphasizing
a loss of kinetic energy in the process. How do you explain this?
Example 4.30
A 14.9 g bullet from a pistol strikes a 2 kg ballistic pendulum. Upon impact, the
pendulum swings for ward and rises to a cm. What was the velocity ofthe
bullet immediately before impact?
Solution
Given
mass of the bullet = m₁ = 14.9 g = 0.0149 kg
mass of the block m₂ = 2 kg
initial velocity of the block = 0,
swing height = h = 21.9 cm = 0.219 m
Using the given values in the equation V = , we get the velocity
163
Physics | Student Text Book
of the bullet just before hitting the block as V = 280 m/s
Exercise 4.9
On a frictionless, horizontal air table, puck A (with mass 0.25 kg) is moving toward
puck B (with mass 0.35 kg), which is initially at rest. After the collision, puck A has
a velocity of 0.012 m/s to the left, and puck B has a velocity of 0.65 m/s to the right.
(a) What was the speed of puck A before the collision?
(b) Calculate the change in the total kinetic energy of the system that occurs during
the collision.
Center of Mass
The principle of conservation of momentum can be restated in a useful way by using
the concept of center of mass. A mechanical system can be either a particle or a
group of particles. Center of mass of an object or system of objects is a place where
the total mass of the system assumed to be concentrated. We shall see that the center
of mass of the system moves as if all the mass of the system were concentrated at that
point. When a resultant force acts on a system of objects or particles, the force is
assumed to have acted at the center of mass and the center of mass moves with an
acceleration governed by Newton's second law of motion.
Key terms
Center of mass: a point where the total mass of a body or system of objects is as
sumed to be concentrated
Suppose we have several particles with masses m₁, m₂ and so on. Let the coordi-
nates of m₁ be (x₁, y₁), be those of m₂ be (x₂, y₂) and so on. We define the center of
mass of the system as the point that has coordinates ( Xcm' Yᶜₘ) given by
Xcm = m₁+m₂ +m₃ +..+mₙ
Ycm = m₁+m₂+m₃+..+mₙ
Example 4.31
Three masses on m₁ = 300 g, m2 = 500 g and m₃ = 200 g are place on the xy plane
at coordinates (-2,2), (2,3) and (3,-1), respectively. If distances are in centimeters,
find the coordinates of the center of mass of the system.
164
Grade 11
Solution
Given ml = 0.3 kg at ( -2, 2) , m2 = 0.5 kg at (2, 3), m3 = 0.2 kg at (3, -1)
xcm = m₁X₁+m₂X₂+m₃X₃X₃ m₁ +m₂ + m₃ = = 1=1, 1
ycm = y₁ m₁ +m₂ + m₃ = 0.3+0.5+0,2 = 19 = 1.9
Motion of Center of the Mass
What will happen to the center of mass when the
system of particles moves? The center of mass of a
system of particles is the point that moves as though
all of the system's mass were concentrated there and
all external forces were applied there. Figure 4.60
shows the position of the center of mass (the dot) of
the baseball bat flipped in the air. The center of mass
follows parabolic path while the other parts of the
bat follow complicated path.
Figure 4.60 The motion of a baseball bat flipped in the air and the motion of its center of
mass.
Knowing the X and y coordinates of the center of mass (or the X and y components
of its position vector) we can determine the time rate at which the position vector
changes to determine the velocity of the center of mass.
The coordinates of x and y components of the center of mass are respectively,
(vcm)y=
m₁+m₂ +m₃ +..+mₙ
When writing this equation to the single vector equation of the velocity of the center
of mass, we have
165
Physics
I
Student Text Book
If the sum m₁ + m₂ + m₃ + mₙ represents the total mass of the system M, we
have
=
The linear momentum of a system of particles is equal to the product of the total
mass M of the system and the velocity of the center of mass.
Conservation of Momentum Applied to Rockets
The motion of a rocket, Figure 4.61, can be explained using Newton's third law.
When the rocket engines burn the fuel and eject the gas backwards, the rocket
propels upward (action-reaction pairs). The law of conservation of momentum
can also be used to explain why a rocket can accelerate even in a vacuum.
When the engines of a rocket burn fuel, the escaping exhaust gas has mass and
considerable speed. When a rocket is in outer space, external friction is negligible.
So the rocket-exhaust gas system is an isolated system. For a rocket-gas system,
the equation for the conservation of momentum is
AProcket
change in the momentum
rocket
of the rocket
change in the momentum
of exhast gas
Figure 4.61 Rocket propulsion
166
Grade 11
Review Questions 4.6
1. A car has the same kinetic energy when it is traveling south at 20 m/s as when
it is traveling northwest at 20 m/s. Is the momentum of the car the same in
both cases? Explain
2. A glass dropped on the floor is more likely to break if the floor is concrete than
if it is wood. Why?
3. An apple falls from a tree and feels no air resistance. As it is falling, which
of these statements about it are true? (a) Only its momentum is conserved;
(b) only its mechanical energy is conserved, (c) both its momentum and its
mechanical energy are conserved, (d) its kinetic energy is conserved.
4. What is the effect on impulse if (a) the time interval is doubled?
(b) the net force is reduced to one-third of its original magnitude?
5. A golfer hits a long sending 50 g golf ball toward East. The graph of the net
force as a function of time for the collision between the golf club and the ball
is as shown in Figure 4.62.
(a) What is the impulse provided to the ball?
(b) What is the velocity of the ball at the moment the golf club and ball
separate?
6000
5000
Magnitude of Net Force Fnet
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time t(ms)
Figure 4.62 Force vs time graph
6. Two billiard balls A and B that are traveling toward each with speeds of V and
2v respectively, If ball A is traveling tward East and B toward West, what are
the finalocities of the two balls. Assume an isolated system.
7. A 0.16 kg billiard ball traveling at 0.5 m/s, due North strikes a stationary 0.18
kg snooker ball and rebounds at 0.23 m/s due South. The snooker ball moves
off at 0.463 m/s due North. Ignoring the possible rotational effect, determine
if the collision is elastic?
8. A 75 kg hunter in a stationary canoe throws a 0.72 kg spear at 12 m/s in the
forward direction. The mass of the canoe is 10 kg. What will be the velocity of
the canoe and the hunter immediately after the spear is thrown?
9. A basketball player A and her wheelchair have a combined mass of 58 kg.
167
Physics
I
Student Text Book
She moves at 0.6 m/s toward East and pushes off a stationary player B while
jockeying for a position near the basket. Player A ends up moving at 20 m/s
toward West. The combined mass of player B and her wheelchair is 85 kg.
What will be player B's velocity immediately after interaction Figure 4.63)?
before
after
VAf = 0.6 m/s
VBf = ?
VAL = 0.6 m/s
Player A Player B
Player A
Player B
Figure 4.63
10. The center of gravity of an object may be located outside the object. Give a
few examples for which this is the case.
168
Grade 11
SUMMARY OF UNIT 4:
c
Newton's laws of motion can be applied in numerous situations to solve problems
related to motion.
c
Newton's first law also known as the law of inertia tells us that in the absence of
unbalanced force a body at rest remains at rest and a body in motion keeps on
moving with the same velocity.
c
Newam's second law describes what happens to a body if it is ncted upon by mn
unbalanced force. The acceleration of a body is directly proportional to the net
force and inversely proportional to the mass of the body. A body accelerates in the
direction of the net force on it.
C
Newton's third law tells us the fact that forces are in pairs and that action and
reaction are equal and opposite.
C
Friction is an example of contact type of force. It arises when a hody moves or
attempts to move on another body. Friction depends on the nature of the surfaces
in contact and the normal force.
c
Static friction is greater than sliding (kinetic friction).
C
The normal force on an object is not always equal in magnitude to the weight of the
object. It depends on the orientation of the surface on which an object is placed.
C
A body is in equilibrium is the net force acting on it is zera.
c
When a body is in equilibrium, it is either at rest or moves at a constant speed in a
fixed direction. Itx acceleration will be zero.
c
For problems involving two or more forces, draw free-body diagrams, resolve the
forces into their components and apply Newton's laws
c
The net work done Wₙₑₜ, is the work done by the net force acting on an object.
c
Work done on an object transfers energy to the object.
The translational kinetic energy of an object of mass m moving at speed V is k=
1/2 mv²
c
The work-energy theorem states that the network Wₙₑₜ on a system changes its
kinetic energy.
C
Gravitational potential energy of a mass m placed at height habove a reference is
PE=mgh
c
One of the common examples of work done by a varying force is work done on a
spring.
c
Elastic potential energy of a spring that is stretched or compressed through X is
PE=k²
Linear momentum is defined as the product of a system's mass and its velocity.
c
In symbols, linear momentum P is defined to be P = mv where m is the mass of
169
Physics
I
Student Text Book
the system and is its velocity.
c
The SI unit for momentum is kgm/s.
c
Newton's second law of motion when expressed in terms of momentum it take the
form Fₙₑₜ =
c
Center of mass of a body is a point where the total mass of the body is assumed to
be concentrated.
c
Power is the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of energy.
c
When a certain work is done in a given interval of time, the power delivered is
given by Power = Work/time.
c
When a force is applied on an object, the velocity is changed, the power delivered
at that instant of time is given by the dot product of the applied force and the
velocity vector as P = F.v
c
When several forces are acting on a body, the net power delivered is the sum of the
power delivered by each of the forces.
C
Positive power means energy is transferred to the object by the force.
c
Negative power means energy is transferred from the object by the force.
170
Grade 11
END OF UNIT 4 QUESTIONS:
1. A ball of mass m is suspended by a string from the ceiling, the Earth pulls down
the ball with a force of magnitude equal to the weight of the ball. Consider this to
be the action force, what is the action force?
a. The string pulling upward on object with a force of magnitude equal to
the weight of the ball
b. The ceiling pulling upward on the string with a force of magnitude equal
to the weight of the ball.
c. The ball pulling upward on the earth with a force of magnitude equal to
the weight of the ball.
2. It is easier to pull a rolling bag on a road than to push. This is because when the
rolling bag is pulled,
a)
the vertical component of the force
acts in the direction of gravity and
weight thereby weight of the roller
is increased and friction increased.
b)
the vertical component of the force
acts in opposite direction to the
weight, thereby weight of the roller
is decreased and friction decreased.
c)
the premise is wrong, because pull-
ing a roller cannot be easier than
pushing.
3. The speed of a freely falling object is proportional to its mass or weight.
a. True
b. False
4. How is inertia of an object affected by its mass?
5. List down the various effects of force.
6. Which of the following statement is NOT true?
a. Rate of change of momentum is called force.
b. Action reaction pairs of force are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
c. Action reaction pairs of force act on two different bodies.
d. Action reaction pairs of force can be cancelled to each other.
171
Physics
I
Student Text Book
7. Any two equal and opposite forces constitute ac-
tion and reaction pairs. Is this statement correct?
Explain.
8. A soccer player starts from rest and accelerates
forward, reaching a velocity of 8 m/s in 2.5 S. (a)
What was his average acceleration? (b) What av-
erage force did he exert backward on the ground
to achieve this acceleration? The player's mass is
70 kg, and air resistance is negligible. (This prob-
lem is solved by integrating the concepts of kine-
matics to dynamics.)
9. What is the use of airbags in cars?
10. Give reason why dust is re moved from a carpet by shaking?
0.2 m/s
11. Why is it advised to tie a rope on the luggage to a luggage rack while you travel by
the bus?
12. The figure at the right shows a 75 kg man standing on a bathroom scale in an ele-
vator. Calculate the scale reading: (a) if the elevator accelerates upward at a rate of
1.20 m/s2, and (b) if the elevator moves upward at a constant speed of 1 m/s.
13. Define the term equilibrium and state the first condition of equilibrium.
172
Grade 11
14. If a block is at rest on an incline without slipping, then friction must equal the
component of the weight of the object parallel to the incline. This requires great-
er and greater friction for steeper slopes
inclined
plane
e
a.
Draw the free body diagram and show that the maximum angle of an in-
cline above the horizontal for which an object will not slide down is Θ=
tan-1(µs).
b.
This angle is called the critical angle, what will be the acceleration of the
block when the angle of the inclination is greater than the critical angle? Is
the acceleration dependent on the mass? Is the acceleration dependent on
the mass if the surface is frictionless? For what angle would the block begin
to slide if the surface were frictionless?
15. Three blocks are in contact with each other on
a frictionless horizontal surface as in the figure
THE
m₂
m3
below.
mg
16. A horizontal force =18N is applied to m₁. If m₁ is 1kg, m₂= = 2 kg, and m3 = 3kg,
Draw a separate free body diagram for each block and find:
a. The acceleration of the block.
b. The resultant force on each block.
c. The magnitude of the contact forces between the blocks.
17. State the law of conservation of momentum.
18. Compare the momentum of a 78 kg footballer running at a speed of 8.0m/s to
that of a hard kicked 0.4kg soccer ball at a speed of 25m/s. Which one has a larger
momentum?
19. Does a large force always produce a larger impulse on an object than a smaller
force does? Explain.
20. If the speed of a particle is doubled, by what factor is its momentum changed? By
what factor is its kinetic energy changed?
21. If two particles have equal kinetic energies, are their momenta necessarily equal?
Explain.
173
Physics I Student Text Book
22. What is the momentum of a 200 kg mass if it has kinetic energy of 1600 J?
23. By what factor must the speed of a moving body change in order to double its
kinetic energy?
24. Suppose that you push on the 30 kg box as shown in the figure with a constant
force of 120 N through a distance of 0.80 m, and that the average opposing friction
force is 5 N.
a.
Calculate the net work done on the box.
b.
Solve the same problem as in part a, this time by finding the work
done by each force that contributes to the net force.
c.
Using the work energy concept, find the velocity of the box at the end
of the push
120N
30kg
25. Explain why it is easier to climb a mountain on a zigzag path rather than one
straight up the side. Is your increase in gravitational potential energy the same in
both cases?
26. Three objects are located in a coordinate system as shown. Find the center of mass.
5.00 kg
2.00 kg
4.00 kg
x
1.00 m
0.500 ml
174
convection
UNIT 5
radiation
air
HEAT CONDUCTION AND
CALORIMETRY
conduction
Introduction
Everywhere you look including yourself, energy transfer taking place in different forms.
One of such energy transfer methods is heat transfer. Heat energy is very essential to
society. From everyday cooking to some of modern-day luxuries, such as refrigerators
and Jet engines are using the transfer of heat energy at the heart of their working
principle. Heat is one of the mechanisms to transfer internal energy so that it can be
usable.
Heat is often misunderstood to be the same as temperature. In this unit, you will be
discussing differences and relationships between the two. Apart from that, you will also
learn about thermal expansion caused by the change in temperature, the quantity of
heat transfer due temperature changes, and change of phase along with internal energy
and the work done by a system.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
gain comprehensive knowledge on basic properties of fluids, thermal
properties of matter, phase changes, calorimetry
quantitatively and qualitatively describe about heat capacity, specific heat
capacity, and thermal expansions.
solve calorimetry problems.
use specific heat and heat of transformations in the practical application
of calorimetry.
175
Physics
Student Text Book
5.1 The Concept of Heat
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the concept of heat
?
Brainstorming:
Get motivated by the following questions
What is temperature?
Although they are highly related, heat and temperature are completely different
quantities. Heat is a measure of change, never a property possessed by an object
or system. Therefore, it is classified as a process variable. However, temperature is
a fundamental physical quantity which is to the average kinetic energy of particles
of the substance.
It should also be noted that work and heat are closely related. Both can change the
temperature of a substance, and heat can be turned into work and work can be
turned into heat. This equivalence is the basis of how heat engines power modern
society.
What is heat?
When a hot cup of tea is left in a room
in contact with the enveloping air, you
know that the cup of tea will gradually
cool down over time. So what is
happening over the course of time to
cause the tea to cool down?
Figure 5.1: Spontaneous transfer of heat is from hot to cold
The fact that the tea lowers its temperature is a sign that the average kinetic
energy of its particles is decreasing - the tea is losing energy. The energy that is
lost by the tea is being transferred to the colder surroundings. In general, if two
objects at different temperatures are brought in thermal contact, energy flows
spontaneously from the hotter object to the cooler one. The spontaneous transfer
of energy from hotter region to cooler region is called heat. Since heat is energy,
176
Grade 11
its SI unit is joules (J). When temperatures of the tea and that of the surrounding
air balance out, we say thermal equilibrium is reached. At thermal equilibrium,
the two regions may exchange energy, but no net heat transfer occurs.
Heat, internal energy and thermodynamic work
Another aspect of the definition
Key terms:
of heat is that a body never
Internal energy is equal to the sum of internal
contains heat. That is, we
kinetic energy due to molecular motion
cannot say "stored heat energy"
(translational, rotational, and energy of
as we cannot say "stored electric
vibration) and internal potential energy due to
molecular attractive forces.
current". Heat is not something
Heat is energy which is in transit from one
you get it sitting down. Rather,
body to another as the result of a difference
heat can be identified only as it
in temperature.
crosses a boundary.
Thermodynamic work is the quantity of energy
transferred from one system to another.
When an object is heated, its temperature rises, since the average kinetic energy
of its particles increases. In other words, the energy stored in the substance is
increased. This energy stored in the object is what we call internal energy. When
the tea is cooling down, it is releasing its internal energy in the form of heat.
Internal energy is equal to the sum of internal kinetic energy due to molecular
motion (translational, rotational, and energy of vibration) and internal potential
energy due to molecular attractive forces.
Heat and work are two different ways of transferring energy from one system to
another. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between systems, while work
is the transfer of mechanical energy between two systems. If heat is supplied
to an enclosed gas, the temperature of the gas increases by then increasing its
internal energy. If the gas is closed by a movable piston as shown in Figure
5.2, work is done by the expanding gas in raising the piston up. Thus, the heat
supplied is converted partly into internal energy and partly into work done. We
can also increase the internal energy of the gas by pushing the piston down and
compressing the gas.
177
Physics
Student Text Book
Surrounding
Heat
supplied (Q)
Work
done (W)
System
(ideal gas)
Figure 5.2: Relationships between heat, work and internal energy
Review Questions 5.1:
1. Explain the concept of heat and describe effects of heating.
2. What are the factors that cause heat flow between two systems which are
in thermal contact?
3. Is there any heat exchange between two systems in thermal contact if they
are in thermal equilibrium?
4. Is it possible to reduce net heat flow to zero? What about internal energy?
Is there any relationship between internal energy and temperature?
5. Consider two cylinders, A and B, of equal volume, which are filled with
equal amount of gases of the same type but A is at higher temperature than
B.
a. Can you say A has greater heat than B?
b. Can you say that A has greater internal energy than B?
C. If A and B are brought in thermal contact, which one loses
and which one gains internal energy? What is the direction of
heat flow? Does the measure of the average kinetic energy of
molecules in B increase or decrease?
6. In the figure shown, heat is supplied to the gas confined in a cylinder.
a. What would happen to this energy after it enters
into the cylinder?
b. If work is done on the piston and displaces it up,
gas
what would happen to the internal energy; decrease or
heat
increase?
C. If the internal energy remains the same while heat
is flowing in to the system, what happened to the energy supplied?
7. What are similarities and differences between heat and work?
178
Grade 11
5.2
Heat transfer mechanisms
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the concept of heat conduction
?
Brainstorming
This unit is motivated by the following discovery questions:
1. When you touch one end of a metal rod whose other end is on a fire, you feel
warm. How is that happened?
2. When you are outside of your house and enjoying the morning sun you
feelwarm. How is that happened? When you insert your hand over the steam
of boiling water, you feel warm. How is that happened?
3. What types of objects feel cold and what type of objects feel warm in your
house? Justify your answer and write them down.
Have you ever touched a hot pan and burned your fingers, or have you ever warmed
yourself in front of a campfire on a cold night? These are all related to the movement
of heat and how it gets transferred between substances and locations. Heat transfer
mechanisms are the ways by which thermal energy can be transferred between
objects, and they all rely on the basic principle that kinetic energy or heat wants to be
at equilibrium. Heat transfer occurs in three different ways: conduction, convection,
and radiation.
I. Conduction
If one end of a metal rod is over a flame and a person is holding the opposite end with
a bare hand, as shown in Figure 5.3, the heat will quickly transfer through the metal
to the person's hand and burn him/her. Such direct transfer of heat from one object
to another by collisions of neighboring particles is called conduction. In conduction,
no actual drift of molecules in the direction of heat flow is happening.
Key terms:
Conduction is the process by which heat energy is transmitted through collisions
between neighboring atoms or molecules.
Convection (or convective heat transfer) is the transfer of heat from one place to
another due to the movement of fluid.
Radiation heat transfer occurs via electromagnetic waves. Unlike conduction and
convection, radiation does not need a medium for transmission
179
Physics
Student Text Book
Conduction
Hotend
Coldend
Figure 5.3: Heat transfer by conduction
Materials such as metals that conduct heat very well are called good conductors.
Some substances are very bad at transferring heat, and these are called insulators.
Good insulators are, therefore, very poor conductors. Do you know why your metal
pots have wooden handles?
Do you know...?
The photo shows Aerogel, an extremely good thermal insulator, be-
tween a blowtorch and matches. The Aerogel blocks all of the heat
from the blowtorch and prevents the matches from burning. Source:
https://www.ucalgary.ca/
The reason is that the metal pots are good conductors of heat, and wood is bad heat
conductor. So, metal pots have wooden handles so that persons do not feel hot while
holding them
Houses are usually insulated with poor conductors such as rock, wool or fiberglass.
Imagine how cold a house would be if there was no protection from the cold outside
during winter, or how hot it would be if it were not protected from the heat outside
in the summer! Interestingly, though, insulators do not actually totally stop the flow
of heat, just slow the transfer considerably.
?
Activity 5.1:
1. Suppose you have a piece of metal and a piece of wood in your room. Why
does the metal feel colder than the wood if they are both at room temperature?
2. You know that rate of heat transfer depends on the properties of the medium.
180
Grade 11
a.
What do you think on impact of size or shape on rate of heat transfer?
b.
Two regular metal rods of different cross-sectional area and equal length
are put in to a fire, as shown in Figure 5.4. If you are holding on the cold
side, after some time you feel the temperature increase in your hand.
Discuss in groups which one of the metals transfer energy to your hand
sooner. Why is that?
3. If you want to have best insulating wall, which factors should you consider?
Figure 5.4: Conducting slab
II. Convection
Convective heat transfer is the transfer of heat between two bodies by currents of
moving gas or fluid. Convection happens in all fluids like the air in your environment,
water in a sea and so on. When a fluid is heated, the molecules at the bottom gain
energy and begin to move faster (See Figure 5.5). As they move faster, they begin to
spread apart, which makes the fluid less dense. But instead of being confined to a
small space, the fluid's warmer molecules begin to move upward, while the cooler,
denser portion of the fluid begins to sink.
Once the cooler molecules reach the
bottom where the heat is, they get an
increase in energy again. They rise back up
to the top, while the cooler molecules sink
warm
molecules
back to the bottom. The cycle continues as
Convection
cool
long as there is a heat source at the bottom.
molecules
Unlike conduction, in convection, heat is
heat
carried from the bottom to the top being
Figure 5.5: Heat transfer by
carried by molecules. That is, molecules
convection
travel with the heat.
III. Radiation
When you sit in front of a campfire, you are warmed by its heat. Hover your hand
over a hot light bulb, and you will feel the heat coming off it, even without touching
it. If you stand out in the sunshine, you will quickly get warmed by its rays. Such heat
181
Physics
Student Text Book
transfer mechanism is called radiation.
Heat transferred by radiation is called radiant heat. Like light, radiant heat is radiant
energy, and does not necessarily require a medium to carry it. This form of energy
transfer is facilitated through a type of electromagnetic radiation.
?
Activity 5.2
1. Let there be hot coffee, hot water, hot milk, hot tea, hot porridge. Discuss and
rank from hottest to coldest. You may design and carry out investigative work
to scientifically support your claim.
2. In hot areas what do people do to cool themselves? (Think of in terms of
clothing housing etc.)
Review Questions 5.2:
1. What would happen to boiling water if you close the cover tightly? Try to
describe it in terms of convention and conduction.
2. What is the difference between conduction and convection?
3. Does heat transferred less or more if the area is big?
4. Name the general mode of heat transfer in: Solids, liquids and gases.
5. A person prefers to sit by a fire during the cold winter months. Which heat
transfer mechanism gives him the most heat?
6. What would be the effect if air were as good conductor as iron?
7. Three types of heat transfer mechanisms are indicated in the same phenomenon,
as shown in Figure 5.6. Do you think these are correct designations? Explain.
Conduction
Convection
Radiation
Radiation
Figure 5.6: Summarizes the three heat transmission mechanism
182
Grade 11
5.3 Heat Capacity and Specific Heat Capacity
After completing this section, you should be able to:
differentiate between heat capacity and specific heat capacity
list the specific heat capacity of various materials
?
Brainstorming!
Investigate in groups why water is added in the radiator of a car? Why different
additives are added in the radiator water? Your investigation can be done through
literature search asking knowledgeable person.
Heat capacity
Different substances respond to heat in different ways. For example, if a metal
plate is placed in the bright sun on a hot day, it may become quite hotter than the
surrounding. An equal mass of water under the same sun exposure will be cooler
than the metal. This means that water has a higher heat capacity. Some objects
gain and lose heat quickly, some slow and some intermediate. Therefore, we need to
define a quantity called heat capacity.
Heat capacity is defined as the amount of heat required to change the temperature of
a given amount of matter by 1°C or by 1K. The mathematical form of this definition
is given by;
C=2/AT C
where Q is heat transferred to the object, T is change in temperature of the object and
C is heat capacity of the object. The SI unit of C is joule per kelvin (J/K); where 1 J/
K=1J/°C.
Consider two tankers, 10 kL and the other 10L, are filled with pure water at the same
temperature. If the two tankers were subjected to the same input of heat energy, the
10L water would certainly rise in temperature more quickly than the water in the
10kL tanker.
Key terms:
Heat capacity is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of an object
by 1 or 1 K.
The specific heat capacity of a substance is the amount of energy required to raise
the temperature of 1 kilogram of the substance by 1 / or 1 K.
183
Physics
|
Student Text Book
This suggests that the heat capacity of an object depends not only on the property of
the object but also on its mass. Because of its much larger mass, the 10 kL water has
a larger heat capacity than the 10L water. Therefore, we require defining a quantity,
specific heat capacity, which depends only on properties of the substance.
Specific heat capacity
Specific heat capacity is defined as the amount of heat absorbed or released by 1kg
of an object to change its temperature by 1o C. The specific heat capacity, c, of a
substance of mass, m, and heat capacity, C, can be defined as
c = m C , or, c = mAT Q
The SI unit of specific heat capacity is J/kg.°C, or J/kg.K.
Specific heat is a property that is specific to a given type of matter, and substances
vary in their specific heat. Table 5.1 holds specific heat capacity of some substances.
Table 5.1: Provides specific heats of some substances at 25 °C and atmospher-
ic pressure.
Substance
Specific heat capacity
Solids
Aluminum
900
Iron
448
Lead
128
Brass
380
Glass
837
Carbon, graphite
709
Copper
385
Gold
129
Silver
233
Ice (-5°C)
2090
Liquids
Alcohol (ethyl)
2400
Mercury
140
Water (15°C)
4186
Gas
Steam (100°C)
2010
Metals tend to have low specific heat. On the other hand, water has very high specific
heat compared to most other substances. That is why; water is commonly used as a
coolant for machinery because it is able to absorb large quantities of heat.
184
Grade 11
Example 5.1:
Calculate the heat energy transferred if the temperature of 600 g of lead is raised
from 20 °C to 100°C.
Solution: Cₚb = 128J / kg.K, m = 600g, T = 100°C - 20°C = 80°C = 80K
The amount of heat absorbed by the lead is
Q = cₚ₆mAT = 128J X X K
Q = 6144.0J
Review Questions 5.3
1. What does a higher specific heat capacity mean in terms of heat energy
transfer?
2. Concrete has a higher specific heat than soil. Use this fact to explain why a city
has a higher average temperature than the surrounding countryside at night.
3. How many joules of energy are required to raise the temperature of 100g of
gold from 20°C to 100°C? (Specific heat of gold is 129 J/kg. °C)
4. Why are coastal climates much more moderate than inland climates?
5. Which heats faster, land or water? You will answer this question by taking
measurements carried out to study differences in specific heat capacity.
6. A 0.80 kg aluminum pan on a stove is used to heat 0.20 L of water from 25.0
°C to 85.0 °C. (Hint: Mass of 1 L of water = 1 kg of water, around 4 °C)
a)
How much heat is required?
b)
What percentage of the heat is used to raise the temperature of the
pan?
7. Calculate the temperature increase of 50 kg of steel falling from a height of 50
m if 50% of its kinetic energy is converted into heat and assume no heat flow
to the surrounding ?
185
Physics
Student Text Book
5.4 Thermal expansion
After completing this section, you should be able to:
solve problems associated with thermal expansion
?
Brainstorming:
1. In the construction of ball bearings (shown in Figure 5.7b) the outer metal ring
and the inner metal ring rotate smoothly due to the solid iron balls between
them and oil lubrication. Once the iron balls are put in to place, they will be
there permanently. Have you ever wondered how the iron metal balls get in
to the ball bearings? Discuss with your group and come up with your opinion.
Your opinion must be supported by reason.
2. What is the reason for the bending of the railroad, shown in Figure 5.7a?
(a)
(b)
Ball Bearings
Figure 5.7: (a) Effect of thermal expansion, (b) application of thermal expansion
Thermal expansion is the change in size of matter in response to a change in its
temperature. When a substance is heated, the average kinetic energy of its constituting
particles is increased.
Key term:
Thermal expansion is the change in size of matter in response to a change in
temperature
Thereby, the particles start to vibrate and move more and usually maintain a greater
average separation. Except in some cases, most substances expand when heated
and contract when cooled. Thermal expansion is also affected by the properties
of the substance. For example, solids expand very less as compared to liquids and
186
Grade 11
gases. Gases expand much more than liquids and solids. This happens because
intermolecular force of attraction is very strong in solids, intermediate in liquids and
very weak in gases. All factors that affect thermal expansion will be treated below.
Thermal expansion can be classified in to three: linear expansion, surface (area)
expansion and volume expansion.
Linear expansion
If the change in length is along one dimension (length) over the volume due to a
change in temperature, it is called linear expansion. Suppose an object has an initial
length of L₀ at some initial temperature T₀. Let the length be changed to L when the
temperature is changed to T. Experiments show that if the change in temperature
(T) is not too large, the change in length (L) is directly proportional to T and
L₀. Then, the change in length is defined as
where,
AT = T - T₀ is the change in temperature,
L = L - L₀ is the change in length,
α is the linear coefficient of thermal expansion, which has the unit °C⁻¹
, or K⁻¹, and
L₀ is the original length.
T₀
L.
AL
T=T,+AT
L
Figure 5.8: Linear expansion
Each substance has a unique linear expansion coefficient; i.e., different substances
expand in different amounts for the same temperature change. For example,
the coefficient of linear expansion of Aluminum is 2.3 x10⁻⁵ K⁻¹ means that if the
temperature of 1 m long Aluminum is increased by 1 K, its length increases by
2.3x10⁻⁵ m. By the same change in temperature, the same length of copper wire
187
Physics I Student Text Book
increases by 1.7x10⁻⁵ m. This implies that the same change in temperature on
different materials of the same length produces different changes in length.
Table 5.2: Linear expansion coefficients of some solids
Material
α X 10-6 (°C⁻¹)
Aluminum
24
Brass and Bronze
19
Copper
17
Glass
9
Lead
29
Steel
11
Concrete
12
Example 5.2:
A steel bridge is built in several segments, each 20 m long. The bridge was constructed
when the temperature was 20 °C. If a gap of 4 cm is left between neighboring
segments what would be the maximum temperature that the bridge can manage
before buckling?
Solution:
T₀ = 20 °C, L₀ =20.0 m, L = 4 cm = 4x10⁻² m, α = 1.1x10⁵K⁻¹
The gap is filled from the two sides.
The expected rise in temperature is
T = L = 1.1X10³k⁻¹x20.0m 4.0x10²m = 180 K = 180°C
The temperature at which the bridge may buckle is
T = To + T = 20°C + 180°C = 200°C
Such big change in temperature may occur if there are exceptional moments such
as flowing volcano over the bridge.
188
Grade 11
Area expansion
The same method as linear thermal expansion can also be applied for area expansion.
Thus, consider the plate of surface area A₀ at a temperature T₀, as shown in Figure
5.9. For a small change in temperature of T, the change in area A, is given by
A = A₀βAT
where â is called the coefficient of surface (area) expansion, and it can be measured
by the unit °C⁻¹, or K⁻¹.
A
A+AA
Temperature T
Temperature T+AT
Figure 5.9: Area expansion
Relationship between a and ß
Suppose a square plate of side length L₀ and surface area A₀, is experienced a
change in temperature of T, then the new area in terms of the new length L can
be written as:
Since α is to the order of 10⁻⁵, then ignoring the third term containing α² 10⁻¹⁰)
doesn't affect the result and we get:
Comparing this with the original definition, we find that ß = 2α. This is a very
good approximation, so we do not need table of values for ß as we can easily find it
by doubling the value of α.
189
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 5.3:
The surface area of one side of a circular brass plate at temperature 100 °C, is 3850
cm². To put this plate inside a cylinder, you need to cool it to 0 °C. What is the
base area of the cylinder?
Solution:
T₀ = 100 °C, T = 0°C, A₀ =3850 cm²
The area of the plate at T = 0 °C is obtain as
A = (3850cm²) + 2 X 1.9 X 10⁻⁵K⁻¹ (0°C - 100°C)]
A = 3835.37 cm²
In order for the plate to pass into the cylinder, either side of its surface area should
be reduced to below 3835.37 cm².
Volume Expansion
When the length, the width and the thickness of the object are equally significant,
as shown in Figure 5.10, we need to consider the expansion of the object in three
dimensions. In this case, all the three lengths experience significant changes in
length with a change in temperature.
Peculiarity of water expansion
The peculiarity of water in its response to temperature changes is that its volume de-
creases as its temperature increases between 0 °C to 4 °C. The density of water has
maximum value at 4°C.
Final Volume
V
Initial Volume V
0
Initial Length
Length After Heating
Figure 5.10: Volume expansion
190
Grade 11
Change in volume V of an object subjected to a small temperature change T, is
given by
V = V
where γ is the coefficient of volume expansion.
The final volume, V, is, then
Both ß and γ have the same units as α; that is, °C⁻¹, or K⁻¹.
Relationship of γ , with a and β
Using a method similar to what we have done in deriving relationship between ß and
α, we find the volume of a cube of length L to be:
V = L³ = L₀³ (1 + αT) = Vₑ 3αT)
Evaluating all the above discussions, we find that:
γ = 2ß = 3a
Table 4.3: Coefficient of volume expansion of solids and liquids
Material
Volume Expansion Coefficient (β) X 10-4°C-1
Alcohol
1.12
Benzene
1.24
Mercury
1.82
Air
3.67
Example 5.4:
1, A 200 liter aluminum cylindrical reservoir is filled with Ethyl alcohol (
γ = 112 X 10⁻⁵ K⁻¹ at the temperature of 20°C. What volume of alcohol will overflow
if the system is heated to 100°C.
Solution:
α₄ₗ = X T₀ = °C, T = 100 °C, V₀ =200 lit
The two have the same initial volume, but will have different volumes when
their temperature is changed even with the same amount. The difference in their
volumes for an increase in temperature T, is equal to the difference between
the volume of the alcohol,
191
Physics I Student Text Book
V = V₀ + αT), and that of the cylinder, VAl = V₀ + T) Thus
Substituting values ans simplifying the result, we obtain
Vₗcy = (200lit) (80°C) (112 10⁻⁵) K⁻¹ - 3 X 2.31 X 10⁻⁵K⁻¹)
Vₗcy = 16.81 lit
2. While working in the laboratory, you fill water in a glass flask that holds exactly
one litter at temperature 10 °C. You heat the flask, raising the temperature of the
water and flask to 30 °C. Which material expands more; the glass or the water? The
information you need for deciding is the coefficient of expansion.
(take γ = 207x10⁻³K⁻¹ for water and
= 3x9x10⁻K⁻¹ = 2.7x10⁻K`for glass)
Solution:
The glass flask and the water both expand when heated. The water expands more,
as the result some water spills out. Let Vw be the increase in the volume of water;
V₉ is the increase in the volume of glass; and^Vₛ is the volume of water spilled.
Then,
V$ = VAT - VAT = (Bᵥ - ßg) VAT
V = (207 X 10⁻⁶ K⁻¹ - 27 X 10⁻⁶K⁻¹) X 10L X (30°C - 10°C)
V$ = 36mL
Real and apparent coefficients of cubic expansion
The formula used to calculate change in volume for a change in temperature of a
solid can be applied for liquids. However, why we want to discuss volume expansion
for liquids is that liquids are treated with their containers and consequently the
expansion of the container affects the result for liquids.
While measuring the coefficient of cubic expansion of a liquid, the result is not a real
value, rather it is an apparent value since the container itself is affected by the change
in temperature. Therefore, the actual coefficient of volume expansion is given by
γᵣ = r + γc where γᵣ is the real value, γ is the apparent value and Vc is the
coefficient of cubic expansion of the container.
192
Grade 11
Example 5.5:
Mercury of volume 10000 cm³, which is filled in a brass container, is heated from 10
°C to 80 °C. What will be the real and apparent volume expansions of mercury in the
brass container?
T₀ = 10°C, T = 80°C, = 18 X , Vb = 5.7 X
The real expansion of mercury is
^Vₘ,r = V₀γ T = (10⁴cm³) X (18 x 10⁻⁵K⁻¹) (80°C - 10°C)
^Vₘ,r = 126cm³
The apparent coefficient of volume expansion of mercury in brass container,
γ app = 18 X - X = 12.3 X
The apparent volume expansion of the mercury becomes
Vₐₚₚ = γ app VₒT = 12.3 X 10⁻⁵K⁻¹ (10⁴cm³) (70k)
AVa₇ₚ = 86.1cm³
Thermal expansion of gases
Gases expand more at ordinary temperature than solid and liquid. In the case of
gases, both temperature and pressure determine the change in volume of the gas.
Increasing the temperature leads to increase in the volume of the gas while the
increase in the pressure leads to decrease in volume. In this case, you cannot use the
method used in liquids and solids to determine the volume expansion coefficient of
a gas.
Applications of thermal expansion in solids
?
Brainstorming
1. Discuss and present the applications of thermal expansion in your locality.
2. Explore how mercury thermometer is calibrated. What property is used for
calibration and why is the mercury made to rise up a capillary tube ? What
would be the shape of the metals look like after heating up? Describe the
shapes
Figure 5.11: Two different metals attached together
3. Follow the demonstration by your physics teacher and explain Gravesend's
ring -and -ball experiment to describe thermal expansion of solids. Experiment
on thermal expansion of gases by putting an inflated balloon on a hot water.
193
Physics
Student Text Book
Some applications of thermal expansion:
Riveting two metal sheets tightly: As the rivet cools it contracts and makes
the joint between the two metal sheets tighter, as shown in Figure 5.12.
hot rivet - expanded
cold rivet . contracted
metal sheets
cool
hot
Figure 5.12: Riveting metal sheets
brass
iron or invar
The bimetallic strip: A bimetallic strip is made
out of two metals of different coefficients of linear
this metal
expands less
expansion bonded together. For example iron and
brass bonded together. The coefficient of linear
expansion (α) of iron (1.1 X 10⁻⁵ K⁻¹) is less than that
of brass (1.9 X 10⁻⁵ K⁻¹). When the strip is heated, the
brass expands faster than the iron and as a result the
strip bends towards the iron side, as shown in Figure
5.13.
Figure 5.13: Bimetallic strip
A bimetallic strip can be used as a switch in an electric circuit that turns on and off
according to the temperature. This switch is what we call thermostat.
Removing a stopper: If you find it difficult to remove the stopper
from a glass bottle, just heat its neck slightly. Now the neck of the bot-
tle expands and the stopper comes out easily.
Liquid thermometers: The expansion of mercury or alcohol in a liq-
uid thermometer is an application of the thermal expansion of liquids.
Boiling of liquids: When liquid is heated, the molecules of the liquid
expand and the liquid changes its state.
Sealed bottles: Medicine bottles are left out with some space at the top
so that the medicine does not spill off after expansion.
194
Grade 11
Review Questions 5.4
1. A steel cork of a soft drink bottle at normal temperature is too tight to open it.
Which method helps to open it easily; heating or cooling?
2. Does heating a thin, circular ring make it wider or narrower?
3. A segment of steel railroad track has a length of 60 m when the temperature is
0.0°C. What is its length when the temperature is raised to 40.0°C?
4. What would happen if, upon heating, the glass of a thermometer expands more
than the liquid inside?
5. Why do we use mercury in a glass thermometer while the glass undergoes
thermal expansion with it?.
6. When a metal ring and a metal sphere with equal radius are both at room
temperature, the sphere does not pass through the ring. After the ring is heated,
the sphere can pass through the ring. Why?
7. The diameter of a piston is 10 cm. To what temperature should a steel ring of
diameter 9.9 cm be heated so that the piston can pass through the ring?
8. Suppose a 300 L steel barrel is filled with Ethyl alcohol at a temperature of
10°C. How much Ethyl alcohol over flows if the system is heated to 100 °C?
9. Consider three metal rods, each has a length of 40.0 cm at a temperature of
0°C. When the temperature on them is increased by 100 °C, the length of the
one is increased by 0.08 cm, the second one by 0.05 cm. The third rod which
is made of combinations of the first two metals, extends by 0.06 cm. Find the
length of each portion of the composite bar.
10. Suppose that a steel hoop could at 0.0 degree Celcius be constructed around
the earth's equator, just fitting it at a temperature 25°C. What would be the
thickness of space between hoop and the earth if the temperature of the hoop
were increased by 5 °C. = 1.2 X
11. Two brass rods and one steel rod of equal length L₀ and equal cross-sectional
are joined rigidly at their ends. All rods are in the state of zero tension at 0° C.
Find the length of the system when the temperature is increased to T. (Take
a
12. The length of a copper wire at 0°C is 100 cm and it is is shorter by 0.05 cm from
a steel wire at the same temperature. To what value should the temperature on
the two wires be increased so that the two wires attain the same length?
13. Calculate the change in area if the surface area of a container with a glass
cover is 0.05 m2 and a = 9 X 10⁻⁶ °C-1 when it is exposed to a temperature
difference of 96 °C.
195
Physics
Student Text Book
L
14. Calculate the volume difference of a 1.00 m³ of water when heated from 10 °C
to 90°C. = 2.1 X 10-4 °C-1.
5.5 Change of phase
After completing this section, you should be able to:
discuss the phenomena of change of phase
?
Brainstorming
You know that heat is a transfer or flow of energy due to temperature dif-
ference.
1. Is there a situation in which heat transfers without bringing change in the
temperature of the substance?
2. Have you ever noticed that melting or boiling undertakes without any change
in temperature while heat is being transferring? What happened to the heat
supplied?
Anything that has mass is made up of matter - an all-encompassing word for atoms
and molecules that make up our physical world. We describe this matter as existing
in states (sometimes referred to as phases). Most people are familiar with three states
of matter - solids, liquids and gases. The term phase is used to describe a specific
state of matter, such as a liquid, solid or gas.
Most substances can exist in different states. For example, water exists in liquid state,
water as solid state, such ice, and water as gaseous state such as steam or water vapor.
All these states or phases are the result of being at different temperatures. Phases
of matter are inter-changeable. That is, matter can be changed from one state to
another by adding or taking heat from the object.
196
Grade 11
What is phase change?
What is important about phases of matter is that matter undergoes changes in phase.
When a substance is supplied with heat, it either changes its temperature or changes
its internal energy. When internal energy is changed as heat is supplied the substance
undergoes phase change. At phase change the heat supplied is used to change the
molecular structure to break the bonds between molecules keeping the temperature
constant. The transition from one phase to another is called phase change or phase
transition, for instance, solid to liquid (melting), liquid to gas (evaporation).
Latent heat
The energy absorbed or released by a substance during a change in its physical state
(phase) that occurs without changing its temperature is called latent heat. The
amount of heat absorbed or released by an object of mass, m, is given mathematically
by
Q = mL
where L is called the latent heat of the substance; i.e., L = Lf for heat of fusion and
L=Lᵥ = for heat of vaporization. Its SI unit is joule per kilogram (J/kg).
Latent heat depends on the nature of the phase change as well as on the properties of
the substance.
Key terms
Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat absorbed by 1kg of a substance from
solid to liquid - leaving the temperature of the system unaltered.
Latent heat of vaporization is the amount of heat absorbed by 1kg of the substance
to change its phase from liquid to gas.
The word "latent" means "hidden", so why is the term hidden? The reason why it
is called latent heat is that it cannot be measured by a thermometer. The energy
involved in a phase change is used to break bonds, and hence there is no increase in
the kinetic energies of the particles (therefore, no rise in temperature). An important
point that we should consider is that at a given pressure, any phase change undertakes
at a specific temperature.
Latent heat of fusion (Lf) is defined as the amount of heat absorbed by 1 kg
of a substance to change its state from solid to liquid without any change in
temperature. The temperature at which fusion takes place is called the melting point
of the substance. For example, the melting point of water is 0°C. Since fusion and
solidification of a given substance are the exact opposite processes, they have equal
in magnitude, but opposite in sign.
197
Physics I Student Text Book
Heat of vaporization (Lᵥ) is defined as the quantity of heat transferred to change 1
kg of a substance from liquid state to gaseous state keeping the temperature constant.
The temperature at which a liquid substance changes to steam is called boiling point.
For example, the boiling point of water is 100 °C.
The temperature versus heat graph, in Figure 5.14, shows temperatures at which
phase changes take place.
Phase Change
Phase Change
(Solid Liquid)
(Liquid Gas)
Gas
Temperature (°C)
Vaporization
Condensation
Liquid
Melting
Freezing
Solid :::
Heat Energy
Figure 5.14: Temperature versus heat diagram
Table 5.4: Latent heat of fusion (Lf) and latent heat of vaporization (Lv)
Melting Point
Boiling point
Substance
(°C)
Lf (J/kg)
LV( J/kg)
(°C)
Oxygen
-218.79
1.38 X 10⁴
-182.97
2.13 X 105
Ethyl alcohol
-114
1.04 X 10⁵
78
8.54 X 10⁵
Water
0.00
3.33 X 10⁵
100.00
2.26 X 10⁶
Lead
327.3
2.45 X 04
1750
8.70 X 10⁵
Copper
1083
1.34 X 10⁵
1187
5.06 X 10⁶
Example 5.6
Suppose the temperature of 4 kg of water is increased from -50 °C to steam at 100 °C,
at standard pressure. Assume the specific capacity of ice is constant, 21 J/g.K. How
much energy is absorbed by the water? Draw the temperature versus heat added
graph.
Solution:
Cᵢ = 2100 J kg.K, Lf = 3.36x X J / kg, cw = 4200 kg.K, Tᵢ = -50°C,
Tₘ = 0°C, Tb = 100°C, Lᵥ = X kg,
The heat energy absorbed by the ice to increase the temperature from Tᵢ = -50°Cto
melting point (Tₘ = 0°C) is,
Qi =
198
Grade 11
The energy absorbed by the ice at 0°C to water at 0°C,
Qf = mL = 4kg X 3.36 X / kg = 1344000J
The energy absorbed by the water to increase its temperature from 0°C to boiling
point
(Tb = 100°C)
,
Qw = mcw (Tb - Tₘ) = 4kg X / kg.K (100°C - 0°C) = 1680000 J
The energy absorbed to change water at 100°C to steam at 100°C,
Q$ = mLv = 4kg X 32.25 X 10⁶ J / kg = 1.29x 10⁸ J
The total energy absorbed by the water is, then
Q = Qi + Qf + Qw + Q$
Q = 420000 J + 1344000J + 1680000 J + 129000000 J
Q = 132444000 J
Temperature (°C)
Gas phase
100
Liquid phase
0
420000 1764000
3444000
132444000
solid phase
Heat (J)
-50
Figure 5.15. illustrates how the temperature varies when we add heat continuously to a
specimen of ice with an initial temperature below 0°C (point A).
Phase diagram
Phase diagram is a graphical representation of the physical states of a substance
under different conditions of temperature and pressure. The commonly known
phase diagram has pressure on the y-axis and temperature on the x-axis. As you can
see in Figure 5.16, there are three major curves for boiling, freezing or melting or
199
Physics
Student Text Book
fusion, and sublimation on the phase diagram. As you cross the lines or curves on
the phase diagram, a phase change occurs.
At several points on the graph, the temperature and pressure combinations will
create a state of phase equilibrium between two phases. This is illustrated by a line
along those temperature-pressure combinations called, "phase equilibrium lines." At
every point along that line, there is equilibrium of both phases.
Key terms
The triple point represents the combination of pressure and temperature that
facilitates all phases of matter at equilibrium.
Critical Point is the point in temperature and pressure on a phase diagram where
the liquid and gaseous phases of a substance merge together into a single phase.
Fusion curve
solid phase
compressible
supercritical fluid
liqiud
critical pressure
Pressure
Pcr
liquid
critical point
phase
Vaporization curve
triple point
gaseous phase
Ptp
sublimation
vapour
curve
critical tempreture
Tₜₚ
Tcr
Temperature
Figure 5.16: Phase diagram
The triple point: The triple point is a point at which the three lines on the pressure-
temperature graph converge, offering an equilibrium state where all the three phases
of solid, liquid and gas exist simultaneously. For example, the single combination
of pressure and temperature at which liquid water, solid ice, and water vapor can
coexist in a stable equilibrium occurs at exactly 273.1600 K and a partial vapor
pressure of 611.657 Pa.
Sublimation:
Sublimation is the term for a phase change that proceeds directly from the solid phase to
the vapor phase without first making the transition to the liquid state.
200
Grade 11
Critical point (or, critical state): The critical point occurs where the critical
temperature and critical pressure of a substance meet. Above this point clear phase
boundaries cease to exist. For water the critical point is around 647 K and 22 MPa. The
properties of the gas and liquid phases merge together giving only one phase at the
critical point. Beyond the temperature of the critical point, the merged single phase
is known as a supercritical fluid. A substance cannot form a liquid above its critical
temperature, regardless of the applied pressure. Above the critical temperature, the
molecules have enough kinetic energy to overcome the intermolecular attractive
forces.
The critical point is different to the boiling point of a substance. The boiling point
of a substance is usually meant to mean the boiling point at standard atmospheric
pressure. However, the actual boiling point of a substance depends on the surrounding
pressure. From the phase diagram the substance has a number of boiling points
following the curving blue line. The lower the pressure, the lower is the boiling
point. The critical point occurs only at one specific temperature and pressure.
Table 5.5: Liquid-vapor critical temperature and pressure for selected substances
Substance
Critical temperature
Critical pressure (absolute)
Mercury
1,476.9 °C (1,750.1 K)
1,720 atm (174,000 kPa)
Sulfur
1,040.85 °C (1,314.00 K)
207 atm (21,000 kPa)
Iron
8,227 °C (8,500 K)
Gold
6,977 °C (7,250 K)
5,000 atm (510,000 kPa)
Review Questions 5.5
1. Why does the melting point of ice get lower at higher pressures?
2. Define critical temperature. Does it vary with pressure? Is it the same as
boiling point?
3. Does the boiling point increase indefinitely with increased pressure?
4. Collect the triple points of water, carbon dioxide, mercury, and zinc, in the
internet. Compare temperatures of these at triple point with the corresponding
melting points at standard pressure.
5. Is it possible to compress steam to form a liquid if the temperature is higher
than 374°C?
6. Calculate the heat energy required to melt 10 g of copper at its melting point.
(Lf for copper = 209 000 J/kg).
7. Calculate the heat energy released to cool 0.1kg of aluminium from 2,470°C
201
Physics
I
Student Text Book
(boiling point of Al) of aluminium gas to solid aluminium at 660.3°C (melting
point of Al) at standard pressure.
8. The diagram shows the phase diagram of CO2.
a. At what temperature and pressure can the solid, liquid and vapor phases of
CO2 coexist in equilibrium?
b. At what temperature does carbon dioxide undergoes change in state at
standard pressure? What type of state change does it undergo?
C. What are the critical temperature and pressure for CO2?
Critical
Supercritical
point
c
fluid
72.9 atm
Liquid
Pressure (not to scale)
5.1 atm
0
Triple
Solid
point
1 atm
Gas
B
-78.5
°C
-56.7 °C
31 °C
Temperature (not to scale)
9. The diagram below shows the phase diagram of water.
a. At what temperature and pressure can the solid, liquid and vapor phases of
water coexist in equilibrium?
b. Is water solid, liquid or gas at 0.01 °C under 1 atm?
217.75 atm
critical point
Pc
Critical
Pressure
LIQUID
melting
PHASE
SOLID
Pressure, P
PHASE
1 atm.
Normal Boiling Point
triple point
GAS
0.006 atm
PHASE
sublimation
0.01
°C
100°C
373.99 °C
Temperature, T
Critical Temperature
202
Grade 11
5.6 Calorimetry
After completing this section, you should be able to:
solve problems associated with Calorimetry
investigate a phenomena related with heat capacity from every day
experience.
?
Brainstorming
You have learned specific heat and heat capacity and later specific latent heat.
Discuss how you can measure the specific heat and latent heat of a substance.
Calorimetry is the measurement of the quantity of heat exchanged between
substances. The experimental approach of measuring heat capacities and the heat
changes during chemical and physical processes is called calorimetry. A calorimeter
is a device used to measure specific heat capacity and specific latent heat of solids or
liquids.
5.6.1. Measuring specific heat capacity
There are several methods we can use to determine the specific heat capacity of a
substance, but remember that to calculate this value we will always need to know:
the mass of the substance,
the amount of heat energy supplied,
its starting temperature, and
the final temperature.
All of these slightly different approaches of specific heat measurement methods
involve heat exchange. This is done by heating one material and bringing it in
thermal contact with a relatively colder body so that they exchange heat. The heat
from the hot body is used to warm a colder body. In approaching these heat exchange
calculations we use the principle that for an isolated system, the heat energy lost
(Q₁₀ₛₜ) from the hot body will equal the heat gained (Qₐᵢₙ) by the cold body.
Heat gained by cold object = Heat lost by hot object
203
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 5.7
A 0.05 kg bar of unknown metal is heated to 200.0°C and then immersed into a
container with 0.40 kg of water initially at 20.0°C. If the final equilibrium temperature
of the system is 22.4°C, find the specific heat of the metal.
Solution:
Using the heat exchange method,
Qw = -Qₛ,
0.4 kgx(4186 J/kg)x(2.4°C-20.0°C) = -0.05 kg x(22.4°C-200.0°C)
Solving this for Cₛ, we obtain,
cₛ = 453J/kg.°C.
Electrical heating to determine the specific heat capacity of a solid
The electrical method can be used to find the specific heat capacity of a solid or a
liquid. The diagram in Figure 5.17 The electrical method can be used to find the
specific heat capacity of a solid or a liquid. The diagram in Figure 5.17 shows the
apparatus used to find the specific heat capacity of a solid by electric method. In this
case, the hot body losing the heat energy is the electrical heater. We assume only
the solid object gains heat. We ignore any heat energy supplied to the thermometer
and any heat lost to the surroundings, and assumed that the electrical heater is 100%
efficient in this calculation.
thermometer
+
electrical heater of
known power
insulation
solid sample of
known mass
Figure 5.17: Finding the specific heat capacity of a known mass
Key term:
Calorimetry is the measurement of the quantity of heat exchanged between
substances.
204
Grade 11
If we know the power rating of the heater and we know how long the heater is
switched on for we can determine the quantity of heat energy supplied to the block
as:
E = Pt
where E is the energy supplied in the time t, and P is the power rating of the heater.
For a given mass, mₛ, and change in temperature, T, the specific heat capacity, cₛ
, can be determined from the principle of calorimetry as
Pt = m&c AT
Example 5.8
A 100 W electrical heater, running for 5 minutes, warmed a 0.50 kg block of an
unknown metal. The initial temperature of the metal block was 20.0 °C and its final
temperature was 86.6 °C. Determine the type of the metal.
Solution
t = 60x5 S = 300 s, T = Tf - Tᵢ = 86.6°C - 20°C = 66.6°C
The total energy supplied to the metal block:
E = Pt = 100 Wx 300 S = 30000 J
The heat gained by the block: Q = mₛcₛAT = 0.5kg X X 66.6°C
Since heat supplied equals heat gained, we have
0.50 kg X Cₛ X 66.60 °C = 30000.00 J
30000.00J
cₛ
=
=
900.90J/kg.°C
0.50kgx66.60°C X
Comparing this value with the value given in Table 5.1, the metal block is an
aluminum block.
205
Physics I Student Text Book
I. Electrical heating to determine the specific heat capacity of a liquid
Electrical heating can also be used to determine
the specific heat capacity of a liquid. An insulated
Thermometer
container could be used for the liquid. Alternatively,
a calorimeter could be used to hold the liquid.
Stirrer
In this case, the liquid is continuously stirred and
we will take into account the heat energy supplied
Heater
to the calorimeter as well as that supplied to the
liquid. The diagram in Figure 5.18 shows the use of
Water
Insulated
a calorimeter to determine the specific heat capacity
base
Calorimeter
of water.
Figure 5.18: Determining the specific heat capacity of a liquid
Applying the heat exchange method for a given mass of liquid, m₁, specific heat
capacity, c₁, using a calorimeter of mass, mc specific heat capacity, C,, and change
in temperature, T,
mccc
Example 5.9
A copper calorimeter and stirrer of mass 350 g contains 227 g of a liquid. A 1000 W
heater running for 1 minute and 15 seconds heated this combination of liquid and
calorimeter from 20 °C to 88 °C. Calculate the specific heat capacity of this liquid
given that the specific heat capacity of copper is 420 J/kg.K.
Solution:
t = 75 s, P = 1000W, T = 88 °C - 20 °C = 68 °C, Cc = 420J/kg.K, m₁ = 0.225kg,
mc = 0.35 kg
Heat supplied: Pt = 1000W X 75 S = 75000J
Heat gained by the calorimeter and the liquid:
Q = 0.225kgxc X 68 °C + 0.350 kgx 420 J kg. 68 °C
Q = (17 kg.ºC)c,+9996 J
Using the heat exchange method,
II
75000 = (15.3 kg.°C)c₁+9996]
206
Grade 11
After some rearrangements, we obtain
75000 J - 9996 J
c₁ =
=
4,248.6J/kg.°C
15.3 kg. C
The type of the liquid is water.
Mixture method
This method can be adapted to measure the specific heat capacity of a solid or liquid.
The diagram in Figure 5.19 shows the method used to determine the specific heat
capacity of a solid. The solid, of known mass, mₛ, is heated in a water bath to a
temperature of Th. This temperature will be the initial temperature of the solid.
The solid is then quickly transferred to the cold water of known mass, mw , in the
calorimeter. Once in the calorimeter, the hot object (in this case a steel bolt) loses
some heat energy to the colder water, and the colder calorimeter and stirrer. We stir
the water and record the highest temperature on the thermometer, which will be the
final temperature, Tf, of the mixture.
cotton
thermometer
thread
stirrer
cover
cotton
thread
beaker
water
outer
jacket
steel
bolt
calorimeter
lagging
material
tripod
stand
HEAT
steel
bolt
Figure 5.19: Determining the specific heat capacity of a solid (bolt in this case) using the
method of mixtures
207
Physics I Student Text Book
In this case, the heat lost by the hot solid object (in this case, the bolt) will be equal
to the heat gained by the water and the calorimeter/stirrer.
-Qₛ
where,
The heat lost by the
The heat gained by the cold water: Qw = mwcw (Tf -T.)
The heat gained by the calorimeter: Qc = mccc (Tf -T.)
Substituting these expressions in the former equation, we obtain an expression, from
which the specific heat capacity of the liquid can be derived:
Example 5.10:
In the above activity, suppose the temperature and mass of the bolt is 100 °C and 125
g, respectively. Mass of water is 200 g, and mass of copper calorimeter, copper stirrer
is 100 g, and initial temperature of water and calorimeter is 20°C. If the equilibrium
temperature is 25°C, what is the specific heat capacity of the bolt?
Solution:
Heat lost by the bolt:
-Q = = = (9.375kg.°C)
Heat gained by the water and calorimeter + stirrer:
Q
Q =(0.2kgx4200J/ kg.°C +0.1kgx385I/kg.C)(75°C) = 65,887.5J
Now we know that,
Heat lost by the bolt = Heat gained by the water and calorimeter + stirrer
(9.375kg.ºC)c, = 65,887.5
?
Activity 5.3
Discuss uses of specific heat in your daily life in groups and share to your class
mates.
208
Grade 11
Uses of specific heat in our daily life are given below:
Utensils for making tea or coffee, or cooking vegetables or rice, are
made of low-specific heat materials. They have a polished bottom. As a
result, they heat up faster. For example, copper, aluminum, and so on.
High specific heat materials can be used as insulators. Wood, for ex-
ample, has high specific heat. During the summer, wooden houses will
keep the inside cooler. Builders can select appropriate building mate-
rials based on location and altitude. This enables the construction of
warmer or cooler houses.
Utensil handles at home are made of materials with high specific heat.
They provide thermal insulation. Specific heat also influences insulat-
ing capability and conductivity.
Probably the most relevant, real-life example of how a substance's spe-
cific heat capacity affects your everyday life is the specific heat of wa-
ter with regard to the ocean as a heat reservoir. Essentially, the oceans
of the Earth are enormous heat storage systems and the high specific
heat capacity of the ocean's water is why we have stable (or relatively
stable) temperature ranges within our climate systems.
5.6.2. Measuring specific latent heat
Measuring specific latent heat of ice or that of steam can be done by the two methods.
Electrical method: Energy is supplied for a known time by an electrical
heater of known power.
Method of mixture: Mixing water and ice in a calorimeter.
Measurement of specific latent heat of ice using mixture method
The apparatus in Figure 5.20 can be used to determine the specific latent heat of
fusion, Lf, of ice by mixture method. The copper calorimeter and stirrer is weighed
before being half filled with water. The mass of the water present in the calorimeter is
then determined before the water is heated to at least 10 °C above room temperature.
Small quantities of ice are then added to the water, while stirring, until the temperature
is below room temperature and all the ice has melted. The mass of the calorimeter,
stirrer and water is then determined to find out the mass of ice added.
209
Physics I Student Text Book
thermometer
stirrer
copper
calorimeter
ice
water
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.20: A simple experiment to determine the specific latent heat of fusion of ice.
We will use the principle here that the heat energy lost from the water and the
calorimeter will go to warming and melting the ice and then warming the cold water
produced when the ice melts.
Heat absorbed by ice and cold water = Heat liberated from calorimeter/stirrer and
water
Example 5.11:
The following experimental data are obtained using this method to determine
the specific latent heat of fusion of ice.
Mass of calorimeter, mc = 0.15 kg,
Mass of water, mw = 2.00 kg.
Mass of ice, mi , added = 0.60 kg
Initial temperature of ice, T₀ᵢ = - -10 °C
Initial temperature of water, Tow = 49 °C
Final temperature of water, Tf = 20 °C
Specific heat capacity of water, cw = 4200 J/kg.K
Specific heat capacity of ice, Cᵢ = 2100 J/kg.K
Specific heat capacity of calorimeter, Cc = 420 J/kg.K
210
Grade 11
Solution
The latent heat of fusion of ice Lf may be calculated from the following equation:
Substituting values in to this equation, we obtain
-f = 346,045
Measurement of specific latent heat of steam
When steam, at 100 °C, is bubbled into water, it first condenses to water and then its
temperature decreases as it loses heat to the surrounding water. If this occurs in an
insulated container then the heat lost by the steam is equal to the heat gained by the
water and the container.
The specific latent heat of vaporisation of water (Lᵥ) can then be calculated using
the formula:
where mₛ is mass of steam, mw and mc are masses of water and calorimeter,
respectively; cc and are specific heat capacities of calorimeter and water,
respectively; Tₛ =T-Tₛ = is fall in temp of condensed steam, and Tc =T-Tc = is
rise in temp of calorimeter or rise in temp of water; provided that T is the final
temperature and Tₛ (=100°C in this case) and Tc are initial temperatures of steam
and cold water, respectively.
Group Discussion
Discuss uses of specific latent heat in your daily life in groups and share to your
class mates.
Daily life is filled with examples of latent heat:
Steaming Food
Cooling drinks with cold water and ice
Extinguishing fire by using boiling water
Melting Ice on the road by using Salt
Steam electric energy
Transformation of water to cloud then to water/rain is the result Latent
211
Physics
Student Text Book
heat.
?
Activity 5.4
1. In a small group, devise and carry out an investigation into the amount of
heat necessary to convert a known quantity of ice to water at 0°. Show your
plans to your teacher. How will you measure how much heat is supplied? What
measurements will you need to take?
Review Questions 5.6
1. A 1.0 kg bar of unknown metal is heated to 400.0°C and then immersed into
a container with 2.0 kg of water initially at 15.0°C. If the final equilibrium
temperature of the system is 20.8°C, find the specific heat of the metal. What
is the type of the metal? Neglect the container specific heat and mass.
2. A calorimeter of mass 250 g contains 200 g of water. A 1000 W heater running
for 5 minutes, heated this combination of liquid and calorimeter from 20 °C to
80 °C. Calculate the specific heat capacity of this calorimeter
3. In an experiment to determine the specific heat of a metal, a 0.25 kg block
of the metal at 200 °C is dropped in a copper calorimeter of mass 0.02 kg
containing 150 cm³ of water at 25 °C. The final temperature is 40 °C. What
is the specific heat of the metal? If heat losses to the surroundings are not
negligible, is your answer greater or smaller than the actual value for specific
heat of the metal?
4. A copper block of mass 20 kg is heated in a furnace to a temperature of 500
°C and then immediately placed on a large ice block. What is the maximum
amount of ice that can melt?
212
Grade 11
UNIT SUMMARY
c
Heat is energy in transit due to temperature differences.
c
Two objects are said to be in thermal equilibrium if they are equal in temperature.
Two or more objects, which are in thermal equilibrium, do not exchange heat
energy.
c
Internal energy of a system or a body with well defined boundaries is the total of the
kinetic energy due to the motion of molecules and the potential energy associated
with the vibrational motion and electric energy of atoms within molecules. It
includes the energy in all the chemical bonds. Internal energy increases with rising
temperature and with changes of state or phase from solid to liquid and liquid to
gas.
c
Heat and work are two different ways of transferring energy from one system to
another. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between systems, while work is the
transfer of mechanical energy between two systems. Heat can be transformed into
work and vice verse, but they aren't the same thing. Heat and work both contribute
to the total internal energy of a system.
c
Conduction is the process by which heat energy is transmitted through collisions
between neighboring atoms or molecules.
c
Convection (or convective heat transfer) is the transfer of heat from one place to
another due to the movement of fluid.
c
Radiation heat transfer occurs via electromagnetic waves. Unlike conduction and
convection, radiation does not need a medium for transmission.
c
Heat capacity is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of an object
by 1 °C It is mathematically defined as
C=2T C
where Q is heat transferred to the object, T is change in temperature of
the object and C is heat capacity of the object. The SI unit of C is joule per
kelvin (J/K); you know that 1 J/K=1J/°C).
C
Specific heat capacity is the change in temperature of a unit mass of a substance by
1o C. The mathematical form of c is
The SI unit of specific heat capacity is J/kg.°C, or J/kg.K.
c
Thermal expansion is the tendency of matter to change in shape, volume, and area
in response to a change in temperature.
c
Thermal expansion of solids can be classified in to three: linear expansion, surface
(area) expansion and volume expansion. We can determine only cubic thermal
213
Physics I Student Text Book
expansion for liquids and gases as they do not have their own definite shapes.
c
When a changed in temperature T caused a change in length of L on a rod of
original length L₀ at an initial temperature T₀ and negligible width and thickness,
the fractional change in length is given by,
AL = aAT
where a is the linear coefficient of thermal expansion, has unit of °C-1.
c
When the area of a plate changes from A₀ to A when the temperature changes
from T₀ to T, we have the relation given by:
where ß = 2α is the area coefficient of thermal expansion, having a unit of °C-1.
c
Similarly, when the volume of an object changes from V₀ to V when the temperature
changes from T₀ to T, we have:
where γ = 2ß = 3α is the volume coefficient of thermal expansion, with a unit
of °C-¹.
In measuring he coefficient of cubic expansion of a liquid in a container, we get
an apparent value since the container itself experiences the change in volume. The
real value of coefficient of volume expansion of the liquid is given by
where γᵣ is the real value, γₐ is the apparent value and Vc is the coefficient
of cubic expansion of the container.
c
The energy absorbed or released by a substance during a change in its physical
state (phase) that occurs without changing its temperature is called latent heat.
Latent heat on by an object of mass, m, is given mathematically by
Q = mL
where L is called the latent heat of the substance; i.e., L = Lf for heat of fusion and
L = Lv for heat of vaporization. Its SI unit is joule per kilogram (J/kg).
c
Latent heat depends on the nature of the phase change as well as on the properties
of the substance.
c
Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat absorbed to convert a unit mass of a
substance from solid to liquid - leaving the temperature of the system unaltered.
c
Latent heat of vaporization is the amount of heat absorbed to change a unit mass
of liquid to gas.
c
Phase diagram is a graphical representation of the physical states of a substance
214
Grade 11
under different conditions of temperature and pressure.
c
The triple point represents the combination of pressure and temperature that
facilitates all phases of matter at equilibrium.
c
Critical Point is the point in temperature and pressure on a phase diagram where
the liquid and gaseous phases of a substance merge together into a single phase.
c
Calorimetry is the measurement of the quantity of heat exchanged between
substances. The experimental approach of measuring heat capacities and the
heat changes during chemical and physical processes is called calorimetry. A
calorimeter is a device used to measure specific heat capacity and specific latent
heat of solids or liquids.
c
There are several methods we can use to determine the specific heat capacity of a
substance, but all methods always involve heat exchange and the following should
be known:
the mass of the substance,
the amount of heat energy supplied,
its starting temperature, and
the final temperature.
c
The law of calorimetry states that for an isolated system, the heat energy lost from
the hot body will equal the heat gained by the cold body.
Heat gained by cold object = Heat lost by hot object
215
Physics
Student Text Book
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS
1. What is/are the condition/s for net heat flow from one place to another place? Is it
necessary to have a heat-conducting material for heat transfer?
2. When does net heat flow stop? Do two objects in thermal equilibrium exchange
heat?
3. What is the direction of the spontaneous flow of heat?
4. What is the relationship between temperature and heat? What about between tem-
perature and internal energy? Is internal energy of a confined gas solely dependent
on temperature?
5. If the temperature of a confined gas is increased, which form of energy is said to
be increased in the gas?
6. Suppose heat is supplied to an inflated balloon, which is firmly tied at its neck.
What are connections between the heat supplied, the thermodynamic work and
the internal energy in the balloon?
7. Describe conduction, convection and radiation heat transfer mechanisms. Name
the general mode of heat transfer in solids, in liquids and gases.
8. Which way is heat transfer believed to occur in a long, hollow cylinder kept at
consistent but varied temperatures on its inner and outer surfaces?
9. How can you change the boiling point of water?
10. At 20.0 degree Celcius, the length of a sheet of steel is 100.0 cm and the width is
50.0 cm. If the coefficient of linear expansion of steel is 0.000011/C, determine the
change in area and the final area at 100.0C.
11. The temperature of a metal bar rises by 10.0°C when it absorbs 9000.0 J of heat
energy. If the mass of the bar is 1000.0 g, what is its specific heat capacity?
12. Is thermal energy the same as heat, internal energy or has another definition?
13. What important properties can be obtained in the phase diagram?
14. What does the critical point of water at (217.7atm, 374.0°C) mean?
216
electrons
+
+
+
UNIT 6
+
+
ELECTROSTATICS
+
AND ELECTRIC CIRCUIT
Introduction
In this unit we will study the two branches of electricity, namely electrostatics
(static electricity) and current (dynamic) electricity. Under electrostatics we study
the properties of electric charges at rest and under current electricity we study the
properties of charges in motion. The main difference between static and current
electricity is that with static electricity, the charges are stationary and build on
the surface of an insulator, while in current electricity electron flowing through a
conductor form what we call an electric current.
Learning outcomes: Students will be able to:
calculate the electric field resulting from a point charge.
determine the magnitude and direction of the electric force among any
point charges.
acquire knowledge and understanding in electrostatic phenomenon
demonstrate an understanding of the components and functions
of electrical circuits that are commonly found at home and in the
workplace
construct, analyze, simple electrical circuits, using schematic
diagrams, working with electrical tools and components, and
examining small everyday electrical devices and appliances
define a capacitor and explain some of its applications in life.
apply Kirchhoff's rules to solve circuit problems.
217
Physics
Student Text Book
6.1 Coulomb's Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
state Coulomb's law.
calculate the magnitude and direction of electric force between any two
charges.
solve problems involving Coulomb's law.
explain Coulomb's law using the idea of vectors.
explain the meaning of a coulomb.
?
Brainstorming Questions
1. What are the compositions of an atom?
2. What are the two types of charges and what are their origin?
3. How can a body be charged positively and negatively?
4. What does the law of electrostatics say?
Properties of Electric Charges
Charge
Before we go into discussing Coulomb's law, we need to revise what you have
learnt in the previous grades about charge and its properties. Charge is the
fundamental property of matter associated with electrons and protons which are
found in any atom. There are only two types of charges: negative and positive
charges. By convention, negative charges are carried by electrons and positive
charges are carried by protons.
When the number of electrons and protons in an object are equal that object is
said to be electrically neutral. However, if this electrical balance is disturbed, then
the object is said to be electrically charged. A negatively charged object contains
more electros than protons, but a positively charged body contains more protons
than electrons.
Properties of charges
Property I: There are two kinds of electric charges: Positive and Negative.
Property II: Two similarly charged bodies repel each other and two oppositely
charged bodies attract each other.
218
Grade 11
—
+
+
+
Figure 6.1: Like Charges repel and unlike charges attract each other.
Property III: Electric charge is always conserved, i.e., it cannot be created
or destroyed. In any charging process, the number of electrons gained by one
object is equal to the number of electrons lost by the other.
Property IV: Electric charge is quantized. Charge comes in discrete packets, it
means that charge (q) always occurs as some integral multiple of the charge of
an electron, e. It can be written as: q = ±ne (where n = 1,2,3,...)
The smallest unit of charge that is carried by one electron or proton is called the
elementary charge, e. The magnitude of the charge of an electron is:
1e=-1.6x10⁻¹⁹C
The charge carried by a proton is also the same as that of the charge carried by an
electron except it is positive.
1p=+1.6x10⁻¹⁹C
Example 6.1
What number of protons needed to make a charge of +1.0 C?
Solution:
n = q e = 1.6x10⁻¹⁹ 1.0C = 6.25x10¹⁸ X protons
Similarly, the number of electrons needed to make a charge of -1.0 C is
6.25x10¹⁸ electrons.
219
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 6.1:
Discuss in pair about the following questions. Present what you have
agreed in your group to the class.
1. What would happen if electrons were positively charged and protons
negatively charged?
2. Is the Earth charged or neutral? Discuss why is so.
3. Is there a force of attraction or repulsion between a charged and a neutral
body?
4. Can positive charges move and create electric current electrostatically?
Exercise 6.1
(a) How many electrons are needed to form a charge of -2.0 nC?
(b) How many electrons must be removed from a neutral object to leave a net
charge of +0.50 µC?
Electrostatic Force
A force of attraction or repulsion between two charged bodies, is known as the
electrostatic force. Electrostatic force is either attractive or repulsive, unlike the
gravitational force which is only attractive. If the objects have opposite charges
they attract each other, while if their charges are similar, they repel each other.
F
q₁
q₂
F
q₁
F
F
q₂
+
+
+
r
r
a)
b)
Figure 6.2: Like charges repel and Unlike charges attract each other.
In 1785, the French physicist Charles Coulomb, proposed a law that describes the
force that one charged particle exerts on another. This law is remarkably similar
in form to Newton's law of gravitation. Coulomb's law states that any two-point
charges exert an electrical force on each other that is directly proportional to the
product of their charges and inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them. where q₁ is the charge on the one particle, q₂ is the charge on the
second, and r is the distance between the two.
220
Grade 11
q₁
q₂
Figure 6.3: Coulomb's Law
Then, the magnitude of the electrostatic force between two point-charges is given
by:
The proportionality constant k is called the electrostatic, or Coulomb constant.
It can also be written in terms of the permittivity of free space E₀ whose value is,
ε₀ = 8.85 X 10⁻¹² C² / N.m². With this, the value of k becomes:
1 = 4x3.14x8.85x10⁻¹²C² / N.m² 1 /
Example 6.2:
Two tiny spherical water drops with identical charges of -, have a center-to-center
separation of 1.0cm. a) What is the electrostatic force acting between them? b)
How many excess electrons are on each drop giving it its charge imbalance?
Solution:
Step I: Conceptualize the problem: There are two identical negative charges of
water drops. We are required to find the electrostatic force from Coulombs law (a)
and the number of excess electrons that gives this charge imbalance by the charge
is quantized property of electric charges.
Step II: Identify the given and required quantities:
What you have is: q₁ = q₂ = X r = =
what you need to determine is: a) F =?
b) n = ?
=
Step III: Apply the appropriate equation that best fits for the solution.
F = k 0
q
221
Physics
I
Student Text Book
That means 6.25 X 10⁸ electrons give this charge imbalance so that the two charged
water drops exert 9.0x10⁻¹⁷ N of repulsive force to each other.
Exercise 6.2:
1.
What are the similarities and differences between Newton's law of universal
gravitation and Coulomb's law?
2.
Which force is greater between an electron and a proton, the gravitational or
the electrostatic? By how much is one larger than the other?
?
Activity 6.2:
1. Take a balloon or plastic comb and rub against your hair. Then take it near a
stream of water falling from a tap. Discuss and try to explain what you observe.
Figure 6.4: A charged body (balloon) attracts a neutral body (stream of water)
?
Activity 6.3
A positively charged light metal ball is suspended between two oppositely charged
metal plates on an insulating thread as shown below. Describe the motion that the
ball undergoes.
Figure 6.5: Coulomb's Law in Vector Form
222
Grade 11
Force on a Charge due to Multiple Electric Charges
Electrostatic force is a vector quantity. Therefore, if there are more than one force
acting on a charged particle, then the resultant force acting on the particle will be the
vector sum of all these forces. This is known as the superposition principle.
Consider a system of n stationary charges q₁,q₂, q₃....qₙ in vacuum. The force on
q₁ due to q₂, q₃ qₙ is obtained by taking the vector sum of the individual forces.
Where, F₁₂ is the force that charge q₂ exert on q₁, F₁₃ is the force that q₃ exert on q₁
,
F₁ₙ is the force that qₙ exert onq₁.
Example 6.3:
Three point charges are placed on the x-axis: q₁ = +6µC at x₁ = 5.0cm
, q₂ = -5µC at x₂ = -3.0cm, and q₃ = = +2µC at the origin (x=0). = What is
the magnitude and direction of the total electrostatic force acting on q₃?
Solution:
The first step should be determining the magnitude of the force each charge exerts
on q₃, using Coulomb's law:
The force charge q₁ exerts on charge q₃ is given by:
Similarly, the magnitude of the force charge q₂ exerts on charge q₃, F₂₃ is given
by
After the magnitude of each force is determined the next step will be determining
the directions of the forces exerted on q₃ due to q1 and q2 by considering the sign of
the pair of these charges.
q2
q₃
q₁
+
+
x = - 3 cm =
x = 0 =
x = 5cm
223
Physics I Student Text Book
Charge q₁ (positive) repels charge q₃ (positive) towards left: F₁₃ = 43.2N - i
Charge q₂ (negative) attracts charge q₃ (positive) towards left: F₂₃ = 100.0N i
Therefore, since these forces act in the same direction (both to the left), the resultant
force, Fᵣ acting on charge q₃, will be their sum.
Fᵣ = F₁₃ = 143.2Nᵢ + 100.0Ni) = - 143.2Nᵢ
Thus, the magnitude of the resultant force acting on charge q₃ is 143.2N, and the
force is directed along the negative x-axis.
Exercise 6.3:
Referring to the question on the above example 6.3, determine the magnitude and
direction of the total electrostatic force acting (a) on q₁, and (b) on q₂.
Review questions 6.1
1. State Coulomb's law in your own words.
2. Write Coulomb's law mathematically both in a scalar and vector form.
3. What is the meaning of a Coulomb?
4. Two charges +3µC and +12µC are fixed 1 m apart, with the second one to the
right. Find the magnitude and direction of the net force on a -2 µC charge
when placed halfway between the two.
5. Two small, identical conducting spheres repel each other with a force of 0.050
N when they are 0.25 m apart. After a conducting wire is connected between
the spheres and then removed, they repel each other with a force of 0.060 N.
What is the original charge on each sphere?
6. In the picture below, X is a small negatively charged sphere with a mass of
1.0kg. It is suspended from the roof by an insulating rope which makes an
angle of 60 degrees with the roof. Y is a small positively charged sphere
which has the same magnitude of charge as X. Y is fixed to the wall by means
of an insulating bracket. Assuming the system is in equilibrium, what is the
magnitude of the charge on X?
224
Grade 11
60°
10kg
Y
X
+
50cm
Figure 6.6: Question 6
6.2 Electric Fields
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define the terms, electric field, and electric flux.
sketch electric field lines.
solve problems involving electric field.
Tap an electric field lines pattern using electric lines of force.
calculate the magnitude and direction of electric field due to a point charge
and two point charges.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is a gravitational field?
2. What causes gravitational field?
3. Discuss the concepts and recall the equations of (a) gravitational field lines,
and (b) gravitational field strength.
225
Physics
I
Student Text Book
An electric field is a region in space
where one charge experiences a force
from another charge. Let us consider a
q
point charge Q placed in vacuum, at point
P
O. If we place another point charge q at a
point P, where OP = r, then the charge Q
+
Q
will exert a force on q as per Coulomb's
law. We say that the charge Q produces an
electric field in its surrounding.
Figure 6.7: Electric field of a charge Q
Electric field lines
The electric field produced by a charged particle can be represented by lines of force
called electric field lines. It is drawn in the direction that a positive charge would
move if placed at a point in the field. Electric field lines are helpful to visualize the
vector nature of an electric field. The Figures 6.8 (a) to (f) shows the electric field
lines for different arrangement of charges.
9
4
(a)
(b)
q
q
4
4
N.
Z
Neutral point
(e)
(d)
q
9
+
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.8: Electric field lines of (a) a positive point charge, (b) a negative point charge,
(c) two equal positive charges, (d) two equal negative charges, (e) an electric dipole, and
(f) a uniform field of oppositely charged parallel plates.
226
Grade 11
Properties of electric Field lines
Electric field lines have the following properties
1. Electric field lines do not cross each other.
2. Electric field lines begin on positive charges and radiate away from them toward
negative charges, where they terminate.
3. Electric field lines are always perpendicular to the surface of the charged body.
4. The closer the lines, the stronger the electric field, and the farther apart they are the
weaker is the field.
5. Equally spaced electric field lines indicate the field is uniform. The electric field
between two parallel plates, shown in Figure 6.8, is a common example of a uniform
electric field.
?
Activity 6.4:
1. Form a group containing 3 or 4 members. Discuss in your group on the
mechanism to investigate the nature of electric field lines between two similar
and opposite charges.
2. What would happen when (a) a conductor and (b) an insulator is placed in an
electric field?
The Electric field strength
The magnitude and direction of the electric field is expressed by a quantity
called electric field strength or electric field intensity (E). Electric field strength, is
the force acting per unit positive charge for a stationary point charge. In equation
form:
E=Fg
q
Electric Field of Point Charge: The electric field of a point charge can be obtained
from Coulomb's law. From Coulomb's law, the equation for the force between two
electric charges is:
F=k9Q F
The electric field strength is then the force per unit of charge.
where E is the electric field strength due to a point charge Q, and r is the distance
from charge Q to the point of interest. From the above equation of electric field
227
Physics I Student Text Book
strength, we see that the electric field is depend only on the source charge Q and the
distance r; it is independent of the test charge q.
The SI unit for the electric field strength is newton per coulomb (N/C). The direction
of the electric field will be in the direction of the force the source charge exerted on
a positive test charge. Thus, electric field lines will direct away from a positive source
charge and towards a negative source charge.
Example 6.4:
Calculate the strength and direction of the electric field E due to a point charge of
2.0 nC (nano-Coulombs) at a distance of 5.0 mm from the charge.
Solution:
Step I: Conceptualize the problem: the strength of the field is its magnitude at a
distance of 5mm = 5x10⁻³m. We are therefore required to find the magnitude of
the electric field.
Step II: Use appropriate equation that best fits for the required quantity.
E
Since the source charge is positive in sign, the field is directed away from Q.
Exercise 6.4:
What electric force does the electric field found in the above example 6.4. would
exert on a point charge of -0.25 µC?
Electric field for multiple point charges
The electric field from multiple point charges can be obtained by taking the vector
sum of the electric fields of the individual charges. Consider n number of charges
whose electric fields have magnitudes of E₁ E₂ at a given point. The net
electric field is found by taking the vector sum of each electric field:
Note that the direction of E₁ is the direction of the force q₁ exerted on the positive
test charge placed at that point, and the direction of E₂ is the direction of the force
q₂ exerted on the positive test charge placed at that point, and so on.
228
Grade 11
Example 6.5
Two-point charges q₁ = 5nC and q₂ = -4nC are separated by a distance of 10 cm.
What is the magnitude of the electric field in between the charges?
Solution:
q₂ = - 4nC
The magnitude of the electric field at point P due to q₁ is:
Since q₁ is positive it exerts a repulsive force to the right on the positive test charge
placed at point P.
Thus,
Similarly, the magnitude of the electric field at point P due to q₂is:
Since q₂ is negatively charged it exerts an attractive force to the right on the positive
test charge placed at point P.
Thus, E₂ =1.44x10⁺N/mᵢ
Finally,
Exercise 6.5:
Repeat example 6.5, if (a) both q₁ and q₂ are positively charged, and (b) they are
both negatively charged.
Electric flux
One of the properties of electric field lines is that, the number of field lines crossing
a unit area, placed normal to the field at a point, is a measure of the strength of
electric field at that point. This means that the number of field lines per unit area, is
proportional to the magnitude of the electric field, or E ~ N/A. We can rewrite this
proportion as the number of field lines is proportional to the product of E and A, N
~ EA.
229
Physics
I
Student Text Book
We can now define electric flux. Electric flux is a measure of the number of electric
field lines that crosses a given area. The product of the electric field and the surface
area, A, perpendicular to the field is called the electric flux and represented by the
symbol Φ.
Φ = EA
If the surface under consideration is not perpendicular to the field, as in Figure 6.9
(b), the expression for the electric flux became,
Φ = EAcosΘ
E cosΘ is the projection of area normal to E. In a vector form, the above equation can
be written as the dot product of the electric field vector and area vector.
Φ=E.A
The area vector of a flat surface of area A has the following magnitude and direction:
Magnitude is equal to area of the surface (A)
Direction along normal or perpendicular to the surface.
This means, if the electric field vectors are tangent to the surface at all points, that
is if they don't penetrate the surface, the electric flux through the surface is zero.
Electric flux Φ is a scalar quantity, whose SI unit is N.m2/C.
Area = A
A
ar-
Θ
E
Electric
field
Figure 6.9: Field lines of a uniform electric field penetrating a plane of area A perpendic-
ular to the field. The electric flux Φ through this area is equal to EA.
Example 6.6:
A 2cm X 2cm square lies in the xy-plane. Find the electric flux through the square
for the electric field vectors, E = (50k + N /
Solution:
In this case direction of the area vector, which is perpendicular to the surface, is
in the z-axis. Because the square lies in the xy-plane.
230
Grade 11
A=(2cmx2cm)k=4cm²k,
Φ = A = À = 4x /
= 4 X 10⁻⁴ X 50 + / = 0.02N. / C
Exercise 6.6:
Find the electric flux through the surface with sides of 15cmx 15cm positioned in
a uniform electric field of E = 150N/C as shown in the figure below.
n
E
30°
Review Questions 6.2
1. Define the following terms, (a)electric field, (b) electric field strength, (c)
electric field lines, and (f) electric flux.
2. Map electric field lines for different arrangement of charges.
3. Compare and contrast the following gravitational quantities with their
counterpart electrical quantities:
A. gravitational field and electric field.
B. Gravitational field strength and electric field strength.
4. For the following figures find the possible region where the electric field could
be zero.
I
II
III
I
II
A.
P
P
B.
P
5. How field lines indicate the magnitude of the field they represent?
6. What is the net electric field strength at point P in the system shown below.
2.0 m
1.0 m
1.0 µC
-3.0 µC
P
231
Physics
Student Text Book
7. A particle of charge 2 X 10-8C experiences an upward force of magnitude 4 X
10-6 N when it is placed in a particular point in an electric field. (a) What is
the electric field at that point? (b) If a charge q = -1.0 X 10-8 C is placed there,
what is the force on it?
6.3 Electric Potential
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the terms electric potential, equipotential surface.
Solve problems involving electric potential.
Explain the meaning of a volt, potential difference, and emf.
?
Brainstorming Questions
U
Discuss the concepts and recall the equations of (a) gravitational potential,
and (b) gravitational potential energy.
U
What is the relationship between the following pair of quantities?
a. electric potential and electrical potential energy?
b. electrical potential energy, and electric work?
C. Electric potential and potential difference?
d. Potential difference and electric field?
e. Electrical potential and gravitational potential?
Electric Potential Energy
The concept of electric potential energy is similar to that of gravitational potential
energy. In raising a ball with mass m to any height, you are giving it gravitational
potential energy. Electric potential energy is similar but with charges instead of
masses. Instead of raising a ball in the gravitational field of the Earth, you move a
charge in the electric field of another charge.
In order to move one positive charge closer to another positive charge, (charge q
closer to charge Q in Figure 6.10) work has to be done by an external agent. This is
simply because there is a force of repulsion between the charges. In the process of
doing work, energy is transferred from you to the charge that you are pushing. As a
result, the charges gain electrical potential energy.
We define electrical potential energy of a test charge q in terms of the work done on
the charge q. Work done by external force in bringing a unit positive charge from
232
Grade 11
point A to B, in Figure 6.10 is the electrical potential energy of q.
W
If we take point A to be at infinity, i.e., rA ≈ inf inity
W = k r
A
B
q
Q
Figure 6.10: Work must be done to push one positive charge towards another.
Thus, the potential energy of a test
U = ?
charge 'q' in the vicinity of a source
r
q
charge 'Q' will be:
U=k9Q U
Q
Figure 6.11: Electric potential energy
Electric Potential
Electric potential is another concept which helps us to visualize the behavior of
electric fields. In unit 4, gravitational potential is defined from the idea of potential
energy. The potential at a point is the potential energy of unit mass at that point.
We will approach the idea of electrical potential in the same way. Electric potential
(denoted by V) is equal to the work done per positive charge in carrying it from
infinity to that point in an electric field. The work to be done is equal to the change
in the potential energy of the test charge in the field of the source charge.
The potential due to a single point charge
In electrostatics the zero of potential is at infinity, at a larger distance from the source
charge, because the electric field and force approach zero there. In the same way as
we consider gravitational potential energy at the ground to be zero, electric potential
233
Physics I Student Text Book
is defined as the work done per unit positive charge to move a positive test charge
from infinity to its current position within an electric field.
Mathematically:
Q
k
W
r
Q
V =
=
k
q
r
V=?
r
Thus, the equation for electric potential at a distance r
+
from a source charge Q is given by:
Q
Figure 6.12: Electric Po-
tential
V = k Q r
Electrical potential is a scalar quantity. Its SI unit is Volt (V) in the honor of
Alessandro Volta. 1V=1C 1V 1C
Electrical Potential Difference
Consider a positive test charge +q placed at
A in the electric field of a source charge Q.
The test charge moves towards B under the
influence of the electric field of the source
B
+Q
charge. In the process the test charge loses
+q
electrical potential energy and gains kinetic
energy. Thus, at A, the test charge has more
potential energy than at B, A is said to have a
higher electrical potential than B.
Figure 6.13: Potential Difference
The potential difference between two points (A and B in this case) in an electric field
is defined as the work required to move a unit positive test charge from the point of
lower potential to that of higher potential.
If an amount of work W is required to move a charge Q from one point to another,
then the potential difference between the two points is given by,
AV=W W
234
Grade 11
?
Activity 6.5:
A difference in height is needed for water
to flow, see the figure below. What is then
needed for current to flow? Discuss in pairs.
Figure 6.14: Gravitational potential
difference
Example 6.7
Determine the electric potential produced by a charge of 1µC at a distance of
1mm from it.
Solution = kq Nm² / X X 10⁻⁶ C
r
1x10⁻³m
=9x10°J/C =9x10°V X
= 9MV
Potential difference in a uniform electric field
+
Figure 6.15, below shows a uniform
+
+
electric field produced between two
+
Ed
+
equally and oppositely charged parallel
+
plates.
+
+
V
Figure 6.15: Potential difference in a
uniform electric field
To measure the potential difference between two points in the field, we equate the
work done in moving a charge from one point to the other with the gain in electrical
potential energy.
W = ДРЕ
Fd = qV
qEd = qV
V = Ed
235
Physics I Student Text Book
Thus, the electrical potential difference between the two plates is expressed as, the
electric field strength times the distance between the plates.
From the previous section, we already know the units for electric field is newtons
per coulomb. We now got the unit of electric field to be volt per meter. Thus, the
following relation among units is valid:
1N/C = 1V / m
Potential due to a system of point charges
Consider a system of charges q₁,,,, ..., qₙ with position vectors r₁, r₂, rₙ relative
to some origin (Figure 6.16). The potential at P due to the charge q₁ is V₁=kₙ.
Similarly, the potential at P due to q₂ is and the potential at P due to q₃
are given by
where r₁ is the distance between q₁ and point P, r₂ is the distance between q₂ and
point P, and so on. By the superposition principle, the potential V at P due to the
total charge configuration is the algebraic sum of the potentials due to the individual
charges.
The total potential at P is:
q3
q4
q1
q2
q5
p
Figure 6.16: Potential of multiple charges
(for n po ch arg es)
Note that the sum in this equation is an algebraic sum. It is not a vector sum. It means
the signs of the charges are used in calculating the potential. As a result, the potential
of a positive charge is positive and the potential of a negative charge is negative.
236
Grade 11
Example 6.8
Two charged particles are placed on the x-axis of a coordinate system. The first (
q₁ = 2µC) is at the origin. The second (q₂ = -5µC) is at x = 1.0m. Determine the
potential at x = 0.2 m.
Solution:
V
V = k
1
V = 3.375x10⁴V
Exercise 6.7:
Referring to example 6.8, (a) determine the potential at x = 1.5m. (b) At what
point in between these two charges the electric potential is zero?
Example 6.9
Calculate the change in electrical potential energy in moving a from 5 cm to 0.1
cm from a charged sphere with a charge of.
Solution:
X
W = 7.2x10⁻¹ = 72mJ
Equipotential line or surface
We can represent electric potentials (voltages) pictorially, just as we drew pictures to
illustrate electric fields. Equipotential lines are lines connecting points of the same
electric potential. When these points lie on a two- or three-dimensional surface,
such as the surface of a metallic sphere, they are called equipotential surfaces. If a
charge moves along the equipotential line then, there is no change in its potential
and hence, no electrical work is done.
237
Physics I Student Text Book
Characteristics of equipotential lines/surfaces:
1. Two equipotential surfaces never intersect each other.
2. The equipotential lines of a uniform field are parallel to each other and the equipotential
lines of a point charge are concentric sphere (see Figure 6.17)
+
Figure 6.17: Equipotential lines of (a) a uniform field, (b) a point charge.
3. Since the electric field (E) is stronger near the charge, so equipotential surfaces of
point charge are crowded near the charge as shown in the Figure 6.17.
4. No work is required to move a charge along an equipotential line because there is no
change in potential.
5. Equipotential lines are always perpendicular to the electric field lines.
W=F.S=Fscos0=qEscos0
Since the work done is zero,
qEscos)=0
Key term
Equipotential lines are lines connecting points of the same potential
238
Grade 11
Review Questions 6.3
1. Write the definition of the following terms in your own words. (a) electric
potential, (b) potential difference, (c) volt, and (d) equipotential line/surface.
2. Write two units of electric field strength.
3. If the potential is constant in a certain region, what is the nature of the electric
field at that region?
4. What would happen to its electrical potential energy (a) when an electron
is released in a uniform electric field, and (b) when a proton is released in a
uniform electric field?
5. How are electric field lines and equipotential lines drawn relative to each
other?
6. What is the strength of the electric field between two parallel conducting plates
separated by 1.0 cm and having a potential difference between them of 1.5V?
7. Two-point charges are located on the corners of a rectangle with a height oh
0.05 m and a width of 0.15 m. The first charge (q₁ =- 5µC) is located at the
upper left-hand corner, while the second charge ( q2 =+ 2µC) is at the lower
right-hand corner. (a) Determine the electric potential at the upper right-hand
corner of the rectangle. (b) What is the potential difference for a point at the
right-hand corner of the rectangle relative to the lower left-hand corner?
8. Two charges 3 X 10⁻⁸ C and -2 X 10⁻⁸ C are located 15 cm apart. At what point
on the line joining the two charges is the electric potential zero? Take the
potential at infinity to be zero.
9. What are the signs and magnitudes of a point charge that produces a potential
of -2.0 V at a distance of 1.0 mm?
10. Two point charges 10pC and -2pC are separated by a distance of 1.0 Find
the potential mid-way between them.
239
Physics
Student Text Book
6.4 Electric Current, Resistance and ohm's law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define the terms electric current, current density, resistance, conductivity,
resistivity and drift velocity.
explain the effect on the current (brightness) and potential difference of
connecting light bulbs in series.
explain the effect on the current (brightness) and potential difference of
connecting light bulbs in parallel.
draw electric circuits consisting of three resistors connected in series and
parallel.
determine equivalent resistance of resistors connected in series and parallel.
describe the principles of potentiometer and wheatstone bridge.
describe how to convert galvanometer to a voltmeter and ammeter.
explain the meaning of an ohm, resistance.
explain the si units of electric current, current density, resistance, resistivity,
conductivity.
state and apply Kirchhoff's laws.
solve problems involving network of resistors.
?
Brainstorming
U
Write down what you understand, from previous grades, by the terms current,
potential difference, emf and resistance.
U
Set up a simple circuit to measure the current in a lamp and the potential
difference across it? Sketch the circuit and swap it with a classmate to check.
U
What drives the current in a conductor?
U
How the flow of electrons are produced through a conductor?
U
Why does current flows through a conductor but not through an insulator?
Electric Current, Resistance and Ohm's law
Electric current
Electric current is a flow of charge. In metals, current is due to a flow of electrons.
When a voltage source is connected to a conductor, it applies a potential difference
V that creates an electric field. The electric field in turn exerts force on the free or
conduction charges of the conductor, causing current. Even though it is electrons'
motion that produces current, for historic reason, what we call electric current is the
conventional flow of protons. Hence, it flows from the '+' terminal of a battery or
power supply through the circuit to the '_' terminal.
240
Grade 11
Electric current is defined as the rate of flow of charges through some cross-sectional
area. if is the net charge that flows through a cross-sectional area A in time (t),then
the current I is given by the equation:
I=At =
The SI unit of electric current is ampere, denoted by A. One ampere is a flow of
one coulomb (1 C) of charge in 1 S. Small currents are measured in milliampere
(mA), and microampere (µA). 1mA = 10⁻³A and A=10⁻⁶.
?
Activity 6.6:
Discuss in group what is needed to store water in a tanker and distributed to the
needy. Compare it with how current is distributed to resistors using the source of
voltage, see the Figure below.
Electric Circuit
Battery
+
electron flow!
Figure 6.18: Analogy of water current (a) and electric current (b)
Electric current and current density
Current density is a quantity which is used to describe the density of an electric
current. It is denoted by the symbol J, and defined as the magnitude of the electric
current per cross-sectional area.
J = A I
The SI unit of current density is amperes per square meter. Current density is a
vector quantity, which means it has both magnitude and direction.
Current density is also assumed to be proportional to the electric field, (E), that
produces it, and the conductivity (σ) of the conductor through which it flows. The
conductivity of a conductor is a measure of its ability to conduct electricity, whereas
resistivity is the reverse of conductivity. With this, the relationship between electric
field E and the current density J became:
241
Physics | Student Text Book
J=0E=E
Where σ = conductivity of the conductor, and p resistivity. The SI unit of Pis Ohm-
meter (Ω.m), where 1 Ω.m = 1 V/A, and the SI unit of p is Siemens per meter (S/m),
or Ω-¹.
Example 6.10
A current of 6 mA, flows through a copper wire of correctional are 12 mm². What
is the current density?
Solution:
X
Exercise 6.9
Since current density is a vector quantity it has both magnitude and direction.
What is then its direction?
Drift velocity
A conductor contains a large number of loosely bound electrons which we call free
electrons or conduction electrons. The remaining material of which the conductor
is made keep on vibrating about their mean positions. The average amplitude of
vibration depends on the temperature. While the free electrons are moving through
the conductor, they collide with these materials/ions. As a result, the speed and
direction of the electron changes randomly at each such collision, causing the
electron to move in a zig-zag path as shown in the Figure 6.19, below.
Figure 6.19: Motion of electrons through a conductor
The potential difference provided by the source creates an electric field inside the
conductor. This field exerts a force on each electron in the direction opposite to the
field. In every collision the electrons lose their kinetic energy and start to drift. The
242
Grade 11
average velocity by which the free electrons move through a conductor is called their
drift velocity.
Conductor
Free electron
Current flow
Electron flow
-
I
-
+
Figure 6.20: When a conductor is not connected to source, the free electrons will make a
random motion (a), but when a pd is applied they will make a directional motion (b).
In a time interval t, an electron moves a distance d=vAt along the wire. If the
number of electrons per unit volume of wire is n then the number of electrons in the
shaded cylinder of Figure 6.15 is nAvAt. Therefore, the total charge on this volume
of electrons is nAvAte, where e is the charge of one electron.
A
d
V
Figure 6.21:
The current in the circuit will then be:
I = At Q = nAve.
J = A I = nvde
243
Physics
|
Student Text Book
Exercise 6.9
1.
Calculate the mean drift velocity of the electrons in a copper wire of cross-
sectional area 5.0x10⁻⁶m² carrying a current of 1.0 A. There are 8.5 x10-6m²
free electrons in one m³ of copper.
2.
What are the directions of the following quantities in an electric circuit? (a)
electrons, (b) electric current, (c) current density, (d) electric field, and (d)
drift velocity.
?
Activity 6.7:
The drift speed of electros in a copper wire is very slow, a fraction of a millimeter
per second, but as a generator is switched on in a power plant, far away from our
house, a bulb gives off light almost instantly. How could this happen? Discuss in
group and present your group's opinion to the class.
Resistance and Ohm's Law
Resistance
An electric wire is made of metal. Inside a metal, there are negatively charged
electrons that are free to move about. We call these conduction or free electrons,
because they are the particles that allow a metal to conduct an electric current. The
atoms of a metal bind tightly together; they usually form a regular array, as shown
in Figure 6.21. In a typical metal, such as copper or silver, one or more electrons
from each atom breaks free to become conduction electrons. Since there are equal
numbers of free electrons (negative) and ions (positive), the metal has no overall
charge - it is neutral.
When electrons are moving through a conductor, they collide with each other and
with the fixed positive ions of the material. This electric property that impedes
current is called resistance. Resistance is therefore defined as a measure of the
opposition to current flow in an electrical circuit.
ions
electrons
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 6.22: In a metal, conduction electrons are free to move among the fixed positive ions.
244
Grade 11
Ohm's Law
The German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787-1854) demonstrate experimentally
that the current in a metal wire is directly proportional to the potential difference
between its ends, provided that physical conditions, such as temperature, remain
constant. This means that, for a metal at constant temperature, the graph of I against
V will be a straight line through the origin.
V
<
Figure 6.23: Current vs. voltage for an ohmic and non-ohmic conductors
Whenever one quantity is proportional to another quantity, there must always be
some constant that relates the two quantities. In this case the constant that relates
voltage and current according to Ohm's law, is the resistance, R. Thus, for a conductor
(resistor) which passes current I when the pd across it is V, its resistance R is given
by the equation
R = V
The SI unit of resistance is Ohm denoted by'Ω, a Greek letter read as Omega.
1Q = 1V / A.
Large resistances are measured in Kilo Ohm (KΩ) and Mega ohm (MΩ).
1KΩ=103Ω Ω and 1MΩ=106Ω.
Note that this equation is valid for wires and resistors at constant temperature, which
are called ohmic. For non ohmic conductors, such as a filament lamp, the current is
not directly proportional to the potential difference. Filaments are materials used in
lamps that are composed of metals that glow when a certain amount of current flows
through them. The resistance of a filament depends on its temperature. A filament
bulb gives a curve with a decreasing gradient because its resistance increases with
temperature, Figure 6.23 (b).
245
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 6.11
What is the resistance of an automobile headlight through which 2.50 A flows
when 12.0 V is applied to it?
Solution
Rearranging Ohm's law for R and substituting known values gives
2.5A 12V 4.8Ω.
Exercise 6.10
The current through a component is 2.0 mA when connected to a source which
provides 12 V. Assuming its resistance is unchanged, what pd is required across the
component when the current is 2.0µA?
?
Activity 6.8:
1. The potential difference (PD) across a resistor means that there is a change in
potential across the resistor. Is there any change in current as it passes through
a resistor? Explain
2. How is the potential difference (PD) drop in a resistor similar to the pressure
differencein a fluid flowing through a pipe.
Resistors
An object of conducting material, having a resistance of desired value, is called a
resistor. In an electric circuit, a resistor is represented by symbol shown in Figure
6.24.
or
or
Figure 6.24: Symbol of (a) resistor and (b) variable resistor
Combination of Resistors
Usually, we find circuits where more than two components are connected together.
There are two basic ways in which to connect more than two resistors. They are
series and parallel.
246
Grade 11
Resistors in Series.
In series connection components are connected end-to-end in a line to form a single
path for electrons to flow. The defining characteristic of a series circuit is that there
is only one path for electrons to flow.
R₁
R2
R3
V₁
V₂
V₃
V
Figure 6.25: Three resistors (R₁, R₂, and R₃), connected in series.
In series circuit the amount of current is the same through any component in the
circuit.
I=I₁=I₂=I₃...
Using Ohm's law (V = IR), the potential difference across each resistor is given
by:
The potential difference V across all three resistors is given by
The total resistance R of the three resistors is then given by
R=R₁+R₂+R₃
Resistors in parallel
Figure 6.26 below shows a circuit
R1
containing three resistors of resistances
R₁, R₂, and R₃ connected in parallel. In
i1
P
N
parallel connection, there are more than
12
R₂
one path for electrons to flow. The defining
characteristic of a parallel circuit is that all
i₃
i
R3
components are connected between the
same set of electrically common points
(P and N). In a purely parallel circuit, the
IV
potential difference across any resistor is
the same,
Figure 6:26 Resister connected in parallel
V=V₁=V₂=V₃.
247
Physics | Student Text Book
To find the equivalent resistance of the combination, let us apply a potential difference
V between the points P and N. The current 'I' is divided at the junction P. Suppose a
current I₁ goes through R₁, I₂ through R₂ and I₃ through R₃. These combine at N to
give a total current. Therefore, I=I₁+I₂+I₃.
So,
V = V₁ + V₂ + V
R R₁ R₂ R₃
Since the pd across each resistor is the same, V = V₁ = V₂ = V₃. This gives
-=-+-+- V V V V
R R₁ R₂ R₃
V cancels throughout to give
-=-+-+- R 1111 R₁ R₂ R₃
For only two resistors connected in parallel, the equivalent resistance can be
determined by the equation.
?
Activity 6.9:
Discuss in group and give a mathematical reason for the following fact.
1. For resistors connected in series, the total resistance is larger than the resistance
of the resistor with the largest resistance, but for resistors connected in parallel,
the total resistance is smaller than the resistance of the resistor with the smallest
resistance.
Example 6.12
For the circuit shown in the figure below, determine (a) the equivalent resistance
of the circuit, (b), the current through each resistor, and the potential difference
across each resistor.
248
Grade 11
R1=5n
R₂=
=
R3=
=
24V
4A
12 A
R4=8n
We start by combining resistors R₂ and R₃ in parallel.
Then, all the three are connected in series, Therefore,
Ω
The current from the battery can then be determined by using Ohm's law.
24V 16Ω =1.5A
Since R₁, R₂₃ and R₄ are in series with the source, they will have the current of
the source. Thus,
Using Ohm's law:
V₂₃ = I₂³R₂₃ = 1.5 Ax3Q= 4.5V
I₂ = V₂₃ R2 = 4.0Ω 4.5V = 1.125 A and I₃ = V₂₃ R₃ = 4.5V 12Ω = 0.375 A
249
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Exercise 6.11
1. For the circuit shown below, list resistors that are connected (a) in series, and (b)
in parallel.
R₂
R3
R₁
R₄
2. What is the equivalent resistance of the circuit shown in the figure? (b) What
current flows through the 5Ω resistor?
5.5 Ω
10:52
159
24 V
52
200
10Ω
?
Activity 6.10:
Use the links below to perform virtual experiment on DC Circuits. You may
need your teacher's guidance on how to use it.
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/circuit-construction-kit-dc
http://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/circuit-construction-kit-dc-virtual-lab/
latest/circuit-construction-kit-dc-virtual-lab_en.html
Title: Verification of the laws of combination of resistance
250
Grade 11
Objectives:
1. To study the characteristics of resistances connected in series.
A. Compare the measured value with the calculated value or resistors connected
in series.
B. Verify that the same current flows through all resistors that are connected in
series.
C. Verify that voltage is added for resistors connected in series.
2. To study the characteristics resistances connected in parallel.
A. Compare the measured value with the calculated value for resistors connected
in parallel.
B. Verify that the same potential difference is found is across resistors that are
connected in parallel.
C. Verify that current is added for resistors connected in parallel.
Theory:
Materials Required:
Digital multimeters (2)
DC power supplies, 0-15 V (2)
Resistors and connecting wires (3)
Circuit board (1)
Procedure:
Series Circuit
I. Record the resistances of three resistors (R₁, R₂ and R₃) determined by mea-
surement
II. Construct a series circuit with these resistors.
III. Measure the equivalent resistance Rₑq' of the circuit by connecting the termi-
nals of the multimeter across the beginning of R₁ and end of R3. Then compare
your measured value with that determined by the equation: R eq = R₁ + R₂ + R₃
Connect power supply. Using the multimeter measure the potential differences
across all the resistances and the current flowing in the circuit. Then apply ohms
law (R= V/I). Finally, compare your result with what you have found in number
iv.
251
Physics I Student Text Book
V. Measure the potential differences across each of the resistors. Add the poten-
tial differences. Do they add up to the voltage across the power supply?
Calculation: In Series circuit
I. Experimental value of Req =
ohm
II. Theoretical value of Req =
ohm
III. Difference (if any) =
ohm
Note the following.
Have your lab instructor approve the circuit before plugging in the
power
supply.
Whenever you use the multimeter, do not forget to adjust the scale of
the multimeter to the quantity being measured.
Parallel Circuit
I. Connect the above three resistors in parallel with each other on the circuit
board. Have your instructor check the circuit before plugging in the power
supply. After approval, plug in the power supply.
II. Record this voltage. Now measure the potential difference across the resistor
R1 and record this voltage. Do the same for the R2 and the R3 resistors. Are
the values the same?
III. Measure current vs. potential as before. Graph current vs. voltage on the
same plot as the series graph and determine the total equivalent resistance of
the circuit.
IV.Disconnect the power supply from the circuit and measure the total resistance
of the circuit with the multimeter as before.
Calculations in parallel circuit
(a) Experimental value of R eq =
ohm
(b) Theoretical value of R eq =
ohm
(c) Difference (if any) =
ohm.
252
Grade 11
Measuring Instruments
Measurement of Current
An ammeter is a device used to measure current flowing in a circuit. To measure the
current flow in a circuit the ammeter must be connected in series with the resistor, so
that the same current passes through both the resistor and the ammeter. The internal
resistance of an ammeter should be as small as possible, so that little energy is dissipated
in it.
A
+
Ammeter
Ipc
+
CIGITAL
VOLT&
AMVETER
Source
Load
****
Figure 6.27: Ammeters and How to connect them.
Exercise 6.12:
In the circuit, shown below, an ammeter has a resistance of 0.5Ω. Determine
the current in the circuit, (a) before an ammeter is introduced, and (b) after it is
introduced. (c) Based on your result of question (b), discuss the effect of inserting
the ammeter.
6.0V
4.052
Figure 6.38: Investigating the effect of ammeters
Measurement of Voltage
Voltmeter is a device used to measure the potential difference between two points in
the circuit. For this reason, they are connected in parallel. It could be voltage across
the terminal of a battery or across a resistor or any other circuit element. Voltmeters
253
Physics
Student Text Book
should have a very high resistance to take as little current as possible. The ideal
resistance of a voltmeter would be infinite.
Digital Voltmeter
Voltmeter
+
Line.10
220
ε
R
V
Line.20
V,
AC 50-400V
AH-076
Figure 6.29: Voltage measuring devices
Exercise 6.13
A voltmeter shown in the figure below which can measure up to 6V has a
resistance of 50 k Ω. Determine the pd across the 20 k Ω in the circuit, (a) when
the voltmeter is not in place, and (b) when the voltmeter is in place. (c) Based on
your result of question (b), discuss the effect of inserting a voltmeter.
6.0V
E
kΩ
20 kS2
Figure 6.30: Investigating the effect of a voltmeter
Conversion of galvanometer to ammeter and voltmeter
A galvanometer is an instrument used for measuring small electric current in electric
circuit. It works by deflecting a pointer in response to an electric current flowing
through a coil in a constant magnetic field. A galvanometer has a coil pivoted (or
suspended) in a magnetic field. When an electric current passes through the coil, it
deflects. The deflection is proportional to the current passed.
There are different types of galvanometers. The most common type, shown in
Figure 6.31, is the moving coil galvanometer in which it consists of a light coil of
wire suspended from a metallic ribbon between the poles of a permanent magnet.
254
Grade 11
Scale
Pointer
N
S
Permanent
Soft
Current
Magnet
Iron Core
Carrying Coil
Figure 6.31: The moving-coil galvanometer
converting a galvanometer into an ammeter?
Since a galvanometer is a very sensitive instrument it can't measure heavy currents.
In order to convert a galvanometer into an ammeter, a very low resistance known as
"shunt" resistance is connected in parallel to it, as shown in Figure 6.32. The shunt
allows most of the current passes through it and the remaining small current through
the galvanometer.
RG
I
RG
G
G
I g
Galvanometer
Ish
Rsh
Ammeter
Figure 6.32: Converting galvanometer to an ammeter
Let R₈ be the resistance of the galvanometer and I₈ be the current for full scale
deflection in the galvanometer. The value of the shunt resistance required to convert
the galvanometer into an ammeter is,
V₈ = Vₛₕ
Rₛₕ = 1
255
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 6.14
A galvanometer of full-scale deflection 5 mA is to be converted into a 10 A
ammeter. If its coil has a resistance of 50 Ω, what value shunt must be fitted?
Solution:
Rₛₕ (1
Converting a galvanometer into voltmeter
A galvanometer can be converted
I₈
RM
Rg
into voltmeter by connecting
G
with it with a very high resistance
called multiplier in series with it
as shown in Figure 6.33.
V
Figure 6.33: Converting a galvanometer into voltmeter
Let R₈ be the resistance of a galvanometer and Rₘ the resistance of the multiplier
connected in series with it. Let V volt be the potential difference to be measured by
the voltmeter and I₈, be the current. Potential difference across the two resistors
in the circuit is the sum of potential difference across galvanometer and potential
difference across the multiplier.
This is the required value of multiplier resistance which must be connected in series
to the galvanometer to convert it into a voltmeter.
256
Grade 11
Example 6.14
A galvanometer has a resistance of 40 Ω and is of 3 mA full scale
deflection.
How would you modify it to a 0 - 10 V voltmeter.
Solution:
Rₛₕ = V R₈ = 5 X 10 10⁻³ 40
g
Rₛₕ = 1960 Ω
Exercise 6.14
Explain how you will convert a galvanometer into (a) an ammeter, and (b) a
voltmeter.
The Potential divider
A potential divider consists of two or more
resistors in series with each other and
R1
with a source of fixed potential difference.
The potential difference of the source is VIN
+
divided between the components in the
R2
circuit, as they are in series with each
Vour
other, Figure 6.34.
Figure 6.34: Potential divider circuit
For the potential divider circuit in Figure 6.34
The total resistance of the combination is: Rπ = R₁ +R₂
The current through the resistors is: I = Rπ V = R₁ V + R₂
The potential drop across resistor R₁: V₁ = IR₁ = R₁ R₁ + R₂ V
The potential drop across resistor R2 : V₂ = IR₂ = R₁ R₂ + R₂ V
257
Physics
Student Text Book
Potentiometer
A potentiometer is a three-terminal resistor with a sliding or rotating contact that
forms an adjustable voltage divider. It works by varying the position of a sliding
contact across a uniform resistance wire. In a potentiometer, the entire input voltage
is applied across the whole length of the resistor, and the output voltage is the
voltage drop between the fixed and sliding contact as shown in Figure 6.35. Thus, a
potentiometer is essentially a type of potential divider circuit.
Object, whose linear
displacement is to be measured
Slider/Wiper
Mandrel
Resistance wire
+
eᵢ
Figure 6.35: Potentiometer
The Potentiometer can also be used for the following purposes.
to measure the emf of a given cell,
to measure the internal resistance of a cell,
to compare the emf of different cells, and
as a variable resistor.
Figure 6.36 shows the two symbols of a potentiometer in an electric circuit.
or
Figure 6.36: Symbols of a potentimeter
Potentiometer to measure the emf of a cell
A potentiometer consists of a piece of resistance wire, usually 1 m in length, stretched
horizontally between two points. In Figure 6.37, the ends of the wire are labelled A
and B. A driver cell is connected across the length of wire. Suppose this cell has an
emf of 2.0V. We can then say that point A is at a voltage of 2.0V, B is at OV and the
258
Grade 11
midpoint of the wire is at 1.0 V. In other words, the voltage decreases steadily along
the length of the wire.
cell
Y
jockey
5,
Figure 6:37 A potentiometer connected measure the e.m.f. of cell X,
Now, suppose we wish to measure the emf. Eₓ of cell X (this must have a value less
than that of the driver cell). The positive terminal of cell X is connected to point A.
(Note that both cells have their positive terminals connected to A.) A lead from the
negative terminal is connected to a sensitive galvanometer, and a lead from the other
terminal of the galvanometer ends with a metal jockey. This is a simple connecting
device with a very sharp edge that allows very precise positioning on the wire.
If the jockey is touched onto the wire close to point A, the galvanometer needle will
deflect in one direction. If the jockey is touched close to B, the galvanometer needle
will deflect in the opposite direction.
Clearly, there must be some point Y along the wire that, when touched by the jockey,
gives zero deflection. In finding this position, the jockey must be touched gently
and briefly onto the wire; the deflection of the galvanometer shows whether the
jockey is too far to the left or right. It is important not to slide the jockey along the
potentiometer wire as this may scrape its surface, making it non-uniform so that the
voltage does not vary uniformly along its length.
When the jockey is positioned at Y, the galvanometer gives zero deflection, showing
that there is no current through it. This can only happen if the potential difference
across the length of wire AY is equal to the emf. of cell X. We can say that the
potentiometer is balanced. If the balance point was exactly halfway along the wire, we
would be able to say that the emf. of X was half that of the driver cell. This technique
- finding a point where there is a reading of zero - is known as a null method.
259
Physics
I
Student Text Book
To calculate the unknown emf. Eₓ we measure the length AY. Then we have:
where E₀ is the emf. of the driver cell.
Potentiometer to compare the emf of two cells
Suppose we have two cells whose emfs
Eₓ and Eₓ we want to compare. Each is
connected in turn to the potentiometer,
C
giving balance points at C and D, see
A
e
Figure 6.38. (In the diagram, you can
t
see immediately that Eₓ must be greater
than Eₓ because D is further to the
1
right than C.)
Figure 6.38: Comparing two emfs using a potentiometer.
The ratio of the emfs of the two cells will be equal to the ratio of the two lengths AC
and AD:
Eₓ Eₓ = AD AC
If one of the cells used has an accurately known emf, the other can be calculated with
the same degree of accuracy.
Measurement of Resistance
Resistance can be measured directly by using ohmmeter. Experimentally resistance
is measured using the following two methods.
1. The ammeter-voltmeter method.
In this method the current is measured using an ammeter and the voltage using
the voltmeter, see Figure 6.39. Then, using Ohm's law (R=V), resistance will
be determined. The variable resistor is used to adjust the current and voltage as
necessary.
260
Grade 11
Source
Variable
resistor
Resistor
A
V
Figure 6.39: Circuit to measure resistance
2. Using Wheatstone bridge
Another more precise method of measuring resistance is using a Wheatstone bridge.
A Wheatstone bridge is an arrangement of four resistances which can be used to
measure one of them in terms of the rest. The arrangement is shown in Figure 6.40.
C
i₁
R1
i₁
i
R₂
A
G
B
i₂
R3
D
i₂
R4
Figure 6.40: A Wheatstone bridge
Four resistors with resistances R₁, R₂, R₃ and R₄ are connected to form a loop.
There are four joints A, B, C and D. A battery is connected between two opposite
joints A and B and a galvanometer is connected between the other two opposite
joints C and D.
The current i from the battery is divided at A in two parts. A part i₁ goes through
R₁ and the rest i₂ goes through R₃. When no current is flowing through, the bridge,
it is said to be balanced. In this case, the current in R₂ is the same as the current in
R₁ and the current in R₄ is the same as that in R₃. As there is no current through the
galvanometer, the potential difference across its terminals is zero.
This is the condition for which a Wheatstone bridge is balanced. To measure the
resistance of a resistor, it is connected as one of the four resistors in the bridge. Given
the other three resistors, the value of the fourth unknown resistor will be easily
determined.
261
Physics
I
Student Text Book
?
Activity 6.11:
In a small group, research some applications of a Wheatstone bridge. Present your
findings to the rest of the class in a form of your choice.
Example 6.15:
Find the value of R in the figure below so that there is no current in the 50 Ω
resistor.
10Ω 0
20 Ω Ω
50 Ω
R
40 Ω
Solution:
R₁ = 4Ω, R₂ = R, R₃ = 20Ω, R₄ = 40Ω
R2 = R₁R₄ R₃ = 10x40 20 = 20Ω
?
Activity 6.12:
Experiment, WHEATSTONE BRIDGE
OBJECTIVE
The objective of this experiment is to determine the unknown resistance
using Wheatstone bridge.
APPARATUS
Galvanometer, various medium resistors, multimeter, power supply (DC)
THEORY:
262
Grade 11
A
I₂
I₁
R₁
R₂
SW₁
C
G
D
1₃
I₄
E
R₃
R₄
B
Figure 6.41: Wheatstone bridge
Setup the circuit that is shown in the figure.
Do the required measures to complete the table with the results of your
experiments.
Determine the resistances of any unknown resistors using a multimeter.
Compare those values to the value obtained using the balancing equation.
Parameter
Rx
Experimental
Theoretical
% of error
% of error = Theoretical Experimental - Experimental x100%
DATA ANALYSIS
Compared to the direct measurement of resistance using a multimeter, what
level of accuracy may be expected when applying a Wheatstone bridge?
Comparing the Brightness of Bulbs
?
Activity 6.13:
What are you referring when you buy a light bulb from electric shops? Discuss in
pairs.
We usually see the wattage to buy a bulb that give us a brighter light. Watts are not
a measure a brightness, they're a measure of energy consumption per unit time. It
measures, how much electricity a bulb uses. The amount of light emitted by a bulb
(brightness) is measured in Lumens. So, when buying light bulbs see their Lumens
263
Physics
Student Text Book
instead of their wattage. The higher the lumens, the more light the bulb emits.
Of course, we can use power (watts) to compare the brightness of bulbs. The higher
the wattage rating, the more energy consumed, and brighter the bulb will be. From
the equation for electric power, P = R, we see that brightness depends on current
and resistance.
Key term
The amount of light emitted by a bulb (brightness) is measured in Lumens.
Example 6.16
Compare the brightness of two lamps arranged in parallel with the brightness of
similar lamps arranged in series (Both arrangements having one cell)?
Solution:
In parallel, both the bulbs will have the same voltage across them as that of the
battery. However, in series connection, the voltage gets divided between the two
bulbs. So, the bulbs which are connected in parallel will glow brighter.
Example 6.17
Compare the brightness of the following the three lamps A, B, and C in the figure
below.
A
B
C
Figure 6.42:
Solution:
Of all the three bulbs, Bulb A is brightest, because it gets the full current from the
battery. At the junction, the current then splits, resulting to the current in bulbs
B and C to be half of that in A (assuming the bulbs to be identical). Thus, Bulbs B
and C will have the same brightness but less than that of A.
264
Grade 11
Exercise 6.15:
What would happen to the brightness of the bulbs in example 6.17, if another
bulb D is connected in parallel to that of bulbs B and C, See Figure 6.43 below?
A
B
C
D
Figure 6.43:
?
Activity 6.14:
Look at the data in the table below. The Lumens, and wattage of Incandescent,
compact fluorescent light (CFL) and Light Emitting Diodes (LED) bulbs are given.
Discuss in group the advantages and disadvantages of using CFL od LED lamps
over the incandescent lamps.
Table 6.2: Comparing Incandescent, CFL and LED lamps.
Lumens
Incandescent
CFL Watts
LEDs Watts
Watts
450
40W
8 - 12W
6 7W
800
60W
13 - 18W
7 - 10W
1100
75W
18 - 22W
12 - 13W
1600
100W
23 - 30W
14 - 20W
2600
150W
30 - 55W
25 - 28W
Kirchhoff's Rules
The following two circuit rules, which are called Kirchhoff's rules, can be used to
analyze any dc circuit, regardless of how many loops and cells are in the circuit.
265
Physics I Student Text Book
Kirchhoff's First Rule (Junction rule)
Kirchhoff's first rule states that, at any junction
in a circuit, the total current entering the
i4
junction is equal to the total current leaving
the junction. This means, the sum of all the
i1
i₃
currents directed towards a junction in a circuit
is equal to the sum of all the currents directed
i₂
away from that junction.
Figure 6.44: Kirchhoff's junction rule
Thus, in Figure 6.44, the currents I₁ and I₂ enters into the junction, while the
currents I₃ and I₄ leave the junction.
Thus,
I₁+I₂=I₃+I₄
Kirchhoff's junction rule is based on the law of conservation of charge. The fact that
no point in a circuit keeps on accumulating charge or keeps on supplying charge,
the net charge coming towards the point should be equal to that going away from it
in the same time.
Exercise 6.16:
The figure below is part of a circuit.
wire X
Calculate the current in the wire X. State
the direction of this current (towards P
3.0 A
P
2.5 A
or away from P).
7.0 A
Kirchhoff's Second Rule (Loop Rule)
Kirchhoff's loop rule is stated as:
For any complete loop of a circuit, the sum of the emfs round the loop is equal to the
sum of the potential drops around the loop.' It follows from the law of conservation
of energy.
When using this rule, one starts from a point on the loop and goes along the loop,
either clockwise or anticlockwise, to reach the same point again. In using Kirchhoff's
loop rule consider the following points.
266
Grade 11
1. Assume all voltage sources and resistances are given. (If not label them
V₁, V₂, R₁, R₂ etc
2. Label each branch with a branch current. (I₁, I₂, I₃ etc)
3. Apply junction rule at each junction.
4. Applying the loop rule for each of the independent loops of the circuit.
5. Solve the equations by substitutions.
For Kirchhoff's loop rule, the following convention is used:
1. The e.m.f of the cells is taken as positive when the direction of motion is from
negative terminal to the positive terminal, but negative when traversing from positive
to negative terminal.
2. The potential difference across a resistor (IR) is taken as positive if we move in the
opposite direction to the current, and negative when moving in the direction of the
current.
Example 6.17:
Find the currents I₁, I2 and I₃ in the circuit shown below.
7V
10
B
C
4
20
l₃
80
A
D
b
F
E
10
30
36V
Solution:
Applying Kirchhoff's first rule to junction A: I₁+I₂=I₃ (1)
Applying Kirchhoff's second rule for loop ABCDA (clockwise)
-7 +I₁(1) +1₁(2) +I,(8) =0
3I₁+8I₃=7
(2)
Applying Kirchhoff's second rule for loop ADEFA (clockwise)
-I₃ 3 (8) - I2 (3) + 36 - I₂ (1) = 0
21₃+ I₂ = 9
(3)
Substituting I₁ = I₃ - I2 into equation 2
111, - 31, 7
(4)
267
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Solving equation (3) and (4) simultaneously yields I₃ = 2A
Substituting for I3 into equation (3) yields I2 = 5A
Substituting for I2 and I₃ into equation (1) yields I₁ = -3A
The negative sign tell us that I₁ is opposite in direction to that shown in Figure 6.3:
Exercise 6.17:
By using Kirchhoff's second law determine the resistance R of the resistor shown
in the circuit below.
R
0.5 A
30 V
10 Ω
20 Ω
10 Ω
0.2 A
10 V
Review Questions 6.4
1. Write the definition of the following terms using your own words: electric
current, current density, resistance, conductivity, resistivity and drift velocity.
2. Write the SI units of the following quantities. Electric current, current density,
resistance, resistivity, and conductivity.
3. What is the meaning of one ohm?
4. Explain how a potentiometer works.
5. What is the use of a Wheatstone bridge? Discuss how it works.
6. Describe how to convert galvanometer to a voltmeter and ammeter.
7. State Kirchhoff's first and second laws.
8. A cell of emf 1.5 V and internal resistance 0.5 Ω is connected to a 2.5 Ω
resistor. Calculate: (a) the current, (b) the terminal pd, (c) the power delivered
to the 2.5 Ω resistor, and (d) the power wasted in the cell.
9. The pd across the terminals of a cell was 1.1 V when the current from the cell
was 0.20 A, and 1.3 V when the current was 0.10 A. Calculate: (a) the internal
resistance of the cell, (b) the cell's emf.
268
Grade 11
10. The figure shown below is part of an electric circuit. Determine the value of
the unknow current Iₓ.
0.3 A
0.5 A
B
0.1 A
A
X
11. Determine the electric current that flows in the circuit below.
20Ω
6V
10Ω
40Ω
12 V
20Ω
12. A galvanometer with a resistance of 36Ω is converted into an ammeter using
a shunt resistance of 4Ω. What fraction of the total current passes through
the galvanometer?
13. Determine equivalent resistance between points A and B in circuit shown
below.
2Ω
4Ω
A
1Ω
60
20
B
269
Physics
Student Text Book
6.6 Capacitors and Capacitance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the terms capacitors, capacitances, dielectric.
Explain the effect of inserting dielectric in the gap between the plates of a
capacitor.
Solve problems related to capacitance of parallel plate capacitor.
Calculate the equivalent capacitance of capacitors connected in series and
parallel.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the function of a capacitor?
2. How is a capacitor is charged?
3. Mention devices that we use in daily life which uses a capacitor for storing
energy.
Capacitor and Capacitance
A combination of two conductors
+
-
placed close to each other but
+
-
not touching form a capacitor. In
+
-
charging a capacitor one of the plates
+
-
is connected to the positive terminal
Electrons
and the other to the negative terminal
of a DC source. The electric field
created forces electrons to flow from
the positive plate to the negative plate
until the potential difference between
Figure 6.46: A capacitor, with the positive
the plates of the capacitor becomes
plate carrying a positive charge and the
equal to the emf of the battery.
negative plate an equal amount of negative
charges.
Finally, positive charges will be accumulated on the positive plate and negative
charges on the negative plate, see Figure 6.47.
270
Grade 11
The following are circuit symbols for capacitors.
Figure 6.47: Circuit symbol of a capacitor
For a given capacitor, the charge Q stored on the capacitor is proportional to the
potential difference V between the plates, QαV. Thus,
Q = CV C C=V V
The proportionality constant C is called the capacitance of the capacitor. It is
independent of Q and V but depends on geometrical factors. The SI unit of
capacitance is farad (F). Small values of capacitances are measured in micro, nano
and pico farads. 1 µF = 10⁻⁶, 1 nF =10⁻⁹F, = and 1 pF =10⁻¹²F.
Key terms
A capacitor is a device used to store electric charge, and hence electric energy.
A capacitor is a device used to store electric charge, and hence electric energy.
Parallel-plate Capacitor
A parallel-plate capacitor consists of two large
Separation of
plane plates placed parallel to each other with
a small separation between them (Figure
6.48). Suppose, the area of each of the facing
surfaces is A and the separation between the
place area
two plates is d. Also, assume that the space
between the plates is filled with vacuum.
Figure 6.48: Capacitor
If a charge Q is stored on the positive plate, a charge -Q will be stored on the
negative plate. The charges will appear on the facing surfaces. The charge density
on each of these surfaces has a magnitude
σ = Q A
271
Physics I Student Text Book
The electric field between the plates is given by the equation
E
The potential difference between each plate is given by:
V = Ed
Therefore
V=Ed=2d Ed
Substituting this into our defining equation for capacitance we get:
This equation gives the capacitance of two parallel plates in a vacuum. If a dielectric
material of dielectric constant k is inserted between the plates, the equation for
capacitance became:
C
Hence, the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor depends on the size, distance of
separation of the plates, and the medium between them.
Example 6.19
Consider a parallel plate capacitor with plates of area 200 cm² and separated by a
sheet of mica thickness 2mm and dielectric constant 6. If the capacitor is connected
to 12V source, determine the charge stored on the plates of the capacitor.
Solution:
=5.31x10⁻¹⁰F
Q=CV=5.31x10⁻ F x12V = 6.37x10°F = 6.37nF
Key term
A dielectric is an insulator such as a glass, paraffin, wood or pastic that is inserted
in the gap between the plates of a capacitor.
272
Grade 11
Exercise 6.18
The dimensions of a parallel plate capacitor are 5cm by 10m, they are separated
by a distance of 2mm, and connected to a 24V dc source. If an insulator of
dielectric constant 5 is inserted between the plates, determine the amount of
charge stored on the plates.
?
Activity 6.15:
Discuss in group about the following questions.
If you were asked to design a capacitor with large capacitance, how are you going
to design?
Dielectrics
A dielectric is an insulating or
nonconducting materials such as glass,
paraffine, wood or plastic, that is inserted
in the gap between the plates of a capacitor.
When a dielectric is inserted in the electric
field between the plates, there will be some
charge distribution in it. The positive
charges within the dielectric are displaced
lightly towards the negative plate, and the
negative charges are displaced slightly
Figure 6.49: Polarization in a dielec-
towards the positive plate.
tric inside an electric field of a capac-
itor
This slight separation of charge is known as polarization. Due to polarization the
potential difference and hence the electric field between the plates will decrease.
Since, the dielectric is not disconnected from the source, the potential difference
between the plates finally will be that of the source. As a result, the capacitor can
hold more charge, and thus, its capacitance increased, C = kC₀.
A dielectric constant, k, also called relative permittivity or specific inductive
capacity, measures the ability of a capacitor to store charge. It is the property of
the dielectric. It is equal to the ratio of the capacitance of a capacitor filled with the
given material to the capacitance of an identical capacitor in a vacuum without the
dielectric material.
Capaci tan ce with dielectric
C
k =
=
Capaci tan ce without dielectric
C₀
273
Physics
Student Text Book
The dielectric constant is a number without dimensions. The value of the dielectric
constant for vacuum is one and for any other material is it is greater than one.
Inserting a dielectric always increases the capacitance of the capacitor.
Example 6.20
If a dielectric is inserted in the gap between the plates of an isolated capacitor, what
are the effects on (a) the capacitance of a capacitor, (b) the potential difference
between the plates of a capacitor, (c) amount of the charge stored on the plates,
and (d) the electric field in the region between the plates of a capacitor.
Solution:
When inserting a dielectric in a capacitor its capacitance always increases.
Due to polarization the potential difference between the plates decreases.
Since the capacitor is isolated (disconnected from the source) the amount
of charge stored on the plates remains the same.
From the equation E = V/d, the electric field in the region between the
plates decreases.
?
Activity 6.16:
1. Discuss in group the effect of inserting a dielectric on a capacitor which is not
disconnected from the source on (a) the capacitance of a capacitor, (b) the
potential difference between the plates of a capacitor, (c) the charge stored on
the plates, and (d) the electric field in the region between the plates.
2. What about if a dielectric is withdrawn from a capacitor?
Dielectric strength
For any insulator, there is a maximum electric field that can be maintained without
ionizing the molecules. This means that there is a maximum allowable voltage
that that can be placed across the conductors. This maximum voltage depends
on the dielectric in the capacitor. The corresponding maximum field Eb is called
the dielectric strength of the material. It is the maximum electric field that the
material can withstand without undergoing electrical breakdown and becoming
electrically conductive (i.e. without failure of its insulating properties). The table
below shows the dielectric strength of some materials.
274
Grade 11
Table 6.3: Dielectric constant and dielectric strength of some materials
Material
Dielectric Constant
Dielectric strength (V/m)
Air
1.0
3x10⁶
Glass
4.8 10
30 X 10⁶
Mica
4.8 10
200x10⁶
Paraffin paper
2.0
40 X 10⁶
Rubber
3.2
21 X 10⁶
Water (distilled)
78.5
3 X 10⁶
?
Activity 6.22: Project
Search an internet or read books on how to make a capacitor, and construct it using
locally available materials. Demonstrate your capacitor to your class by showing a
practical work, like charging your cell phone.
Combination of Capacitors
Capacitors are manufactured in a certain standard capacitance and working voltages.
But these values may not be compatible with the ones that we effectively need for
a particular application. In such cases we obtain the desired values by combining
capacitors in different ways. Two or more capacitors may be connected either in
series or in parallel.
Capacitors connected in parallel
Consider three capacitors connected in parallel as shown in Figure 6.50.
+
+
+
C₁
C₂
C₃
Figure 6.50: Three capacitors C1, C2 and C₃ connected in parallel.
The same potential difference is provided for each capacitor.
a
V = V₁ = V₂ = V₃
275
Physics I Student Text Book
Charges Q₁ is stored on capacitor C₁, and charge Q₂ ₀n on capacitor C2 and so on. The
total charge will therefore be:
Q=Q₁+Q₂+Q₃
Since potential difference across the capacitors is the same, V. Then,
Q₁=C,V,Q₂=C₂V and Q₃ =C₃V .
From which,
But we know that V Which yields
For any number of capacitors connected in parallel then
Capacitors Connected in Series
Consider three capacitors of capacitances C₁, C₂, and C₃ connected in series to a
potential difference of V as shown in Figure 6.51.
+
C₁
V₁
+
+
C₂
V₂
+
C₃
V₃
Figure 6.51: Three capacitors C1, C2 and C₃ connected in series
Since the capacitors are connected in series and are charged by induction, they will
all carry the same amount of charge. Thus, the magnitude of charge on all plates is
the same. That is,
276
Grade 11
Therefore, if V₁ is the voltage across C₁, V₂ is the voltage across C2, and V₃ is the
voltage across C₃, then
V₁ = C₁ Q , V₂ = C₂ Q and V₃ = C₃ Q
V =V₁+V₂ + V₃
V = C₁ Q + C₂ Q + C₃ Q = Q C₁ 1 + C₂ 1 + C₃ 1
From which,
V 1 + 1 + 1
Q C₁ C₂ C₃
The equivalent capacitance of the capacitors is given by
Cₑ₄ C = V Q Q
Combining these equations, we get
For any number of capacitors in series therefore,
The above equation indicates that the equivalent capacitance of a series combination
of capacitors is always less than any individual capacitance in the combination.
Exercise 6.19:
For each circuit in the following figure, are the capacitors connected in series,
in parallel, or in neither mode? What is your reason to say about their mode of
connection?
a)
b)
c)
277
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Equivalent capacitance for multiple capacitor circuits
In most electronic circuits, capacitors are connected in series, in parallel or in
combinations of series and parallel as well. Consider a capacitor network shown in
Figure 6.54.
C2
C₁
a
C₃
b
Ca
C₆
5
Figure 6.54: A capacitor network.
We can see in the upper portion of the circuit, C₁ is connected in series to the
combinations of C2 and C3. But, C2 and C3 are connected in parallel. Again, in the
lower portion of the circuit, C₆ is connected in series to the combinations of C₄ and
C₅. Again, C₄ and C₅ are connected in parallel to each other. Therefore, the circuit
can be reduced as follows.
Figure 6.55: Reduced equivalent circuit of the network shown in
Figure 6.54.
C₂₃ = C₂ +C₃ and C₄₅ = C₄ + C₅ (Since they were connected in parallel)
Now, refer to the capacitors in upper portion of the circuit in Figure 6.55. C₁ and C₂₃
are connected in series to each other. Similarly, the capacitors in the lower portion of
the circuit C₄₅ and C₆ are connected in series. So, the circuit can further be reduced
as in Figure 6.56.
Figure 6.56: The equivalent capacitance of the network in Figure 615
278
Grade 11
and
(Since they are connected in series)
The equivalent capacitance of the six capacitors between a and b is therefore the
parallel combination of these two capacitors is
Cₑ₉ = C₁₂₃+C₄₅₆...
When numerical values for each capacitors are given, it is advisable to substitute the
numerical values in each step.
Exercise 6.20:
For the network of capacitors shown in the figure below, determine (a) the
equivalent capacitance, (b) the charge stored on each capacitor, and (c) the
voltage across each capacitor.
3uF
I
4uF
200 V
6uF
?
Activity 6.18
Mention the different applications of a capacitor.
Review Questions 6.5
1. Write the definition of the following terms using your own words. capacitors,
capacitances, dielectric.
2. Mention the factors that affect the capacitance of a capacitor.
3. Explain the effect of inserting dielectric in the gap between the plates of a
capacitor on the following quantities. Its capacitance, (b) the amount of charge
stored on the plates, (c) the potential difference between the plates, and (d) the
electric field in the region between the plates.
4. A pair of parallel flat metal plates are placed a distance of 10 mm apart. The
279
Physics
I Student Text Book
plates are circular, with a radius of 10 cm. How much charge must be placed
on each plate to produce an electric field of 500 V/m between them?
5. For the network of capacitors shown in the figure below, determine (a) the
equivalent capacitance, (b) the charge stored on each capacitor, and (v) the
voltage across each capacitor.
6
µF
2 µF
4
µF
9V
6. Calculate the equivalent capacitance between points A and B for the circuit
shown in the figure below.
5.0 uF
24 uF
A
4.0 UF
12 UF
B
6.0 UF
8.0 UF
6.7 Electric Circuits in Our Surroundings
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
apply the knowledge about electric circuits to explain household electric
installation.
?
Brainstorming
Make a list of electrical appliances in your home.
Group them into three, (a) electric power powered, (b) battery powered, and (c)
280
Grade 11
heat powered.
Household Electric Installations
In our country Ethiopia, the voltages of the mains are 220 V - 240 V. Heating
appliances include electric kettle, immersion heater, electric irons, hair driers
and electric stoves. All heating appliances contain a heating element that converts
electrical energy into heat energy.
?
Activity 6.19:
Have you visited the new national Science Museum located Addis Ababa? If so,
present a report about the smart house you visited. If not arrange a means to visit
this fantastic museum.
Color Code of Resistors
Resistors and capacitors that we discussed so far are frequently used in many
electronic devices and they are said to be the major circuit components for many
electronic systems. The value of the resistance of resistors in electronic devices is
labeled by a color code. There are colored rings in any resistor. According to the
international standard organization ISO, the orders of the rings are arranged and
each color is represented by a number.
Band A
Band B
Band C
Band D
1st Digit
2nd Digit
Multiplier
Tolerance
Figure 6.56: Color code of resistors
The first band represents the first digit number, the second band the second digit
number and the third band represents multiplier to the base 10. The fourth band is
the tolerance (the permissible percentage error ± of the value.
The trick in reading color code is noticing that the first three digits (numerical
values) in a four band resistor are closer in equal gap, whereas the fourth band (the
tolerance) on the other end is in a bit wider gap! In a five band resistor, the first four
digits are closer in equal gap and the fifth band (the tolerance) is a bit further
For example in the illustrated resistor, the numerical value of the resistor can be
calculated by referring the color code chart and replace the corresponding number
281
Physics
Student Text Book
for each color. The first three closer bands are: brown, black and red, which represent
first digit number, second digit number and the multiplier respectively. Referring
the color chart, the first band is brown =1 the second band is black =0, the third
band is red=2. Therefore, the numerical value of this resistor is
10 X 10²= 1000 Ohms =1KO
The color of the fourth band is gold, the tolerance value of gold in the chart is ±
5%. This resistor has a value of 1K Ω ± 5%.
The following chart depicts the ISO standard for each color in the resistor.
Colour
1st Band
2nd Band
3rd Band
Multiplier
Tolerance
Black
0
0
0
10
Brown
1
1
1
100
± 1% (F)
Red
2
2
2
1000
± 2% (G)
Orange
3
3
3
1KQ
Yellow
4
4
4
10KQ
Green
5
5
5
100KQ
± 0.5% (D)
Blue
6
6
6
1MΩ
± 0.25% (C)
Violet
7
7
7
10MQ
± 0.10% (B)
Gray
8
8
8
± 0.05%
White
9
9
9
Gold
0.10
± 5% (J)
Silver
0.010
± 10% (K)
?
Activity 6.20:
Given the following resistor as the color of the first three bands in order are: green,
blue and yellow, the last band (the tolerance) is silver. What is the numerical value
of this resistor?
?
Activity 6.21: Project
Go to a nearby radio, television or computer repair house them. Ask them for a
used electronic components like resistors or capacitors. Read their values by using
the color code and present as a demonstration to your class
282
Grade 11
UNIT SUMMARY
C
Electric charges are quantized and are integral multiples of a fundamental charge
e.
C
There are two types of charges: positive and negative. Unlike charges attract each
other and like charges repel each other.
C
The electrostatic force between two charges is directly proportional to the product
of the two charges and inversely proportional to the square of the separation
between them. This law is called Coulomb's law.
c
The electrostatic force is positive if the force is repulsive and negative if the force
is attractive.
c
Electric field lines originate from the positive charge and terminate into the
negative charge.
c
Electric field lines do not cross to each other and are perpendicular to the surface
of the charge source.
c
The total resistance of an electrical circuit with resistors wired in a series is the sum
of the individual resistances:
c
Each resistor in a series circuit has the same amount of current flowing through it.
c
The total resistance of an electrical circuit with resistors connected in parallel is
less than the lowest resistance of any of the components and can be determined
using the formula:
R
C
Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same full voltage of the source applied to
it.
C
The current flowing through each resistor in a parallel circuit is different, depending
on the resistance.
c
If a more complex connection of resistors is a combination of series and parallel,
it can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance by identifying its various parts
as series or parallel, reducing each to its equivalent, and continuing until a single
resistance is reached.
c
Total capacitance in series 1 = C₁ 1 + C2 1 Cₙ 1
c
Total capacitance in parallel Ceq=C₁+C₂+C₃+.
283
Physics Student Text Book
c
If a circuit contains a combination of capacitors in series and parallel, identify
series and parallel parts, compute their capacitances, and then find the total.
c
Capacitors are devices that store charge and electrostatic energy.
c
A capacitor consists of two isolated conductors (the plates) with equal and opposite
charges +q and -q. Its capacitance C is defined from , where V is the potential
difference between the plates.
c
The SI unit of capacitance is the farad. (1 farad = 1 coulomb per volt)
c
Other practically applicable units of capacitance are: micro Farad, nano Farad and
pico Farad.
c
When two or more capacitors are connected in series, the reciprocal of the
equivalent capacitance is the sum of the reciprocals of the individual capacitance
of the capacitors.
c
When two or more capacitors are connected in parallel, the equivalent capacitance
is the sum of the capacitance of each capacitor.
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS
1. If two charges separated by a distance d, have an electrostatic force F, What will be
the magnitude of the new electrostatic force if their separation is doubled to 2d.
2. What is the source of an electric field in a certain region?
3. Which one of the following cannot be the unit of electric field
a) Volt/meter
b) newton/ coulomb
c) newton.coulomb
4. When resistors are connected in series which property of the resistor is practically
changed?
a) The length
b) the thickness
c) the resistivity
5. When resistors are connected in parallel, which property of the material is changed?
a) The length
b) the thickness
c) the resistivity
6. Two charges Q₁ = -5µC and Q₂ = +2µC are separated by a distance of 4cm.
Calculate the electrostatic force between these charges. Is the electrostatic force an
attractive or repulsive force? Why?
284
Grade 11
7. In the above question, what is the electric field produced due to Q2 at a point where
Q₁ is placed? What is the direction of the electric field? Similarly, determine the
electric field produced by Q₁ at a point where Q2 is placed. What is the direction of
the electric field?
8. What are the largest and smallest resistances you can obtain by connecting a 36.0
Ω, a 50.0 Ω, and a 700 Ω resistor together?
9. What is the resistance of ten 75 Ω resistors (a) when connected in series? (b) when
connected in parallel?
10. When do you get a brighter light, connecting bulbs in series or in parallel?
11. Why heating coils like an electric kettle is made of materials with large resistivity?
12. Why and how the resistivity of conductors depends on its temperature?
13. Why temperature dependence of the resistivity differs for conductors, semicon-
ductors and superconductors?
14. What is the difference between emf and terminal voltage?
15. What is internal resistance?
16. How do you connect resistors so as to get larger/smaller equivalent resistance?
17. How do you connect resistors so as to get larger current from the circuit?
18. A battery of unknown emf ε and internal resistance r is connected in series with
an ammeter and a resistance box. The current was 2.0 A when R = 4.0 Ω and 1.5
A when R = 6.0 Ω. Calculate ε and r.
19. A 12 V battery causes a current of 3.0 A to flow into the circuit shown in the figure
below. Find (a) the value of the unknow resistor R2, and (b) the potentiial differ-
ence across the 3Ω resistor.
2.0 Ω
3.0 A
R2
3.0 Ω
12 V
20. Determine the current that flows through the ammeters, A₁, A2. and A₃ in the cir-
cuit below.
100 mA
A
A1
A3
30 mA
A
A
80 mA
A2
285
Physics
I Student Text Book
21. In the circuit shown below, If V1 = 1V, V2 = 2V, V3 = 3V, and let each resistor has
a 1 Ω resistance. Determine the value of the currents I₁, I₂, and I₃.
A
R1
R3
I₃
I₁
R₂
V1
V3
I₂
R₄
V₂
B
22. If you want to store a large amount of energy in a capacitor bank, would you con-
nect capacitors in series or parallel? Explain.
23. Find the total capacitance of capacitance between points A and B, for the network
shown in the figure below?.
2C
2C
3C
A
B
4C
3C
286
Pressuriser
Control rods
Steam
Steam
generator
UNIT 7
Steel
pressure
Y
vessel
Water
elements
NUCLEAR PHYSICS
einforced concrete
tainment and shield
Introduction
Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies atomic nuclei and their constituents
and interactions that hold them together. Nuclear interactions include radioactive decay,
the break-up of a nucleus (fission), and the merging of nuclei (fusion).
The main driving strong nuclear force produced by the nucleus of an atom acts within
a very short distance - just a few femtometres ( metres) across. The strong nuclear
force is the force that is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons into atomic
nuclei. The strong binding energy will help to produce strong radiation upon different
reaction processes and radiation decay.
Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies atomic nuclei and their constituents
and interactions that hold them together. Nuclear interactions include radioactive decay,
the break-up of a nucleus (fission), and the merging of nuclei (fusion).
The main driving strong nuclear force produced by the nucleus of an atom acts within
a very short distance - just a few femtometres (10⁻¹⁵ metres) across. The strong nuclear
force is the force that is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons into atomic
nuclei. The strong binding energy will help to produce strong radiation upon different
reaction processes and radiation decay.
A nuclide may be stable or unstable. Unstable nuclides emit radiations spontaneously.
These radiations have different forms which are known as α, ß and Y radiation with
charges similar to proton, electron, and neutron in the atomic system.
Through research, nuclear physicists are leading us on a journey of discovery into the
nucleus of the atom - the very heart of matter. The goal is a roadmap of matter that will
help unlock the secrets of how the universe is put together. Significant efforts have been
made from the early 19th century on the observation of different subatomic systems by
different scientists. Nowadays, the research reactor (RR) and the power reactor (PR) are
widely in use globally. Research reactors are small nuclear reactors that are primarily
287
Physics
Student Text Book
used to produce neutrons, unlike nuclear power reactors, which are larger and used to
generate electricity. The two reactors are based on the fission processes. However, the
fusion is still in progress in laboratories and computer work. In all these processes, it is
important to aware that the fuel elements for nuclear reactions are heavy unstable nuclei
such as U, Th, K, Pt and so on.
Nuclear radiations have very powerful ionization effects; some of which is fatal to
human beings if proper precautions are not in use. It is mandatory to use the nuclear
safety rules of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the proper use of
nuclear instruments and materials. There should be a separate inspection bodies for
both the RR and PR once any country has these reactors in use.
The purpose of this unit is studying the different properties of nuclei so far you have
seen above, uses and quantitative measurements of nuclear energy; and precautions to
be taken to take care of ionization radiations.
At the end of the unit, students will be able to:
appreciate the basic concept of the atomic nucleus.
describe qualitatively the basic nuclear processes (concepts of
radioactivity, and nuclear reaction).
discuss the types of nuclear forces.
explain application of radioactivity and nuclear reaction to society.
describe the application of radioactivity and nuclear reaction to explain
the energy source of stars.
define terms like nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, and isotope.
gain the basic knowledge of nuclear medicine.
demonstrate high level of awareness to protect themselves and their
community from radiation hazard.
7.1 The nucleus
At the end of this topic, you should be able to:
identify particles inside the nucleus
discus the historical origins of the particles of the nucleus
define and discuss isotope of an atom
describe the relationships between nuclear mass and binding energy of
isotopes;
calculate binding energy of the nucleus of different isotopes;
identify the nuclear forces, (strong nuclear force, weak nuclear force)
288
Grade 11
?
Brainstorming:
Discuss in small groups and tell to the whole class about the following.
1. Discus about the volume and the mass of the nucleus compared to that of
the atom; about constituting particles of the nucleus and their charges.
2. Who discovered the nucleus? How?
3. What force keeps protons and neutrons at the center of the atom? What
force keeps the electrons and the nucleus together?
About the Atom
Atoms are the basic building blocks of matter. An atom consists of a positively
charged central nucleus that is surrounded by one or more negatively charged
electrons. The nucleus contains one or more relatively heavy particles known
as protons (positively charged) and neutrons (electrically neutral), which are
collectively called nucleons. Table 7.1 summarizes charges and masses of the
three subatomic particles.
Proton
Nucleus
Neutron
Electron
Figure 7-1: Structure of an atom- Every atom has these particles except the smallest
isotope of hydrogen which has no any neutron.
Table 7-1: Mass and charge of subatomic particles
Subatomic particles
Charge (in C)
Mass
(in kg)
(in u)
Electron
0.00054858 U
- 1.602 X 10⁻¹⁹
9.1094 X 10⁻³¹
Proton
1.0072766 U
+1.602x10⁻¹⁹
1.6726 X 10⁻²⁷
Neutron
O
1.0086654 U
1.6749 X 10⁻²⁷
Note: Where 1 amu (atomic mass unit) = 1.660 X 10⁻²⁷ kg.
289
Physics I Student Text Book
Since the mass of an electron is comparatively very small, only the nucleus contributes
to the mass of an atom, which typically contains more than 99.9% of the mass of
the atom. Thus, the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus is
expressed as mass number (A) and the number of protons is its atomic number (Z)
for a neutral element. A neutral element in the periodic table of chemical symbol X
is uniquely designated by:
AX
Some examples of designation of elements are oxygen 16, helium 4 2 He and carbon
1². Although the nucleus contains much of the mass of the atom, it is very dense
and occupies only less than 0.01% of the volume of the atom. The atom and the
nucleus are assumed spherical and the atomic radius is estimated by:
where A is the mass number of the atom; R₀ is the radius of the nucleus which is
roughly equal to R₀ = 1.2fm and 1 femtometer (1 fm) = 10⁻¹⁵ m.
Isotopes
An element may have atoms with different number of neutrons. Atoms with the same
number of protons but different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes.
They share almost the same chemical properties, but differ in mass and therefore
in physical properties.
Key terms:
Atomic nucleus consists of electrically positively charged particles called protons
and electrically neutral particles called neutrons. These are held together by the
strongest known fundamental force called the strong nuclear force.
Isotopes are members of a family of an element that all have the same number of
protons but different numbers of neutrons.
Some examples of isotopes of elements:
Carbon isotopes: ¹², ¹³C and 14.
Hydrogen isotopes: (protium), (deuterium) and ³H(tritium).
Uranium isotopes: 232 90 U, 233 90 U, 234 90 U, 235 90 U, 236 90 and 238 90 U.
290
Grade 11
Example 7.1
Calculate the radii of the smallest isotope of hydrogen (|H) and uranium-238.
Compare the volume of U-238 atom with the volume of its nucleus.
Solution:
The radius of1H is
The radius of U-238 becomes
The volume of U-238 atom is,
The volume of the nucleus of U-238 atom,
Taking the ratio of the first to the second one, we obtain
V -
The volume of the nucleus is 0.0565% of the volume of the atom.
7.1.1 Historical origins of the nucleus and its constituting particles
?
Activity 7.1:
Collect pictures and diagrams showing particles of the nucleus, important
physicists who contributed to the discovery of the nucleus and its constituent
particles; illustrations of experiments related to the nucleus.
Discus in groups why electrons could not be part of the nucleus.
291
Physics
Student Text Book
Discovery of the nucleus
In 1909, two of Lord Rutherford's students, Geiger and Marsden, aimed positively
charged particles (stream of helium at an extremely thin piece of gold
foil (100 nm thickness). In order to study the deflection caused by the a-particles,
they placed a fluorescent zinc sulfide screen around the thin gold foil. They used the
apparatus similar to that shown in Figure 7.2.
zinc sulphide
Most CL particles travel
screen
through the foil
undeflected
vacuum
Gold
Foil
Some CE particles are
Detector
deflected by small
angles
Beam of a particles
Occasionally, on X
particle travels back
from the foil
Radioactive
Source
Figure 7-2: Rutherford's scattering experiment apparatus
Rutherford repeated the experiment many times, and come up with the same result.
His evidences and conclusions are summarized as follows.
Evidences
Conclusions
Most of the -particles passed through the gold
Most of the space in an atom is empty.
sheet with no or small deflection (0°-10°).
Some of the particles were deflected by very
The positive charge in an atom is not uniformly
small angles (10° 90°)
distributed, but concentrated in a very small volume.
Very few of the -particles were deflected back
Most of the mass of the atom, and all the positive
towards the source (90°-180°), only very few
charge, is concentrated in a tiny central space, what
being at 180°.
Rutherford called the nucleus.
292
Grade 11
Based on his observations, Rutherford proposed a new atomic model in 1911, called
the solar system model as all the positive charge and most of the mass is concentrated
in a tiny central nucleus. Most of the atom is empty space, and electrons orbit at the
edge. He also claimed that the electrons surrounding the nucleus revolve around it
with very high speed in circular paths. He named these circular paths as orbits (See
Figure 7.3).
Nucleus
Electron
+
Figure 7-3: Rutherford's atomic model
What are the drawbacks of the Rutherford atomic model? Rutherford's atomic
model failed to explain the stability of electrons in a circular path. He stated that
electrons revolve around the nucleus in a circular path, but electrons in motion
would undergo acceleration and cause energy radiation. Eventually, electrons should
lose energy and fall into the nucleus.
Discovery of the proton
Rutherford thought that a hydrogen nucleus must be the fundamental building block
of all nuclei, and also possibly a new fundamental particle. Rutherford postulated the
hydrogen nucleus to be a new particle in 1920, which he called proton. Rutherford
named it the proton, from the Greek word "protos," meaning "first."
Discovery of the neutron
The British physicist James Chadwick discovered the neutron in 1932. He conducted
experiments very similar to those of Rutherford. In Chadwick's case, he fired his
atomic bullets at the element beryllium, not gold. The resulting collisions produced a
new kind of particle that was just as massive as the proton, but it penetrated through
several inches of lead.
293
Physics
Student Text Book
If you can take a particle and penetrate several inches of lead, it implies, first of
all, that the particle is moving very fast; and second, that the particle is electrically
neutral, it has neither a positive nor a negative charge. So Chadwick found that the
neutron is indeed electrically neutral, and he also found that its mass is slightly
greater than that of the proton. Finally, he determined the mass of the neutron using
the law of conservation of energy and momentum as well.
7.1.2 What keeps the nucleus together?
You know that the positively charged protons and electrically neutral neutrons
are packed together in the nucleus. Then, what is holding the cluster of nucleons
together instead of repelling each other due to the electrostatic force and fly apart?
This question takes you to consider the two fundamental forces of nature: the strong
and weak nuclear forces.
The strong and the weak nuclear forces
The strong nuclear force is a very short-range attractive force that acts between
nucleons: protons and neutrons. The strong nuclear force is strong enough to
withstand the electrical repulsion up within a distance of slightly more than the
radius of a nucleon, 10⁻¹⁵ m. Both nucleons are affected by the nuclear force almost
identically.
Look at the difference!
At the range of 10⁻¹⁵ m (slightly more than the radius of a nucleon), the strong force is
approximately 100 times as strong as electromagnetism, 10⁶ times as strong as the weak
interaction, and 10³⁸ times as strong as gravitation.
The weak nuclear force acts inside of individual nucleons, which means that it is
even shorter ranged than the strong nuclear force. The weak nuclear force can split
the electrically neutral neutron into a proton and an electron. In this process, sub-
atomic particles are released near the speed of light. These fast particles allow nuclear
fusion reaction- combination of two or more nuclides to form a single nuclide- by
then releasing enormous energy.
Key terms:
The Strong Nuclear Force is an attractive force between protons and neutrons that
keeps the nucleus together.
The Weak Nuclear Force is responsible for the radioactive decay of certain nuclei.
Nuclear binding energy is the energy required to separate an atomic nucleus
completely into its constituent protons and neutrons, or, equivalently, the energy
that would be liberated by combining individual protons and neutrons into a single
nucleus.
294
Grade 11
Nuclear binding energy
Nuclear binding energy is the energy that holds nucleons together. Another equivalent
definition of binding energy is the minimum energy that is required to disassemble
the nucleus of an atom into its constituent nucleons. Now the question is how can we
determine the binding energy of a nuclide?
The mass of an atomic nucleus is less than the sum of the individual masses of the
free constituent protons and neutrons. This difference in mass (L) is known as the
mass defect. Once the mass defect is known, the nuclear binding energy (BE) can
be calculated using Einstein's special theory of relativity, which states that mass and
energy are equivalent. The remarkable equivalence between matter and energy is
given in one of the most famous equations given by E = mc²; where m is the mass
converted in to an amount of energy E and c =3x10⁸ m/s is the speed of light. From
this theory, we can deduce that the mass defect is an amount of mass released in
the form of energy during the formation of the nucleus. This energy is equal to the
binding energy, which is then given by
BE = Amc2
Masses of subatomic particles are measured in "atomic mass unit (amu or u)";
1 amu (or 1 u) = 1.660 10⁻²⁷ kg
Nuclear energy is measured in "atomic energy unit (aeu)"; or "megaelectron volt
(MeV)";
1aeu = c² x1 amu = 1.44x10¹J
1MeV = =1.602 J, and laeu = 931.1MeV
The mass defect of an atom can be calculated by:
where Zmₚ is the total mass of the protons; (A Z)mₙ n is the total mass of the neutrons,
and M is the mass of the nucleus.
Using this into the former equation, we obtain:
Therefore, when mass is given in amu, the nuclear binding energy of a nucleus in
MeV becomes,
BE=[Zm,+(A-Z)m₁-M]x931.1MeV
295
Physics I Student Text Book
Masses of subatomic particles
mₚ = 1.0072766u, mₙ = 1.0086654 u, and mₑ = 1836 mₚ = 0.00054858 u
Binding energy per nucleon: Binding energy per nucleon (BEN) is the average
energy required to remove an individual nucleon from a nucleus. It is one of the
most important experimental quantities, which is defined by
BEN = BE BE BE A
where BE is the binding energy and A is the atomic number of the atom.
Example 7.2
You know that an atom of oxygen has the form 16.
a) What is the mass defect in oxygen nucleus?
b) What is the binding energy per nucleon in Oxygen?
Solution
Z = 8, A = 16, mₚ = 1.00728 u, mₙ = 1.00867 u, mₙₙc = 16u
a) The mass defect is
Am = 8x1.00728 u + 16u
Am = 0.1276 u
b) The mass defect in amu is 0.1276. The binding energy in Oxygen is, then:
BE = =[Zm,+(A-Z)m₁-M]x931.1MeV=Amx931.1Me\
BE=0.1276x931.1MeV = = 118.808MeV
The binding energy per nucleon in Oxygen:
BEN = BE A = 118.808 16 ≈7.4MeV ≈
296
Grade 11
?
Activity 7.2
Select few isotopes of some elements in the periodic table.
Let individual students of your group do the calculations for the binding
energy of different isotopes and the rest members of the group come up with
a set of biding energy.
Contribute your result in a whole class discussion about the least and highest
binding energies.
Give explanation about how the binding energy varies from isotope to isotope
and from element to element
Nuclear stability
Nuclear stability is determined by the binding energy per nucleon. The net binding
energy of a nucleus is that of nuclear attraction, minus the disruptive energy of the
electrostatic force.
9
34S
⁵⁶Fe
84Kr
119Sn
¹⁶O
8
¹²C
205Ti
235U
14N
Most stable nucleus
7
4He
238U
Binding energy per nucleon (MeV)
6
7Li
5
6Li
4
Region of very
stable nuclides
3
3H
³He
2
1
2H
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
Mass number (A)
Figure 7.4: A plot of the binding energy per nucleon as a function of mass number A.
297
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Any system will always try and move to a state of lower energy (or more stable state).
As nuclei get heavier than helium, their net binding energy per nucleon grows more
and more slowly and reaches its peak at iron (Fe- 56), which is 8.8 MeV/nucleon,
,
as shown in Figure 7.4. As nucleons are added, the total binding energy increases
but so does the total disruptive energy of the electrostatic forces and, once nuclei are
heavier than that of iron, the increase in disruptive energy has more effect than the
increase in binding energy. For example, the binding energy per nucleon of uranium,
which is at the end of the periodic Table, decreases to about 7.6 MeV.
N
160
Stable nuclei
150
Unstable nuclei
25
140
OO
210
130
190
120
180
110
160
170
100
150
Number of neutrons
AD
90
130
80
170
120
70
0.0
100
N Z
60
50
?O
80
40
50'
60
30
to
20
OF
10
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Z
Number of protons
(atomic number)
Figure 7.5: Graph of neutron number vs atomic number
298
Grade 11
Review Questions 7.1
1. Two nuclei have mass numbers in the ratio 27:125. What is the ratio of their
nuclear radii?
2. Consider the atoms ¹⁶, 18 O, 18 F, 18 Ne and 20 Ne.
a. Which atoms are isotopes of the same element?
b. Which ones have the same number of neutrons?
3. X and Y are two elements with the same mass number but different atomic
numbers 28 and 30, respectively. If X has a mass number of 58, what is the
number of neutrons in Y? Are X and Y isotopes of the same element?
4. In his experiment of gold foil, when Rutherford bombarded the alpha particles
on a very thin sheet of gold foil, only very few of the projectiles were observed
deflecting back.
a. Which force was responsible for the deflection?
b. What does it imply that most of the alpha particles were passed undeflected?
5. What were failures in Rutherford's planetary model of the atom?
6. Describe how neutrons were discovered.
7. What are differences between strong nuclear force and weak nuclear force?
8. What are the major differences between the electrostatic and nuclear forces?
9. Calculate the binding energies per nucleon of the nuclei 26 56 Fe and 209 83 Bi in
units of MeV. Use the following data: m(Fe-56) = 55.934939u, m(Bi-209) =
208.980388u, mp= m(H-1)=1.007900 u, m (neutron)=1.008665 u.
10. Explain factors affecting nuclear stability of isotopes.
7.2 Radioactivity
By the end of this section you should be to:
define the terms radio-activity, and distinguish between the three types of
emissions, alpha radiation, beta- radiation and gamma- radiation
recognize and discuss dangers of ionizing radiation;
discuss radioactive dating and radiation detectors;
identify radioactive sources in the school, home, and workplace and
recommend protective measures to the school community.
299
Physics
Student Text Book
In 1896, the French physicist Antoine Henri
Do you know
?
Becquerel (1852-1908) accidentally found that
uranium-rich mineral called pitchblende emits
Pierre and Marie were award-
invisible, penetrating radiations that can darken a
ed the Noble Prize in Physics in
photographic plate enclosed in an opaque envelope.
1903 for their work on radio-
Later it was found that there are some unstable
activity. Marie Curie became
isotopes that are emitting particles to be stable.
the first woman to be awarded
the Nobel Prize and the first
Larger nuclides tend to have more neutrons than
person to obtain two Nobel
protons to reduce the disruptive energy and
prizes when she won the prize
stay stable. To reduce the disruptive energy by
for the discovery of Polonium
increasing number of neutrons and reducing
and Radium in 1911. She later
number of protons, the weak nuclear force converts
discovered two new radioac-
proton to neutron; or at some stage the only way
tive elements: Radium and
for the nucleus to reach a lower energy state will
Polonium which took her sev-
be to emit particles. All these processes that lead
eral years since these elements
unstable atoms to decay by particle emission are
are difficult to extract and
what we call radioactivity. unstable isotope is said
extremely rare. Unfortunately,
to be a radioisotope, and the energy that is released
the Merry Curie died young.
is called radiation. After an atom expels energy
She died of aplastic anemia,
from the nucleus, the composition of the nucleus
almost certainly a result of
changes, and we are left with a different element
radiation exposure.
that is more stable.
Key term:
Radioactivity is the phenomenon of the spontaneous disintegration of unstable
atomic nuclei to atomic nuclei to form more energetically stable atomic nuclei.
Radioactive decay is a highly exoergic, statistically random, process that occurs
with a small amount of mass being converted to energy.
Types of nuclear radiation
There are three types of nuclear radiations: alpha (a), beta (ß) and gamma (y)
radiation. Each of these comes about through a different process in the decaying
nucleus, each one is composed of different particles and each one has different
properties.
Alpha Particles Radiation
Alpha particles are subatomic fragments consisting of two neutrons and two protons,
or helium nuclei (He-4). Alpha radiation occurs when the nucleus of an atom
300
Grade 11
becomes unstable (the ratio of neutrons to protons is too low) and alpha particles
are emitted to restore balance. Alpha decay occurs in elements with high atomic
numbers, such as uranium, radium, and thorium. The nuclei of these elements are
rich in neutrons, which makes alpha particle emission possible.
When a radioactive atom decays by a-emission, it leaves a daughter nucleus of atomic
number two less than the parent atom of atomic mass number four less than that of
the parent atom. Thus,
where X and Y are chemical symbols of the parent and the daughter nuclei,
respectively.
For example, the abundant isotope of uranium, U-238, decays by alpha emission to
give a thorium atom which can be written in a form:
238U
Some sources of α radiation are americium-241, plutonium-236, uranium-238,
thorium-232, radium-226, radon-222 and polonium-210.
Beta-particle Radiation
Unlike alpha radioactivity, beta radioactivity requires the weak nuclear force. There
are two beta decay types; beta minus (-) and beta plus (+). Beta minus particles are
energetic electrons emitted from a radioactive nucleus. Beta minus particle emission
occurs when the ratio of neutrons to protons in the nucleus is too high. An excess
neutron transforms into a proton and an electron. The proton stays in the nucleus
and the electron is ejected energetically. This process decreases the number of
neutrons by one and increases the number of protons by one. Thus,
As we see in this reaction equation, any decay by beta-emission accompanies
emission of an antineutrino, V. Take a look at the decay of the uranium daughter
product thorium-234 into protactinium-234:
Some beta negative emitters are tritium, cobalt-60, strontium-90, technetium-99,
iodine-129, iodine-131, and cesium-137. There is also positron or beta plus
emission. Like the beta particle, a positron is immediately rejected from the nucleus
upon its formation. For example, potassium-38 decays by positron emission,
301
Physics
Student Text Book
becoming argon-38. Positron emission decreases the atomic number by one, but the
mass number remains the same. Thus,
AX
Gamma-particle Radiation
Gamma rays are high energy, high frequency, electromagnetic radiations. Gamma
radiation usually accompanies alpha or beta decay. They have no charge and no
mass so they rarely interact with particles in their path, so they have the least ionizing
power of the three radiations. They are never completely absorbed, although their
energy can be significantly reduced by several centimeters of lead, or several meters
of concrete. If the energy is reduced to a safe level, gamma rays are often said to have
been absorbed.
Gamma emitting radioisotopes are the most widely used radiation sources. The
three radionuclide's by far useful are: cobalt-60, cesium-137, and technetium-99 m.
?
Activity 7.3
Discharge flame and radioactivity:
Hold a candle flame near a charged electroscope and it discharges leaves of the
electroscope. The reason is that the Flame produces ionization of nearby air.
Repeat demonstration with opposite charge on electroscope. Holding weak
radioactive source near electroscope may also cause discharge.
Ionization and penetration powers of nuclear radiations
When alpha, beta and gamma radiations, they produce ions and molecular fragments
by knocking electrons from them. The greater mass presents the greater the ionizing
power. Thus, alpha-radiation has the highest and gamma radiation has the least
ionization powers.
On the other hand, gamma-radiation has the highest and alpha- radiation has the
least penetration powers. Alpha radiation can be stopped by paper and skin, beta
radiation by aluminum sheet and gamma radiation can be blocked by 2 inches thick
lead. Figure 7.6, compares penetrating powers of these radiations.
302
Grade 11
Alpha
+
Beta
Neutron
Gamma
Paper
Metal
Water
Concrete
Lead
Figure 7.6: Penetration of the alpha, beta, and gamma radiations. Neutron is added to
show impact of charge on penetration power.
Dangers of ionizing radiation
When radiation passes through cellular tissue, it ionizes water molecules which
change into free radicals. These radicals are highly reactive and can interact with the
important genetic material in the cell, the DNA. In addition, the DNA may also be
ionized directly. Damage caused by these interactions may be fully repaired, in which
case, the cell remains viable. However, if the damage is not successfully repaired and
the DNA is not restored completely, the cell may either die or mutate.
Because the radiations ionize to different extents, the hazard level is also different for
each one. The extent of the potential damage depends on several factors, including:
the type of radiation
the sensitivity of the affected tissues and organs
the manner and length of time exposed
the radioactive isotopes involved
Characteristics of the exposed person (such as age, gender and under-
lying condition).
303
Physics
Student Text Book
The depth of radiation damage is summarized below.
Radiation
Effect inside body
Effect outside body
type
Alpha
Highly ionizing - very dangerous
Absorbed by surface layer of dead skin cells -
radiation poisoning and cancer
no danger
possible.
Beta
Moderate ionization and danger
Moderate SO exposure ionization and danger,
should be minimized
close exposure should be minimized
Gamma
Minimal ionization, cancer danger
minimal ionization -cancer danger from long-
from long-term exposure
term exposure
Effective Dose
The risk of developing adverse health
1 Gy is the deposit of a
effects depends on the radiation dose. The
joule of radiation energy
higher the dose the higher is the risk of
per kilogram of matter or
adverse effects. Absorbed dose describes
tissue.
the amount of energy deposited per unit
1 Sv = 1 joule/kilogram -
mass in an object or person. The units
a biological effect. The
for absorbed dose are gray (Gy, sievert
sievert represents the equiv-
(Sv) and rad; where 1Gy = 1J/kg and
alent biological effect of the
1rad = 0.01 Gy = 0.01 J/kg.
deposit of a joule of radia-
tion energy in a kilogram of
human tissue.
Radiation doses above 3 Gy (300 rad) can be fatal and doses above 6 Gy (600 rad)
are almost certain to be fatal, with death occurring within several months (in shorter
times at higher doses). For gamma rays and electrons, above 1 Gy, radiation causes
a complex of symptoms, including nausea and blood changes, known as radiation
sickness. For doses below 1 Sv (100 rem), there is little likelihood of radiation
sickness, and the main danger is an increased cancer risk.
Safety precautions when using radioactive sources
Radioactive sources which may be used in schools are usually very weak. They can
only be used in the presence of an authorized teacher. They are kept in a sealed
container except when they are being used in an experiment or demonstration. They
are immediately returned to the container when the experiment or demonstration
is finished.
304
Grade 11
When using the radioactive source it should be:
1. handled with tongs or forceps, never with bare hands.
2. kept at arm's length, pointing away from the body.
3. always kept as far as possible from the eyes.
Hands must be washed after the experiment and definitely before eating.
Radiation Detectors
A radiation detector is a device that measures the ionization of radiations (i.e.,
creating electrons and positively charged ions), such as beta radiation, gamma
radiation, and alpha radiation with the matter. There are different types of radiation
detectors, most widely ones of which are discussed below.
Scintillators: A scintillator is a general term for substances that emit fluorescence
when exposed to radiations of high energy- it is a type of phosphor. When a
radiation collides with this substance, it absorbs its energy and internal electrons
move from the ground state (stable state) to the excited state. When this electron
returns to the original stable state, it releases its energy in the form of light emission
(visible light or ultraviolet light), and this phenomenon called scintillation.
The incident radiation can be measured quantitatively by photo-electrically
converting/ amplifying the emitted fluorescence with a photomultiplier tube (PMT)
or the like Figure 7.7 shows a type of a scintillation detector. Scintillation detectors
represent the best means for detecting gamma or x-radiation and are the second-
most common detector type after G-M tubes. They have the ability to distinguish
between alpha, beta, and gamma radiation, and can be configured to produce
correspondingly different sounds through a meter.
Radiation
Light
Photomultiplier Tube
Measuring
Device
Sodium-lodide
Crystal
Anode
Photocathode
Optical Window
Figure 7.7: Scintilator
305
Physics
Student Text Book
Geiger counter: A Geiger counter, also known as the Geiger-Muller tube, is used
to quickly detect and measure radiation. It exploits the natural process of ionization
to detect and measure radiation. When exposed to radioactive radiations, the stable
gas within the chamber ionizes. This generates an electrical current that the counter
records over a period of 60 seconds.
When ionization occurs and the current is produced, a speaker clicks and a reading
is given - often in millisieverts (mSv). The central wire in between a gas-filled
tube at high voltage is used to collect the ionization produced by incident radiation.
Geiger counters can detect alpha, beta, and gamma radiation. However, they cannot
differentiate which one is beta, or gamma or alpha radiation.
B
inert gas
Y
A
HV
Figure 7.9: Geiger counter
?
Activity 7.4: Demonstrations
Work in a small group. Before you begin, make sure that you know the safety
precautions that you must follow when using radioactive materials. Set up the
equipment as shown in the figure below in cooperation with your teacher.
data-logging computer
absorbing material
recording counts
568
radioactive source
G-M tube
paper
aluminium
holder for
lead
absorbing material
The Geiger-Muller tube can detect all the three types of radiations. Place absorber
sheets which progressively increase in density between the source and the detector,
and record the average count rate in each case. You can also carry out the experiment
306
Grade 11
using computer software to remove all risk of exposure to radiation hazards.
Note that:
Some counters can separate betas from gammas by absorbing the betas
in a metallic cover.
Few have windows thin enough to detect alphas.
If you can detect betas and gammas, use aluminum sheets and lead
sheets to show that betas are stopped by aluminum but lead is required
to stop gammas.
If there is no any detector in your school, it might be possible to contact a local
hospital regarding the use of nuclear medicine for analysis or treatment. If a tour
cannot be arranged, perhaps your teacher may invite a specialist and He/she can
speak to the class.
Use either a prism or diffraction grating spectrometer to show the difference
between continuous or line spectra. A simple absorption spectrum can be shown
by crushing leaves in alcohol. The chlorophyll solution will absorb at both ends of
the spectrum. ß rays spectrum is continuous among a and Y rays spectrum.
?
Activity 7.5
Research the common detectors for α-particle, ß-particle and y-rays
In a small group: Research the various forms of detectors for nuclear radiation.
Prepare a summary of your research to present to the rest of your class. Choose an
appropriate format for your presentation.
The half life
Here, we consider a system containing many nuclei of the same species at some
initial time. The number of any radioactive parent nuclei decreases with time since
it emits radiation in the form of α, or ß emissions. The decay of a particular nucleus
cannot be predicted and is not affected by physical influences like temperature. The
rate of isotope decay depends on two factors.
The total number of undecayed nuclei present in the system. That is, on
doubling the average number of undecayed nuclei must double the rate
of decay.
The stability of the isotope. Some isotopes decay more rapidly than
307
Physics | Student Text Book
others. The rate of decay gives the number of nuclei that decay per
second.
In general, the decay rate, called the activity, A, is given by
At -AN
where
The negative sign shows the decrease in the number of the radioactive
nuclei with time,
N is the number of undecayed nuclei at the subsequent time t,
The decay constant a of a radioactive nuclide is defined as its prob-
ability of decay per unit time; having SI unit s⁻¹. It is a positive rate
also called the exponential decay constant, disintegration constant, rate
constant, or transformation constant.
The SI unit of activity, A, is Becquerel (Bq); where 1Bq = 1 decay per second. We can
also use the unit Curie, Ci, where 1 Ci = X 10¹⁰ Bq.
The quantity of the parent radioactive nuclei is subject to exponential decay since
it decreases at a rate proportional to its current value. This exponential decay law is
given by
=
where N₀ is the number of undecayed nuclei at an initial time t0 = 0.
In practice, the stability of radioactive nuclei against decay and the decay rate are
most often estimated in terms of the half-life, t1/2, rather than the decay constant
a. The half-life is defined as the time at which half of the original nuclei have
decayed. Or, it can also be stated somewhat differently as the time after which one
half of the original number of nuclei remains untransformed. Since nuclear decay is
an example of a purely statistical process, a more precise definition of half-life is
that each nucleus has a 50% chance of living for a time equal to one half-life, t1/2.
The half-life of a certain decay can be determined by using N = N (t₁/₂) = N₀/2, in
to exponential decay law as:
Scientists predicted that the half-lives of naturally occurring nuclear reactions fall in
a very wide range - vary from fractions of milliseconds like Radium C (), to billions
of years like U-235 (4.5 billion years). For some induced radioactive elements
(initially stable made radioactive by exposure to specific radiation), the half life is a
few millionths or even hundred millionths of a second.
308
Grade 11
?
Activity 7.6:
Perform experiments on Half life simulation using free applets available from the
internet.
Key term:
The half life of a radioactive isotope is the amount of time it takes for one half of
the radioactive isotope to decay.
Why do we use a term like half-life rather than lifetime?
The answer can be found by examining Figure 7.10, which shows how the number
of radioactive nuclei in a sample of initial value N₀, decreases with time. The number
of radionuclide's left at t₁/₂ is N₀/2. Half of the remaining nuclei decay in the
next half-life (2t₁/₂), is N₀ / 4. Then, it becomes N₀ /8 in the third half-life and so
on. For n integral numbers of half-lives, the number of original nuclides left, N, can
be calculated by
N = 2⁻ⁿ N₀
No
Number of
N=No
undecayed
Nuclei
No/2
No/4
No/8
No/16
t₁/₂ 2t1/2 3t₁/₂ 1/2
Time(t)
Figure 7.10: Number of undecayed nuclei vs time graph of a radioactive isotope
Examples 7.3
1) The half-life of radium is equal to 1590 years. What is the activity of 1 g of
radium-226? Solution: t1/2 = 1590 yrs = 50176584000 S
The gram molecular weight of Ra-226 is M = 226.0254098 g/mol. There are Nₐ =
6.023 X 10²³ atoms/mol of radium. Therefore, the number of atoms of 1g of Ra-
226 would be:
309
Physics I Student Text Book
N = Nₐ X = 1gx6.023x10²³ atoms / mol =2.664x10²¹ atoms
M
226.0254098 g / mol
The decay constant is,
0.693
0.693
a =
=
=1.381x10⁻¹¹ₛ⁻¹ a = 0.693/t1/2=13.81 pBq
t₁/₂
50176584000s
The desired activity is
A = AN = X 10⁻¹¹ X 10²¹ = 3.6793 X 10¹⁰ Bq
A = 150176584000s
A = 1.23 x10¹⁰ Bq
That is, the number of decays per second in one gram of radium is 12300 million.
2) The radioisotope strontium-90 has a half-life of 38.1 years. If a sample contains
400 mg of Sr-90, how many milligrams will remain when the age of the sample is
190.5 years?
Solution
t1/2 = 38.1 years, t = 190.5 years
From the equation t₁/₂ = =0.693/X, we obtain
a = 0.693 = 0.693 = 0.018189 yr⁻¹
Then the mass remained after 190.5 years becomes
Review Questions 7.2
1. In the radioactive decay of radon-222, both alpha and gamma radiation are
emitted, with the latter having energy of 8.2 X 10⁻¹⁴ J per nucleus decayed:
2226Rn
2.
How much energy does 1mol of Rn release in the form of gamma radiation?
310
Grade 11
3. What can be the reason that tritium (H-3) isotope is a radioisotope where there
is no electrostatic repulsive force in its nucleus? How does this isotope decay?
4. Why does Uranium 235 decay via alpha decay (by the way of Thorium-231)
into 231 Pa?
5. You know that excessive exposure to radiation may damage living tissues and
organs, depending on the amount of radiation received (i.e. the dose). Write
some factors on which the extent of the potential damage depends on?
6. It is known that radioactive decay is a statistical process. Is it possible to
determine the constancy of t1/2, or a for a given radioactive element with one
of few atomic nuclei?
7. Determine the reaction equations of the decays of U-238 by alpha emission
and Th-234 by beta minus emission?
8. Does the probability per unit time that a radioactive nucleus will decay,
increase, decrease or remain the same independent of time?
9. Compare Geiger counter with Scintillator.
10. Given alcohol, argon gas, oxygen and hydrogen gas, which one of these acts
as ionizing gas in Geiger Muller counter?
11. What is the activity of a sample of 100 million atoms of carbon-14? The decay
constant, 2, is 3.84 X 10⁻¹² s-¹.
12. Here is a table showing the activity of a sample of technetium-99, a gamma
emitter which is often used in medical investigations. Plot the activity VS time
graph to show this data and work out the half life
Activity (Bq)
Time (hours)
4000
O
2000
6
1000
12
500
18
250
24
125
30
75
36
13. How do the electric charges of alpha, beta and gamma rays differ?
14. How does the source differ for a beam of gamma rays and a beam of X rays?
15. When beta emission occurs, what change takes place in an atomic nucleus?
16. Among the three radiations, alpha, beta and gamma radiations, which radiation
is the most fatal to the human beings?
17. Why does neutron radiation attain the highest penetration depth compared to
alpha and beta radiations?
311
Physics
Student Text Book
7.3 Use of nuclear radiation
By the end of this section you should be able to:
investigate the benefits and hazards (nuclear waste) of nuclear energy
production;
discuss and appreciate the application of nuclear medicine
?
Brainstorming questions
1. Have you ever heard that goiter can be treated using radiations?
2. Have you ever heard about how ages of fossils such as Lucy/Dinknesh are
determined? Outside of some harmful applications such as nuclear weaponry,
there remains a wide array/range of ways in which radioactive material and
the radiation it gives off remain useful in the daily lives of people all over the
world. The nuclear technologies are in use to improve agriculture, industries,
medicine, water and sanitation and power generation. Among these, only two
uses, namely, medical application and radioactive dating are discussed below.
Medical applications of nuclear radiation
Nuclear medicine uses radioactive material inside the body to see how organs or
tissue are functioning (for diagnosis) or to destroy damaged or diseased organs or
tissue (for treatment).
For diagnosis, nuclear medicine can show how the organs or tissues are functioning.
For most diagnostic procedures, a tracer, which contains the radioactive material,
is injected, swallowed, or inhaled. Then, a radiation detector is used to see how
much of the tracer is absorbed or how it reacts in the organ or tissue. The nuclear
diagnostics are more often used in imaging.
Some radioactive nuclides in use for diagnosis include fluorine-18, gallium-67,
krypton-81m, rubidium-82, nitrogen-13, technetium-99m, indium-111, iodine-123,
xenon-133, and thallium-201.
To diagnose cancer, positron emitting nucleotides (PET) are used to scan for a
short period. In this type of nuclear medicine, the tracer is used to show the natural
activity of cells, providing more detailed information on how organs are working
and if there is damage to the cells. Some common uses of PET scans include
diagnosing heart disease, Alzheimer's disease, and brain disorders. PET scans are
often combined with computed tomography (CT) scans or magnetic resonance
312
Grade 11
imaging (MRI) which provides three-dimensional images of the organ.
Nuclear treatment in Ethiopia
Based on the basics of medical application, in Ethiopia, there are Nuclear Technology
activities. Previously, the Black Lion Specialized Hospital (a teaching hospital under Addis
Ababa University) uses radioisotope for the treatment of cancer.
For treatment (Nuclear radiation therapy):- Radiation therapy is a type of cancer
treatment that uses high energy beams to destroy cancer cells and shrink tumors.
Cancer cells grow and divide faster than most normal cells. The radiation works by
making small breaks in the DNA inside cells. These breaks keep cancer cells from
growing and dividing and cause them to die. The radiation may injure noncancerous
cells, but most are able to recover. There are two broad types of radiation therapy
that doctors use to treat cancers: internal and external.
External beam radiation, or teletherapy: In this type of treatment, the
energy beams come from a machine outside of the body. The beam is
precisely aimed and it penetrates the body to reach the cancer site. For
example, such treatment can be carried out using a gamma beam from
a radioactive cobalt-60 source.
Internal radiation therapy: Brachytherapy and Systemic radiation thera-
py: In Brachytherapy, a doctor places usually a gamma or beta emitter,
in or near the cancer site. The implants come in different shapes, which
include: tube, wire, capsule, seeds, and pellets. For example, io-
dine-131 is commonly used to treat thyroid cancer and non-malignant
thyroid disorders. It is produced in wire form. In Systemic radiation
therapy, the patient requires swallowing a radioactive substance, which
travels throughout the body to find and kill the cancerous cells. Alter-
natively, a healthcare professional may inject the radioactive substance
into a person's vein.
?
Activity 7.8:
Contact a knowledgeable person such as a radiologist in a local hospital for
demonstration regarding the use of nuclear medicine for analysis or treatment.
If a tour cannot be arranged your teacher may perhaps invite a specialist to speak
to the class.
313
Physics
Student Text Book
Radioactive dating
Radioactive dating or radioisotope dating is a technique which is used to date materials
by use of naturally occurring radioactivity.
That is, in radioactive dating, scientists count the number of parent isotopes and
daughter isotopes formed from the nuclear decay to determine how many half-
lives have passed and provide a suggestion of the age of an object. Thus, once the
isotopic abundances of each parent/daughter elements is determined using the
mass spectrometer, the age (t), of the object can be calculated using the formula
N=N0e^lambda*t.
Its most famous application is carbon-14 dating. Carbon-14 has a half-life of
5730 years. Radioactive carbon has the same chemistry as stable carbon, and so it
mixes into the ecosphere, where it is consumed and becomes part of every living
organism. Carbon-14 has an abundance of 1.3 parts per trillion of normal carbon.
Thus, if you know the number of carbon nuclei in an object (perhaps determined
by mass and Avogadro's number), you multiply that number by 1.3x10⁻¹² to find
the number of ¹⁴C nuclei in the object. When an organism dies, carbon exchange
with the environment ceases, and ¹⁴C is not replenished as it decays. By comparing
the abundance of 14 C in an artifact with the normal abundance in living tissue, it is
possible to determine the artifact's age (or time since death).
Carbon-14 dating can be used for biological tissues as old as 50 or 60 thousand years,
but is most accurate for younger samples, since the abundance of ¹⁴C nuclei in them
is greater. Very old biological materials contain no ¹⁴C at all. There are instances in
which the date of an artifact can be determined by other means, such as historical
knowledge or tree-ring counting. These cross-references have confirmed the validity
of carbon-14 dating and permitted us to calibrate the technique as well. Carbon-14
dating revolutionized parts of archaeology.
Localized Applications of radioactive dating
Dinikenesh or Lucy was discovered in 1974 in Ethiopia, at Hadar, in Afar by
paleoanthropologist Donald Johanson. After all her bone fragments were collected
and reconstructed, Lucy was taken to USA so that her age is measured precisely.
Which method was used to measure the age of Lucy? Can carbon dating be applicable?
Carbon-14 has the same chemistry as stable carbon, and so it mixes into the
ecosphere, where it is consumed and becomes part of every living organism. When
the organism dies, carbon exchange with the environment ceases, and as a result
C-14 is not replenished as it decays. Since the ratio of C-14 to total carbon nuclei is
very small (about 1.3x10⁻¹²), C-14 concentration falls nearly to zero after about nine
314
Grade 11
half-lives (about more than 50 thousand years). This implies that Lucy is too old for
radiocarbon dating and hence other methods were employed to find her age.
The appropriate method used was
argon-argon (⁴⁰Ar-³⁹Ar) dating on
tiny crystals in layers of volcanic
ash sandwiching the sediments
where Dinikenesh was found. In
this measurement, her age was
found to be 3.18 million years.
Figure 7.11 shows several hundred
fossils of Lucy 40% pieces of the
skeleton of female found in Afar
Figure 7.11: Several hundred fossils of Lucy
region in Ethiopia.
with 40 percent pieces.
Review Questions 7.3
1. State some uses of radioactive isotopes.
2. Why might a radioactive source be injected into a patient?
3. What are radioactive tracers used for?
4. What is radioactive dating? Explain how it works.
5. Injected radioactive sources can be used as tracers to make soft tissues, such
as blood vessels or the kidneys, show up through medical imaging processes.
Which radiation type should the radioactive source used emit?
6. Depending on the object that scientists are trying to study, different radioactive
dating techniques can be used. Why do scientists prefer to use:
A.K-40 for dating of rocks that are older than 100,000?
B. C-14 for dating of fossils and some rocks?
7. How can carbon dating be used to measure age of dead organisms?
8. List some commonly used element pairs to establish absolute ages.
9. Right after scanning using radiation for diagnosis, does the body remain
radioactive? Is it harmful to approach the irradiated person?
315
Physics
I
Student Text Book
7.4 Nuclear Reaction and Energy Production
By the end of this section you should be able to:
distinguish between the two types of nuclear reaction;
appreciate the sun as a big nuclear reactor.
discuss the use (energy production, production of important isotopes, etc.)
and misuse (nuclear bomb) of artificial nuclear reaction.
Nuclear reactions are processes in which one or more nuclides are produced from the
collisions between two atomic nuclei or from the collisions between a nucleus and
a subatomic particle. In general, there are two types of nuclear reactions, namely;
fission reaction, and
fusion reaction.
Nuclear fission reaction
Nuclear fission is the splitting of a heavy atomic nucleus such as uranium-235, into two
fragments of roughly equal mass. Nuclear fission is a form of nuclear transmutation,
meaning that the starting atoms are not the same elements as the resultant - or
daughter - product atoms. In nuclear reactors, nuclear fission usually takes place by
inducing neutrons into the parent nuclei. In neutron induced fission reactions, two
additional neutrons are released per one incident neutron.
Nuclear fission is accompanied by the release of a large amount of energy. Part of
this energy is converted into the kinetic energy of the fission fragments and the
remaining energy is converted into different forms such as heat and sound. For
example, consider the fission reaction equation on U-235, given by:
"Ba+"Kr+3'n+200MeV
The reaction is described pictorially as shown in Figure 7.12.
316
Grade 11
144
56
Ba
235
92
U
Neutron
200
Neutron
MeV
Neutron
Neutron
89
36
Kr
Figure 7.12: The atomic fission of 235U.
In this reaction, the sum of the nuclear binding energy U-235 and the kinetic
energy of the incident neutron (n-1) is equal to the sum of kinetic energy of the two
daughter nuclides (Ba-144 and Kr-89); the kinetic energy of the three neutrons and
the 200MeV energy, which is directly released
Key terms:
Nuclear fission is the splitting of a nucleus of an atom into two or more smaller
nuclei.
Nuclear fusion is a reaction in which two or more atomic nuclei are combined to
form one or more different atomic nuclei and subatomic particles.
Example 7.4
A nuclear fission reaction is given below. Complete the equation, find the value of X
and determine the type of the element, Y.
²³⁵U+¹n X Y + 139 Cs + 2 + energy
Solution:
The equation is balanced on both sides so the total mass number on the left side
must be the same as the total mass number on the right side. Thus,
235 + 1 = X + 139 + 2, or X = 95, which corresponds to Rb-95.
317
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 7.9: Simulating nuclear reactions
Simulate nuclear reactions produced by high speed particles using marbles
accelerated down sloping aluminum channel into saucer. Those in saucer are
analogous to target nuclei. Include several marbles of differing sizes. Show effect
of speed by launching from different height and angles and effect of mass and
increased momentum of projectiles by using different marbles. Marble sufficient
momentum can cause ejection of one or more marbles from saucer.
Discuss analogy to bombarding nuclei with particles of ever increasing mass
proton, deuteron, and alpha.
Applications of fission reaction
Chain nuclear reaction:
Fission reaction has several applications. Its
In a chain reaction, neutrons
application in nuclear reactors is the concern
released in fission produce an
of this section. There are two types of nuclear
additional fission in at least one
reactors: power reactor and research reactor.
further nucleus. This nucleus in
turn produces neutrons, and the
Power reactors (PR) are used to generate
process repeats. The process may
electricity by the process of nuclear fission. In
be controlled (nuclear power) or
a chain nuclear reaction, undertaking in nuclear
uncontrolled (nuclear weapons).
reactor, the kinetic energy of fission fragments
Chain reaction occurs only above
and the energy released will be converted to heat.
a certain mass called critical
The heat produces steam which is used to drive
mass.
the turbine of a generator to produce electricity.
Pressuriser
Control rods
Steam
Steam
generator
Steel
pressure
vessel
Water
Fuel elements
Reinforced concrete
containment and shield
Figure 7.14: Scheme of a power reactor
318
Grade 11
There are several components common to most types of reactor:
Fuel: Uranium is the basic fuel. Usually pellets of uranium oxide
(UO₂) are arranged in tubes to form fuel rods. The rods are arranged
into fuel assemblies in the reactor core.
Moderator: Material in the core which slows down the neutrons re-
leased from fission so that they cause more fission. It is usually water,
but may be heavy water or graphite.
Control rods or blades: These are made with neutron-absorbing mate-
rial such as cadmium, hafnium or boron, and are inserted or withdrawn
from the core to control the rate of reaction, or to halt it.
Coolant: A fluid circulating through the core so as to transfer the heat
from it. In light water reactors the water moderator functions also as
primary coolant.
Pressure vessel or pressure tubes: Usually a robust steel vessel contain-
ing the reactor core and moderator/coolant, but it may be a series of
tubes holding the fuel and conveying the coolant through the surround-
ing moderator.
Steam generator: Part of the cooling system of pressurized water re-
actors where the high-pressure primary coolant bringing heat from the
reactor is used to make steam for the turbine, in a secondary circuit.
Containment: The structure around the reactor and associated steam
generators which is designed to protect it from outside intrusion and to
protect those outside from the effects of radiation in case of any seri-
ous malfunction inside. It is typically a meter-thick concrete and steel
structure.
Research reactors (RR) are nuclear fission-based nuclear reactors that serve
primarily as a neutron source. Research reactors are simpler than power reactors and
operate at lower temperatures. They need far less fuel, and far less fission products
build up as the fuel is used. They are also called non-power reactors, in contrast to
power reactors. The neutrons produced by a research reactor are used for different
purposes such as neutron scattering, analysis and testing of materials, production of
radioisotopes, research and public outreach, and education.
Radioisotopes can be produced in research reactors by exposing suitable target
materials to the intense neutron radiation for an appropriate time. The quality and
specific activity of the radioisotopes produced depends on both the target and the
irradiation conditions. A wide range of isotopes are made at reactors, from elements
as light as carbon-14 to as heavy as mercury-203, with irradiations ranging from
minutes to weeks.
319
Physics
Student Text Book
For example, Mo-99-the parent to the widely used medical diagnostic radioisotope
Tc-99m-is usually produced via neutron-induced fission of targets with U-235
using a 4- to 8-day irradiation time.
The problems posed by nuclear waste of reactors
Nuclear waste refers to the byproducts of nuclear reactors. One of the main
difficulties is that the isotopes used in nuclear power stations typically have very long
half lives. Plutonium-239 has a half-life of 24100 years; in contrast plutonium-238
has a half-life of 88 years. Spent nuclear fuel is the most important source of waste
from nuclear power stations and is mainly unconverted uranium. About 3% of it is
fission products from nuclear reactions. The actinides (uranium, plutonium, and
curium) are responsible for the bulk of the long-term radioactivity, whereas the
fission products are responsible for the bulk of the short-term radioactivity.
After about 5 percent of a nuclear fuel rod has reacted inside a nuclear reactor, it will
no longer able to be used as fuel due to the build-up of fission products.
Scientists are experimenting on methods for reusing these rods in order to reduce
waste and use the remaining actinides as fuel.
?
Activity 7.10 : Research nuclear power
1. Work in a small group to research one of the following topics. Students can be
assigned to investigate and report
The fraction of energy generated from nuclear power in Africa and the rest
of the world
Peaceful uses of Nuclear Radiation in Ethiopia and Africa
Nuclear Facilities in Africa
Present your findings to the rest of your class in a form of your choice.
7.4.1. Nuclear fusion reaction and its uses
Nuclear fusion reaction is a process of making a single heavy nucleus from the
combination of two or more lighter nuclei. In most cases, fusion reaction releases
more energy than fission reaction. The process releases energy because the total
mass of the resulting single nucleus is less than the mass of the two original nuclei.
The leftover mass becomes energy.
320
Grade 11
Use of nuclear fusion as source of energy in the sun
The principal source of energy in the sun is a net fusion reaction in which four
hydrogen nuclei fuses and produce a helium nucleus and two positrons. This is a net
reaction of a more complicated series of events:
41H ₄He + 2 +1ß
The mass of the resulting helium nucleus has a mass that is 0.7% less than that of
the four hydrogen nuclei. This lost mass (the mass defect) is converted into energy
during the fusion. The energy produced in this reaction is about 3.6 X 10¹¹ kJ of
energy per mole of He-4 produced. This energy is greater by 20 fold than the energy
produced by the nuclear fission of one mole of U-235, and over 3 million times
larger than the energy produced by (chemical) combustion of one mole of octane.
The heavy isotopes of hydrogen, a deuteron, and a triton, , also undergo fusion at
extremely high temperatures. They form a helium nucleus and a neutron:
2H + 3H ₄He +
This change proceeds with a mass loss of 0.0188 amu, corresponding to the release
of of He-4 formed. The very high temperature is necessary to give the nuclei
enough kinetic energy to overcome the very strong repulsive forces resulting from
the positive charges on their nuclei so they can collide.
Figure 7.13 shows the cyclic sun fusion reaction to form a very strong release in
the electromagnetic radiation.
Nuclear Fusion
Deuterium
Fusion
Helium
Energy
Tritium
Neutron
Figure 7.13: Nuclear fusion reaction process of the H isotopes.
Hydrogen bomb: One of the misuses of nuclear fusion reaction is its application for
hydrogen bomb, which has higher destructive power and greater efficiencies than
atomic bombs. Fusion weapons are also referred to as thermonuclear bombs.
321
Physics I Student Text Book
?
Activity 7.10:
Observe simulation of Nuclear Collisions using free applets available from the
internet. Demonstrate nuclear reactions using virtual laboratory simulation
software's like PhET.
Review Questions 7.4
1. List uses of applications of nuclear reaction
2. What are the basic differences between nuclear fission and fusion reaction
processes?
3. Complete the following nuclear reactions:
(a) 'Be+|H ⁶Li+
(b) He 13N+_
4. Describe the nature of research reactors by comparing it with the power
reactors.
5. Why is Technetium-99 considered as the most important radioactive isotope
for medical applications?
6. Is nuclear energy from radioisotopes in use for space travel?
7. Is there any radiation hazard from nuclear wastes of nuclear reactors? If so,
how?
8. Caesium-137 is a by-product of nuclear fission within a nuclear reactor.
a) Copy and complete this equation which describes the production of
137 55 Cs by finding X and y.
b) The half-life of Cesium is 30 years. When the fuel rods are removed
from a nuclear reactor core, the total activity of caesium-137 is 5.8 X
10¹⁵ Bq. After how many years will this have fallen to 1.6 X 10⁶ Bq?
c) Comment on the problems of storage of the fuel rods over this time
period.
9. Does Fusion produce radioactive nuclear waste the same way fission does?
10. Is there chain reaction in nuclear fusion? Can fusion cause a nuclear accident?
11. Can fusion reactors be used to produce weapons?
12. In the fusion reaction below, determine the mass defect.
H :He+,B+energy
322
Grade 11
7.5 Safety Rules Against Hazards of Nuclear
Radiation
By the end of this section you should be able to:
implement safety rules against hazards of nuclear radiation.
Nuclear Safety rules
Nuclear safety is defined by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as "The
achievement of proper operating conditions, prevention of accidents or mitigation
of accident consequences, resulting in protection of workers, the public and the
environment from undue radiation hazards". The IAEA defines nuclear security as
"The prevention and detection of and response to, theft, sabotage, unauthorized
access, illegal transfer or other malicious acts involving nuclear materials, other
radioactive substances or their associated facilities' This covers nuclear power plants
and all other nuclear facilities, the transportation of nuclear materials, and the use
and storage of nuclear materials for medical, power, industry, and military uses.
The nuclear power industry has improved the safety and performance of reactors
and has proposed new and safer reactor designs. However, a perfect safety cannot be
guaranteed. Potential sources of problems include human errors and external events
that have a greater impact than anticipated: The designers of reactors at Fukushima
in Japan did not anticipate that a tsunami generated by an earthquake would disable
the backup systems that were supposed to stabilize the reactor after the earthquake.
Catastrophic scenarios involving terrorist attacks, insider sabotage, and cyber-
attacks are also conceivable.
Nuclear safety therefore covers at minimum:
Extraction, transportation, storage, processing, and disposal of fission-
able materials
Safety of nuclear power generators
Control and safe management of nuclear weapons, nuclear material
capable of use as a weapon, and other radioactive materials
Safe handling, accountability and use in industrial, medical and re-
search contexts
Disposal of nuclear waste
Limitations on exposure to radiation
323
Physics
Student Text Book
Protecting yourself from radiation
Radiation is part of our life. Background radiation, coming primarily from natural
minerals, is around us all the time. Fortunately, there are very few situations
where an average person is exposed to uncontrolled sources of radiation above
background. Nevertheless, it is wise to be prepared and know what to do if such
a situation arises.
One of the best ways to be prepared is to understand the radiation protection
principles of time, distance and shielding.
Time: For people who are exposed to radiation in addition to natu-
ral background radiation, limiting or minimizing the exposure time
reduces the dose from the radiation source.
Distance: Just as the heat from a fire reduces as you move further
away, the dose of radiation decreases dramatically as you increase
your distance from the source.
Shielding: Barriers of lead, concrete, or water provide protection
from penetrating gamma rays and X-rays. This is why certain radio-
active materials are stored under water or in concrete or lead-lined
rooms, and why dentists place a lead blanket on patients receiving
X-rays of their teeth. Therefore, inserting the proper shield between
you and a radiation source will greatly reduce or eliminate the dose
you receive.
Safety precautions when using radioactive sources in schools
Radioactive sources which are used in school are usually very weak. They can
only be used in the presence of an authorized teacher. They are kept in a sealed
container except when they are being used in an experiment or demonstration.
The containers can be designed based on the appropriate shields. They are
immediately returned to the container when the experiment or demonstration is
finished. When using the radioactive source it should be:
handled with tongs or forceps, never with bare hands. Moreover,
hands must be washed after the experiment and definitely before
eating.
kept at arm's length, pointing away from the body.
always kept as far as possible from the eyes.
What to do in the event of a nuclear accident?
What are the three main safety guidelines for nuclear reactors?
324
Grade 11
?
Small group work:
Gather information about the possible sources of nuclear radiation from
the internet.
Enquire about radiation hazards in your locality by having a meeting with
the nearby Radiation Protection Authority and what could be done to
protect yourself and others from radiation hazards.
If there is no nearby authority, let you send your questions to an accessible
body of authority by electronic media.
Let you organize a report about what measures you need to take as school
community and present it to the whole class.
?
Expert Guest:
Your teacher will invite you a medical personnel from the nearby medical
establishment who is knowledgeable about nuclear medicine. Ask the guest to
explain
how and why nuclear medicine is practiced, where the medicine
comes from and how it is transported; handled, stored.
what measures should be implemented during use and disposal of
these medicines. To actively engage with the guest, you need prior
reading.
Discuss about hazards of nuclear radiations and safety with your
teacher.
325
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Review questions 7.5
1. How does radiation affect the public? How can you help the public to
protect from radiation hazards?
2. How do you need to be careful around radiation?
3. How can exposure to radiation be minimized?
4. How is a person contaminated by radiation such as from bomb get
decontaminated?
5. Is nuclear waste from nuclear reactors harmful to humans and the
environment? If so how can we protect the hazard?
6. What barriers provide protection from radiation produced by a nuclear
power plant?
326
Grade 11
UNIT SUMMARY
c
The chemical shorthand to describe atom X, where Z is the atomic number, and A
= Z +N, is AX.
c
The atom and the nucleus are assumed spherical and the atomic radius is estimated
by:
where A is the mass number of the atom; R₀ is the radius of the nucleus which is
roughly equal to R₀ = 1.2fm and 1 femtometer (1 fm) = 10⁻¹⁵ m.
c
A member of a family of an element with the same number of protons but different
number of neutrons is called an isotope. Some examples of isotopes of elements:
c
The strong nuclear force is a very short-range attractive force that acts between
nucleons: protons and neutrons. The strong nuclear force is strong enough to
withstand the electrical repulsion up within a distance of slightly more than the
radius of a nucleon, 10-15 m Both nucleons are affected by the nuclear force
almost identically.
c
The weak nuclear force acts inside of individual nucleons, which means that it is
even shorter ranged than the strong nuclear force. The weak nuclear force is a force
that causes decay of an atom by beta emission.
c
Nuclear binding energy is the energy that holds nucleons together. Another
equivalent definition of binding energy is the minimum energy that is required to
disassemble the nucleus of an atom into its constituent nucleons.
c
The mass of an atomic nucleus is less than the sum of the individual masses of the
free constituent protons and neutrons. The energy equivalent to this difference in
mass can be calculated by the Einstein equation,
BE = Amc2
where BE is the nuclear binding energy, and c is the speed of light. This 'missing
mass' is known as the mass defect, and represents the energy that was released when
the nucleus was formed.
c
The mass defect of an atom can be calculated by:
where Zm p is the total mass of the protons; (A - Z)mₙ is the total mass of the neutrons,
and M is the mass of the nucleus. Using this into the former equation, we obtain:
c
Nuclear energy is usually expressed in atomic energy unit (aeu), where:
1 aeu = c² X amu
Or, in megaelectron volt (MeV), where
1MeV=1.602x10⁻¹³ J, and 1 aeu = 931.1MeV
327
Physics I Student Text Book
c
When mass is in amu/u, the nuclear binding energy in MeV becomes,
BE=[Zm₂+(A-Z)m,-M]x931.1MeV
c
Binding energy per nucleon (BEN) is the average energy required to remove an
individual nucleon from a nucleus. It is given by
BE
BEN
=
c
Radioactivity is the phenomenon of the A spontaneous disintegration of unstable
atomic nuclei to atomic nuclei to form more energetically stable atomic nuclei.
Radioactive decay is a highly exoergic, statistically random, process that occurs
with a small amount of mass being converted to energy.
c
Representations of nuclear decay reaction of element with chemical symbol X by
alpha ( α a), or beta (B⁻, , or ß+) emission to give a daughter element Y are:
α-emission : AX
ß⁻ - emission : X
ß⁺ emission : X
C
Gamma rays are high energy, high frequency, electromagnetic radiations. Gamma
radiation usually accompanies alpha or beta decay.
C
Radiations damage cells by ionizing atoms or molecules by removing electrons
from them.
c
Absorbed dose describes the amount of energy deposited per unit mass in an
object or person. The units for absorbed dose are gray (Gy, international unit) and
rad; where 1Gy = 1J/kg and 1rad = 0.01 Gy = 0.01 J/kg.
c
Radiation doses above 3 Gy (300 rad) can be fatal and doses above 6 Gy (600
rad) are almost certain to be fatal, with death occurring within several months (in
shorter times at higher doses).
c
A radiation detector is a device that measures the ionization of radiations (i.e.,
creating electrons and positively charged ions). Scintilator, Gaseous ionization
detectors and Geiger counter.
c
The rate of isotope decay is called the activity, A, and is given by
c
where the negative sign shows the decrease in the number of the radioactive
nuclei with time, N(t) is the number of undecayed nuclei at the subsequent time t,
the decay constant A of a radioactive nuclide is defined as its probability of decay
per unit time; having SI unit s-1. It is a positive rate also called the exponential
decay constant, disintegration constant, rate constant, or transformation constant.
c
The SI unit of activity, A, is Becquerel (Bq); where 1Bq = 1 decay per second. We
can also use the unit Curie, Ci, where 1 Ci = X 10¹⁰ Bq.
328
Grade 11
c
If N₀ is quantity at time t =0, the quantity of the parent radioactive nuclei is subject
to exponential decay given by
c
The half-life is defined as the time at which half of the original nuclei have decayed.
Or, it can also be stated somewhat differently as the time after which one half of the
original number of nuclei remains untransformed.
C
The half-life is related to the decay constant by
0.693
c
Fission occurs when a neutron slams into a larger atom, forcing it to excite and
split into two smaller atoms-also known as fission products.
c
Nuclear fusion reaction is a process of making a single heavy nucleus from the
combination of two or more lighter nuclei.
c
A nuclear reactor is a device used to initiate and control a fission nuclear chain
reaction or nuclear fusion reactions.
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS 7
1. Discuss (a) Rutherford and (b) Bohr model of an atom.
2. What are the radii of U-238 and U-235?
3. What do you mean by reduced mass? How is this mass related with the nuclear
binding energy?
4. State some uses of radioactive isotopes.
5. State one risk or danger associated with radioactivity.
6. What are the basic differences between nuclear fission and fusion reaction pro-
cesses?
7. Write the nuclear reaction equation for K-242 that decays by beta minus emission.
Do the same for Pu-239 decays by alpha emission.
8. Compare alpha and beta emission interms of their nature, relative ionizing effect,
relative penetrating power, the effect of magnetic and electric field on the radia-
tion, and the common detectors.
9. What are research reactors (RR)? How are RR important for the in agriculture and
medical applications? How are the research reactors (RR) different from the power
reactors (PR)
10. When a patient undergoes radiotherapy, how does medical staff protect themslves
from radiation?
11. What effects can high doses of radiation have on the human eyes?
12. Iodine-131, in the form of iodine chloride is used to treat thyroid cancer. Why
does the patient radioactive substance orally to treat the cancer?
329