Unit 2: Characteristics and
Classification of Organisms
Content
Learning competencies
2.1. Characteristics of living things
State the characteristics of living things
2.2. Taxonomy of living things
Classify living things based on taxonomic prin-
2.2.1. Principles of classification
ciples
2.2.2. Taxonomic hierarchies in biological
classification
Argue for or against the importance of classifi-
2.3. Relevance of classification
cation
2.4. Linnaean system of nomenclature
Describe the system of Linnaean nomenclature
2.5. Common Ethiopian animals and plants
Classify common Ethiopian animals and plants
2.6. The five-kingdom system of classification
based on the taxonomic categories.
2.6.1. Kingdom Monera
2.6.2. Kingdom Protista
List the characteristic features of the five king-
2.6.3. Kingdom Fungi
doms
2.6.4. Kingdom Plantae
Appreciate the works of renowned taxonomists
2.6.5 Kingdom Animalia
in Ethiopia
2.7. Renowned taxonomists in Ethiopia
2.1 Characteristics of living things
Objectives
Activity 2.1: Reflective
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discussion
state the characteristics of living things.
If somebody places an object
in front of you and asks you
whether it is alive, what
would you do?
Living things have variety of shapes and forms. Thus, biologists study
life in many different ways. Biologists often live with wildlife, collect
Would you poke it to see if it
reacts?
fossils, or listen to whales. For example, they count how many times
a hummingbird's wings beat per second. What makes something
Would you watch it closely
to see if it moves or breathes?
"alive"? Anyone could deduce that a galloping horse is alive and a car
is not, but why? We cannot say, "If it moves, it's alive" because a car
Would you dissect it to look
at its parts?
can move, and gelatin can wiggle in a bowl. They certainly are not
alive. Although we cannot define life with a single sentence, we can
come up with a series of characteristics shared by living systems.
Grade 9 Biology
19
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
What are the characteristics of living things?
Activity 2.2: Field
Observation
Some of the properties that are shared by all living things are listed
below:
Discuss what makes living
things different from non-
All living things are made up of one or more cells: Those made up of
living. Go outside your
one cell, such as bacteria are termed 'unicellular' and those made up
village or your school
of more than one cell, such as plants are termed 'multi-cellular'.
compound and sort the
things you observe into
All living things require energy: All organisms use a source of energy
living and non-living. Based
for their metabolic activities. For example, every muscle in your body
on your observations, write
is powered by the energy you obtain from your diet. Some organisms
a short report and present to
use energy from the sunlight to make their foods through the process
your classmates.
of photosynthesis. Such organisms, for example plants, are known as
producers or autotrophs. Other organisms cannot make their own
food but consume others. Such organisms are known as consumers
or heterotrophs.
All living organisms respond to stimuli: organisms can detect or
sense stimuli (change) in the internal or external environment and
make appropriate responses.
All living things can grow: Growth is a permanent increase in size
and mass due to an increase in cell number or cell size or both.
Even bacteria and single-celled creatures show an increase in size.
Multicellular organisms which increase the number of cells in their
bodies become more complicated and change their shape and size.
All living things can reproduce: Reproduction is the process that
makes more of the same kind of organism. Single-celled organisms
may simply keep dividing into two. However, multicellular plants and
animals may reproduce sexually or asexually.
All living things can excrete: Excretion is the removal of the
metabolic wastes produced in cells as a result of chemical reactions
(metabolism). For example, respiration and other chemical reactions
in the cells produce waste products such as carbon dioxide. Living
organisms expel such substances from their bodies in various ways.
All living things display ordered complexity: All living things
are both complex and highly ordered. The levels of organization in
biological systems begin with atoms and molecules and increase in
complexity. Your body is composed of many different kinds of cells
each containing many complex molecular structures. Many non-
living things may also be complex, but they do not exhibit this degree
of ordered complexity.
Most living things maintain homeostasis: Most organisms maintain
relatively constant internal conditions that are different from their
environment. Homeostasis is the regulation of an organism's internal
20
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
conditions to maintain stability. For example, your body temperature
remains stable despite changes in outside temperatures.
Reproduction
All living things possess adaptations that evolve overtime: All
Growth
Excretion
& Dev't
organisms interact with other organisms and their environment in
Response
Ordered
ways that influence their survival, and as a result, organisms evolve
Living
Complexity
Things
adaptations to their environments (Fig.2.1).
Metabolism
Homeostasis
Self Assessment 2.1
Cellular
Adaptation
Structure & Composition
1. Is it possible to define life in a simple sentence? If your answer
is no, why not? Give a short explanation.
Figure 2.1. Characteristics of life
2. How are living things different from the non-living things?
2.2 Taxonomy of living things
2.2.1 Principles of classification
Activity 2.3: Reflective
Discussion
Objectives
This section explains how
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
biologists have organized the
study of living things. This
classify living things based on taxonomic principles,
organization makes it easy to
tell which organisms share
Why do biologists classify living things?
characteristics and which are
related to each other.
Organizing items not only makes them easier to find but can also
1. How organized are you?
make them easier to understand. One tool biologists use to organize
and understand living organisms is classification. Classification is the
2. Do you organize your
clothes or books in some
process of grouping things based on their similarities. The science of
way?
naming, identifying and classifying organisms is known as taxonomy.
3. Discuss the advantages
Scientists who study taxonomy are called taxonomists. Biologists
of being organized.
classify organisms into different categories mostly by judging the
degrees of their apparent similarities and differences. These include
the external and internal structures of the organism as well as where
Key Terms
the organism lives. Taxonomists also consider the genetic makeup
of organisms to reveal their evolutionary relationships to other
Identification: identifying
organisms. The assumption is that the greater the degree of physical
organisms using
characteristic feature
similarity between them, the closer their biological relationship is.
They try to identify and classify organisms based on a number of
Nomenclature: Aspect
of taxonomy that deals
features (e.g., morphological, physiological, molecular, behavioural,
specifically with the naming
and/or ecological characters).
of organisms
Taxonomy: The science
of naming and classifying
species.
Grade 9 Biology
21
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.2.2. Taxonomic hierarchies in biological classification
Activity 2.4: Problem
Objectives
solving
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Read a book or search in
describe taxonomic hierarchies
the Internet on biological
classification. Why do
biologists need to organize
living things in hierarchies?
Thousands of years ago, the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384-322
BC) developed the first widely accepted biological classification
systems. He used simple morphological characters to classify plants
into trees, shrubs and herbs. He also divided animals into two groups
-those which had red blood and those that did not have. Though it
was useful for a while, Aristotle grouped some organisms that had
very little in common. For example, he grouped birds, bats, and flying
insects because they could fly. Later on in the 1700s, a Swedish Botanist
Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778), who is also known as the father of
taxonomy, introduced a taxonomic hierarchy of classification. He was
the first person to propose an orderly system for classifying organisms.
Taxonomic hierarchy is the process of arranging various organisms
into successive levels of the biological classification either in a
decreasing or an increasing order. In the Linnaean classification
system, all organisms are placed in a ranked hierarchy. The kingdom
is ranked the highest followed by Phylum (division), class, order,
family, genus, and species (Fig. 2.2). Each rank in a taxonomic
hierarchy is termed taxon (plural, taxa). Linnaeus' developed a two
Kingdom system of classification. He classified all living organisms
under kingdoms Plantae and Animalia that included all plants and
animals, respectively. This system did not distinguish between the
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, unicellular and multicellular organisms;
and photosynthetic (green algae) and non-photosynthetic (fungi)
organisms.
At the broadest level, biologists divide the diversity of life into three
domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Domain is the rank above
kingdom. Every organism on Earth belongs to one of these three
domains. The first two domains, Bacteria and Archaea, identify two
very different groups of organisms that have prokaryotic cells, relatively
small and simple cells that lack a nucleus or other compartments
bounded by internal membranes. Archaea are prokaryotic as their
cells have no nucleus and membrane bounded organelles. Their range
of size is similar to that of bacteria. Many Archaea inhabit extreme
environments. Bacteria are prokaryotic as their cells have no nucleus.
They are all small organisms that vary in size between that of the largest
virus and the smallest single-celled eukaryote. The major differences
22
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
of bacteria and archaea includes the chemical composition of the cell
wall and cell membrane; the use chlorophyll for photosynthesis by
Key Terms
bacteria but not by archaea, methane generation, and sensitivity to
Bacteria: is the most diverse
some antibiotics. Eukaryotes have relatively large and complex cells
and well-known group of
that contain a nucleus and other membrane-enclosed compartments.
single-celled organisms that
They are grouped into the domain Eukarya. The domaineukarya
lack a nucleus.
includes groups such as protists, fungi, plants and animals. Have a great
Classes: is a taxon of similar
diversity of forms: there are unicellular, colonial and multicellular
orders.
organisms.
Eukaryotic cells: cells with
a nucleus and membrane-
bound organelles.
Attention
Family: is a taxon of similar
genera.
Archaea
Bacteria
Eukarya
Genera: is a taxon of similar
species.
Cells with no
Cells with no nucleus
Cells with a nucleus and
membrane-bound
DNA exists as a circular
membrane-bound organelles.
Kingdoms: is a taxon of
organelles.
'chromosome'.
DNA in the nucleus arranged
similar phyla (plural for
DNA exists as a circular
as linear chromosomes with
No membrane-bound
'chromosome'
histone proteins
phylum).
organelles are present
Ribosomes are similar to
Ribosomes are different from
Orders: is a taxon of similar
Ribosomes are similar
bacteria.
both bacteria and archaea
to archaea
families.
Cell wall does not
There are unicellular,
Cell wall contains
contain peptidoglycans
colonial and multicellular
Phylum: is a taxon of
Cells divide by binary
peptidoglycans
organisms
similar classes. (Plant
fission
Cells divide by binary
Cell division is by mitosis
Are unicellular/ colonial
fission,
Many different ways of
taxonomists use the taxon
Are unicellular/ colonial
reproducing asexually and
division instead of phylum).
sexually.
Prokaryotic cells: are
unicellular organisms
without a separate nucleus.
Species: unique type of
Homo sapiens
organism
Bi-pedal and higher
Taxon: is a group of
SPECIES inteligence
organisms that share a
Homo
unique set of traits.
Hominids with large brain
GENUS
& upright posture
Similarity increases
Hominidae
Primates with relatively flat
FAMILY
faces & binocular vision
Primata
ORDER
Mamals with forward lookng
eyes & grasping fingures
Mammalia
Self Assessment 2.2
CLASS
Body covered with hair/fur.
Mammary glands are present
1. What is taxonomic
Chordata
PHYLUM
Animals with a notochord or
hierarchy?
vertebral column(Back bone)
2. List some of the
Animalia
KINGDOM
taxonomic hierarchies
that you know.
Figure 2.2. Taxonomic hierarchy
Grade 9 Biology
23
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Attention
Have you ever asked yourself what a species is? What are the characteristic features of a species? The
smallest natural group of organisms is the species. A species can be defined as a group of organisms that
can reproduce to produce fertile offspring. Members of a species also often resemble each other very
closely in appearance, unless humans have taken a hand in the breeding programs. All cats belong to the
same species but there are wide variations in the appearance of different breeds. There are many other
definitions of species; for example, phylogenetic species, morphological species, evolutionary species,
systematic species, recognition species etc. However, for a biological species, members could reproduce to
produce fertile offspring. Members of a species also often resemble each other very closely in appearance.
2.3 Relevance of classification
Objectives
Activity 2.5: Investigating
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
1. Why and how do
describe the relevance of classification
human beings classify
organisms?
2. Visit a library in your
What are the relevancies of biological classification?
school or public library
The applications of classification are manifold: identification of
in your village, and write
harmful and beneficial organisms, reduce energy and time to
on the importance of
biological classification
study organisms, and help us understand the relationship between
and present your results
organisms, etc. Classification gives biologists a framework that allows
to your classmates.
them to study the relationships between organisms. For example, this
framework allows biologists to study the relationship between birds
and dinosaurs. Biologists have found that the bones of some dinosaurs
have large internal spaces. So do the bones of birds. Because of these
findings, some biologists believe that dinosaurs are more closely
related to birds than to reptiles.
Taxonomy can also be a useful tool for scientists who work in such
areas as agriculture, forestry, and medicine. Taxonomy can also help
the economy. For example, taxonomists can discover new sources
of lumber, foods, medicines, and energy. For example, a taxonomist
might know that a certain species of tree contains chemicals that make
good disinfectants (e.g., Shiferaw/ Moringa- Moringa stenopetala). It
is possible that a closely related plant species could have the same
useful substances. So instead of having one source of chemicals, there
may be two or more sources.
Self Assessment 2.3
1. For which of the following purposes could taxonomy be used?
a. to determine whether a plant is safe to be planted in a schoolyard
b. to find a new source for medicine that comes from plants
c. to determine how closely related two species animals
d. all of the above
24
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.4 Linnaean system of nomenclature
Objectives
Activity 2.6: Inquiring and
researching
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Did you know Carl
describe the system of Linnaean nomenclature
Linnaeus?
explain how organisms are given scientific names.
List the major contributions
write scientific names properly and give examples.
of Carl Linnaeus to the
Science of taxonomy.
How did Carl Linnaeus classify living organisms?
Linnaeus was a Swedish naturalist who initially graduated in medicine
but became interested in plants. He travelled in Scandinavia, England
and Eastern Europe, discovering and naming new plant species.
In 1735 he published his Systema Naturae, in which he accurately
described 7700 plant species and classified them. He further grouped
species into genera, genera into classes, and classes into orders. He
also classified over 4000 animals, but rather less successfully into
mammals, birds, insects and worms.
Linnaeus refined and popularized the binomial system of naming
organisms, in which the first name represents the genus and the second
name the specific epithet. This system is still the official starting point
for naming or revising the names of organisms.
Binomial nomenclature
Species must be named in such a way that the name is recognized
all over the world. For example, maize is named Bekolo in Amharic,
Boqqollo (Badallaa) in Afan Oromo and Baddela in Sidaamu Afoo
and corn in American English etc. If you are not aware of these
names, it could lead to confusion. If the botanical name, Zea mays,
is used, however, there is no chance of error. As you all might know
our country is endowed with cultural and linguistic diversities and
each would have different names for the same species. As a result, it
would be difficult for a person to know the names given by the 80 plus
ethnolinguistic groups in Ethiopia. Similarly, there are over thousands
of languages in the African continent and beyond.
Therefore, the Latin form of the name allows it to be used in all over
the world irrespective of language barriers. The similarity in size,
shape, behaviour and colour makes it difficult to differentiate one
species from the other. Again, the use of the scientific name avoids
such confusion.
The binomial system of naming species (introduced by Linnaeus) is
an internationally agreed system in which the scientific name of an
organism is made up of two parts showing the genus and the species.
Grade 9 Biology
25
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Binomial means 'two names'; the first name gives the genus and the
Self Assessment 2.4
second gives the specific epithet. A genus (plural, genera) consists of
1. What is a binomial
a group of similar species. The specific epithet sometimes describes
a characteristic of the organism. For example, Enset, false banana,
nomenclature?
Ensete ventricosum and Banana, Musa acuminate, belong to the same
2. Write the scientific
family (Musaceae). In writing a scientific name, the first letter of name
names of the following
of the genus is a capitalized letter and the specific epithet always starts
organisms: house fly,
with a small letter, for example, the scientific name of human beings is
mouse, dog, cat & goat.
Homo sapiens. The scientific names are underlined when handwritten
or italicized when printed.
2.5 Common Ethiopian animals and plants
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
classify common Ethiopian animals and plants based on the
taxonomic categories.
write the scientific names of common Ethiopian plant and
animals species
use dichotomous keys to identify unknown organism
Ethiopia is endowed with high biological diversity (biodiversity)
due to its geographical location, topographical diversity and diverse
climatic features. The country is a hot spot for a diversity of wild plant
and animal species with a high degree of endemicity. Furthermore,
Ethiopia is a primary centre of diversity for field crops such as noug
(Guizotia abyssinica), tef (Eragrostis tef) and the Ethiopian mustard
(Brassica carinata). Besides, field crops such as barley, sorghum,
durum wheat, finger millet, faba bean, chickpea, lentil, and cowpea
have wide diversity in Ethiopia. Also Ethiopia has served as a gateway to
domestic animals from Asia to Africa and its diverse ecology favoured
diversification of these resources. The scientific and common names
of some plants and animals in Ethiopia are presented in table 1.
Activity 2.7:Inquiring and Researching
Read books and/or search in the Internet for the scientific and the
local names common Ethiopian plants and animals species. Present
your report to your classmates.
26
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Table 1: Scientific names of some common plants and animals
in Ethiopia
Common
Taxon
name
Kingdom
Phylum/
Class
Order
Family
Genus
Scientific
Division
Name
Elephant
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Proboscidea
Elephanti-
Loxodonta
Loxodonta
dae
africana
Ethiopian
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Carivora
Canidae
Canis
Canissimensis
Wolf
Gelada
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Primate
Cercopithe-
Thero-
Theropithecus
cidae
pithecus
gelada
Lion
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Carivora
Felidae
Panthera
Panthera leo
Walia
Animalia
Chordate
Mammalia
Artiodactyla
Bovida
Capra
Capra walie
Ostrich
Animalia
Chordate
Ave
Struthioni-
Struthion-
Struthio
Struthio
formes
idae
camelus
Watled
Animalia
Chordate
Ave
Pelecani-
Threskior-
Bostrychia
Bostrychia
Ibis
formes
nithidae
carunculata
Enset
Plantae
Angio-
Monocylo-
Zingiberales
Mussaseae
Ensete
Ensete ventri-
spermata
doneae
cosum
Maize
Plantae
Angio-
Lilospida
Cyperales
Poacea
Zea
Zea mays
spermata
Noug
Plantae
Angio-
Eudicots
Asterales
Asteraceae
Guizotia
Guizotia ab-
spermata
yssinica
Tef
Plantae
Angio-
Lilospida
Cyperales
Poacea
Eragrotes
Eragrstos tef
spermata
Wheat
Plantae
Angio-
Lilospida
Cyperales
Poacea
Triticum
Triticum aes-
spermata
tivum
Dichotomous keys
Activity 2.8: Inquiring and
Researching
How do biologists use dichotomous keys?
You may have come across
Dichotomous keys are used to identify unfamiliar organisms. They
organisms that you did not
simplify the process of identification. Each key is made up of pairs of
recognize and could not
contrasting features (dichotomous means two branches), starting with
classify. How do you solve
quite general characteristics and progressing to more specific ones.
this problem?
By following the key and making appropriate choices it is possible
to identify the organism correctly. Figure 2.3 shows an example of a
Self Assessment 2.5
dichotomous key that could be used to place an unknown vertebrate
1.Make a field visit in
and unknown invertebrate in the correct class. Item 1 gives you a
your village and or your
choice between two alternatives. If the animal is poikilothermic
school compound and
(cold-blooded), you move to item 2 and make a further choice. If it is
ask the names of twenty
a homoiothermic (warm-blooded), you move to item 4 for your next
common Ethiopian
choice. The same technique may be used for assigning an organism to
animals and plants. Write
its class, genus or species. However, the important features may not
their scientific names
always be easy to see and you have to make use of less fundamental
(species names) along
characteristics.
with their local names.
Grade 9 Biology
27
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Has Legs
2
1
No les
5
Poikilothermic
2
1
Homoiothermic
4
More than six legs
3
2
Six legs
4
Has fins but no limbs
Fish
2
Has four limbs
3
Short, flattened gray body
Woodlouse
3
Long brown/yellow body
Reptile
3
Has no scales on body
Amphibian
Has four limbs
Reptile
4
Pincers on last segment
Earwig
Hard wing covers
Beetle
Has feathers
Bird
4
Has fur
Mammal
5
Body segmented
Earthworm
Body not segmented
6
Has a shell
Snail
6
No shell
Slug
Figure 2.3. Vertebrate (left) and invertebrate keys
2.6 The five-kingdom system of classification
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list the characteristic feature of the five kingdoms,
describe the kingdoms of the Monera, Protista and Fungi
and give examples of organisms from each one.
describe the kingdom Plantae and explain its major taxa,
giving examples.
discuss features the kingdom Animalia and explain its major
taxa, giving examples.
group animals into vertebrates and invertebrates and
explain the differences between them.
Why did we come up with the five kingdoms?
Classification of organisms into plants and animals was easily done
and understood, but a large number of organisms did not fall into
either category. Hence the two kingdom classification used for a long
time was found inadequate. Besides, gross morphology a need was
Activity 2.9: Cooperative
also felt for including other characteristics like cell structure, nature
Learning
of cell wall, mode of nutrition, habitat, methods of reproduction,
What is the largest group
evolutionary relationships, etc.
of organisms recognized by
biologists? How many such
Whittaker (1969) proposed a five kingdom classification to solve
groups should there be?
the pitfalls of the two kingdom system of classification. The main
Most biologists used to favor
criteria for classification used by him include cell structure, body
the adoption of two groups.
organization, mode of nutrition, reproduction and phylogenetic
What are these two groups?
relationships. Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme consists of animals,
plants, fungi, monera and protists(Fig.2.4). It is still not easy to fit all
28
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
organisms into the five-kingdom scheme. For example, many protista
with chlorophyll (the protophyta) show important resemblances to
Attention
some members of the algae, but the algae are classified into the plant
kingdom.
Viruses are not included
in any kingdom - they are
Fungi
not considered to be living
Plantae
Animalia
organisms because they
Basidiomycota
Arthropoda
lack key characteristics of
Spermatophyta
living things. Viruses are
Annelida
Molluses
Pteridophyta
Vertebrate
particles that are not alive.
Ascomycota
/
Nematoda
They cause diseases and
Protochordata
infections. Viruses are made
Bryophyta
Dictyosteliidae
Platyhelminthes
Echinodermata
up of nucleic acids, either
Charophyta
Chaetognatha
DNA or RNA, surrounded
Oomycete
Phaeophyta
by a protein coat. They
Chlorophyta
Coelenterata
are smaller than the tiniest
Rhodophyta
Porifera
bacterium. Most biologists
COMMITR
agree that viruses are not
alive because they don't
Ciliophora
Rhizopoda
Protista
grow, develop, or carry
Cyanophyta
out respiration. All viruses
Bacteria
replicate, or make copies of
Monera
themselves. However, viruses
need the help of living cells
to copy themselves. In order
Figure 2.4. The five kingdoms of life
to copy itself, a virus must
enter a living cell. The cell
in which a virus replicates is
Self Assessment 2.6
called the host cell.
1. Do you agree or disagree with the classification of algae as a
plant? Explain.
2. Do you suggest an alternative category or group for organisms'
such as algae and the likes?
Activity 2.10: Debate
Debate on why it is difficult for biologists to develop a rigid classification scheme? Do you think
the Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme has solved the classification problems biologists are trying to
answer for generations?
Procedure:
1. Divide members of your classmates into three groups.
2. Members of group 1 support the idea that Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme has solved the
classification problems.
3. Members of group 2 are against the idea that Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme has solved the
classification problems.
4. The third group will be the audience.
5. Let members of group 1 and 2 present their position each in five minutes, and
6. Let students from group three ask questions both groups.
Grade 9 Biology
29
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Activity 2.11: Collaborative
2.6.1. Kingdom Monera
Learning
Objectives
What do you think about
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
when you hear the word
bacteria? You probably think
describe the kingdom Monera and give example of organisms
about germs or something
describe importance of Monera
that is bad for you. Did you
What are Monera?
know that some bacteria
are actually helpful? For
Monera includes eubacteria and archaebacteria. Eubacteria (true
example, some bacteria
bacteria) have strong cell walls. They exist in various shapes and
help with human digestion,
forms (Figs 2.5 and2.6). Some eubacteria are heterotrophs; otherscan
while other bacteria help
make their food (autotrophs). Some autotrophic bacteria make their
produce cheese, yogurt, and
own food the way plants do; they are photosynthetic. Others make
sourdough bread. However,
other bacteria cause diseases
energy by chemical reactions; chemosynthetic. The eubacteria live
in humans, for example
in most habitats, except the most extreme. Some eubacteria cause
Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
diseases, like strep throat and pneumonia. Most eubacteria, however,
causes tuberculosis, and
are harmless and helpful.
Haemophilus ducreyi,
Spherical
Rod-shaped
Spiral
chancroid. Discuss the major
distinguishing features of
kingdom Monera
Key Terms
Cocci
Bacilli
Spirillum
Archaebacteria: a group of
Figure 2.5. Examples major groups of Monera
microorganisms considered
to be an ancient form of life
Archaebacteria (Archaea) have very different cell walls than bacteria,
that evolved separately from
but like bacteria, archaebacteria make their own food. They are
the bacteria
chemosynthetic and photosynthetic. Archaebacteria live in extreme
Chemosynthetic: synthesis
environments. They live in such places as swamps, deep-ocean hot-
food using chemical
water vents and seawater evaporating ponds. The environments in
reaction.
which the archaebacteria live often have no oxygen (Fig 2.5).
Eubacteria: true bacteria
Monera
Eubacteria
Archaebacteria
True bacteria)
Heterotropic
Autotropic
Halophiles
Thermoa-
Methanoges
bacteria
bacteria
(Salty areas)
cidophiles
(Marshy areas)
(hotsprings)
Chemoautotrophs
Photoautotrophs
Sulphur bacteria)
(Cyanobacteria)
Figure 2.6. Some representative of taxa of kingdom monera
30
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Attention
Activity 2.12: Collaborative
Learning
Most people tend to think of bacteria in terms of illness and disease.
Classify the following
However, there are actually only a few disease-causing bacteria
statements into useful
compared to the number of harmless and beneficial bacteria. In
versus harmful relating to
fact, we could not survive without bacteria. Bacteria cause diseases
the importance of bacteria:
in plants, animals, and humans. Disease causing bacteria enter the
endospores germinate in
human body through openings such as the mouth. Bacteria are
human lungs, cause infection
carried in air, food, and water. Sometimes bacteria enter the body
in humans, provide nitrogen
through skin wounds. There are two ways bacterial diseases harm
in a usable form for plants,
people. First, the growth of bacteria can interfere with the normal
flavor food, oxygen is a
function of body tissues. Second, the bacteria can release a toxin that
byproduct of making food
directly attacks the host.
and Create toxins.
Important characteristics of monera:
Simple prokaryotic unicellular organisms
Self Assessment 2.7
Lack a well-defined nucleus or any membrane bound organelles
If someone tells you that
Most have a rigid cell wall
bacteria are bad, how would
Have various modes of nutrition. Could autotrophs or heterotrophs
you respond?
Known as decomposers and mineralizers in the biosphere
2.6.2. Kingdom Protista
Objectives
Activity 2.13: Collaborative
Learning
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
You have learned that all
describe the kingdom Protista and give examples of
organisms
life is organized into five
describe importance of Protista
kingdoms. Without using
your notes, name all five
kingdoms. Some of the
What are protists?
organisms you will learn
about in this section are
There is no such thing as a typical protist. Kingdom protista contains
plantlike, and some are
the most diverse organisms of all the kingdoms (Figs. 2.7 and 2.8).
animal-like. Still others have
There are single-celled (unicellular) protists as well as many-celled
characteristics like fungi.
(multicellular) protists. Some are microscopic, others are very large.
Some of them were placed
Some can make their own food, some cannot. Protists have only
in different kingdoms before
one thing in common-they are all eukaryotes. That means most of
they were finally classified
their metabolic processes (chemical reactions) take place inside their
as Kingdom Protista. As you
membrane-bound organelles. Other than that, organisms classified
read this sub-section keep
in mind how much variety
as protists are quite different from each other. Some protists, called
there is in the world of
protozoans, seem to be like animals except that they only have one
Protista.
cell. Others, called algae, seem to be like plants except they do not
have roots, stems, or leaves. Algae are photosynthetic and autotrophic.
Unicellular algae are the basis of aquatic food chains and produce
much of the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. Still, other protists seem to
be like fungi except that they do not have the same kind of cell walls
that fungi have.
Grade 9 Biology
31
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Paramecium
Amoeba
Euglena
Cilia
Pseudopod
Flagellum
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.7. Examples major groups of protists
Classification
of Protista
Phylum
Phylum
Protozoa
Bacillariophyta
(e.g. Diatoms)
Algae belongs to classes:
Phylum
Phylum
Phylum
Phylum
Chlorophyta
Phaeophyta
Rhodophyta
Cyanophyta
(e.g. Green
(e.g. Brown
(e.g. Red
(e.g. Blue
algae)
algae)
algae)
green algae)
Rhizopoda
Flagellata
Ciliata
Sporozoa
(e.g.
(e.g. Euglena)
(e.g.
(e.g.
Amoeba)
Paramecium)
Plasmodium)
Figure 2.8. Some representative taxa of kingdom Protista
Self Assessment 2.8
Activity 2.14: Reflective discussion
1. What are the
You probably come into contact with algae every day. Diatoms are a
characteristic features of
type of algae whose remains become a powdery, porous rock called
protists?
diatomite. Diatomite is highly absorbent. It is used in pet litter and
2. Write the single
to clean up chemical spills. It also is used as an abrasive in household
common feature to all
cleaners. It is even added to paint to add sparkle. Now that you know
that diatomite is absorbent, sparkling, and abrasive, see if you can
protists.
imagine some additional uses for it. Discuss the additional application
and present to your classmate.
32
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.6.3. Kingdom Fungi
Objectives
Activity 2.15: Peer
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
conferencing
describe the kingdom fungi and give example of organisms
So far, you have studied
describe the importance of fungi
bacteria, and protists. In
this section, you will learn
What are fungi?
about the kingdom Fungi.
Fungus is the singular of
Fungi are eukaryotic organisms that include micro-organisms such as
fungi. Mushrooms are types
yeasts, moulds and mushrooms.
of fungi. Think about places
you have seen mushrooms
Except for unicellular yeasts, fungi are filamentous multicellular
growing. What do those
organisms.
places have in common?
Were they hot, dry, cool, or
Their bodies consist of long, slender thread-like structures called
damp? Did the mushrooms
hyphae. Hyphae play an important role in how they obtain food.
appear suddenly or grow
slowly over time?
Fungi possess a cell wall that is made up of chitin and polysaccharides.
Like animals, fungi are heterotrophic in nutrition. But unlike animals,
fungi do not ingest (eat) their food. Instead, a fungus absorbs nutrients
from the environment outside of its body. Many fungi accomplish
this task by secreting powerful enzymes into their surroundings,
digest compounds from a wide range of sources, living or dead.
These enzymes break down complex molecules into smaller organic
compounds that the fungi can absorb into their bodies and use (Figs
2.9 and 2.10).
Figure 2.9. Examples of fungi
Most fungi absorb soluble organic matter from dead substrates and
hence are called saprophytes (decomposers). Decomposer fungi
break down and absorb nutrients from non-living organic material,
such as fallen logs, animal corpses, and the wastes of living organisms.
Grade 9 Biology
33
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Fungi cannot make their own food. They are heterotrophs. Fungi use
Key Terms
a process called extracellular digestion to obtain nutrients. This means
Mutualism: symbiotic
food is digested outside a fungus's cells and then the digested food
relationship in which
is absorbed. For example, some hyphae of a fungus will grow into
both species benefit.
an orange. They release digestive enzymes into the orange that break
down the large organic molecules into smaller molecules. These small
Parasitism: symbiotic
molecules are absorbed into the hyphae and move into the flowing
relationship in which
cytoplasm.
one organism benefits at
the expense of another.
Fungi can also live with different living as parasites or mutualists.
Parasitic fungi absorb nutrients from the cells of living hosts. Some
Symbiosis: permanent,
parasitic fungi are pathogenic, causing diseases in humans (Example:
close association between
Candida albicans cause rush and Tinea pedis cause athlete's foot),
two or more organisms
animals and plants. Mutualistic fungi also absorb nutrients from a
of different species.
host organism, but they reciprocate with actions that benefit the host.
For example, mutualistic fungi that live inside certain termite species
use their enzymes to break down wood, making food available for
termites. Fungi can also live as symbionts in association with algae as
lichens and with roots of higher plants as mycorrhiza.
Attention
Fungi can reproduce either asexually by vegetative means
Some fungi cause food
(fragmentation, fission and budding), asexual reproduction through
to spoil, others cause
spores formation and sexually. The various spores are produced in
diseases, and some are even
distinct structures called fruiting bodies.
poisonous. However, fungi
are important and beneficial.
Yeast (saccharomyces service) is a very important fungus used for
Without fungi, the world
making injera rise and allows us to make alcohol (Tej, Tella, Beer etc.).
would be overrun with huge
amounts of waste, dead
organisms, and dead plants.
Thanks to many fungi, some
bacteria, and protists, the
Kingdom mycota
organic material is broken
down and recycled into the
Sexual reproduction not
Sexual reproduction
identified
identified
raw materials that other
living organisms need.
Fungi imperfecti or
Primitive Fungi
Advanced Fungi
DUETRROMYCETES
OOMYCOTA
EUMYCOTA
e.g. Cercospora Fusarium
(Mycelium Asptate)
(Mycelium Septate)
PHYCOMYCETES
ZYGOMYCETES
ASCOMYCETES
BASIDIOMYCETES
(Algal Fungi)
(Conjugation Fungi)
(Sac Fungi)
(Club Fungi)
e.g. Phytophthora
e.g. Mucor rhizophus
e.g. Yeast candida
e.g. Puccinia agaricus
albugo
Self Assessment 2.9
1. What are the
characteristic features of
fungi?
Figure 2.10. Some repressive taxa of kingdom fungi
34
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
2.6.4. Kingdom Plantae
Objectives
Activity 2.16: Reflective
Discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Think of all the things
describe the kingdom Plantae and give example of organisms
that plants provide for us.
describe characteristic features of major divisions of plants
They are an important
give examples of flowering plants
source of food. They also
provide oxygen through
What are plants?
photosynthesis. Some plants
are valuable sources of
Kingdom Plantae includes all eukaryotic, and multicellular
medicine. What are some
autotrophic organisms.
other things that plants
provide?
Plants make their own food through the process of photosynthesis.
Plants have chloroplast and chlorophyll pigment, which is required
for photosynthesis. Photosynthesis also provides oxygen in the
atmosphere.
Some parasitic.
Nearly all live on land.
Sexual reproduction predominates.
They do not move from place to place; they are stationary.
Their cells contain a rigid cell wall made up of cellulose.
They reproduce asexually by vegetative propagation or sexually.
There are over 250 000 species of plants. These include flowering
plants, mosses, ferns, and coniferous plants (see figs 2.11 and 2.12).
Activity 2.17: Inquiring and
Researching
Name or think of at least
five different plants. You
Ferns
might think of flowers,
bushes, shrubs, ferns, trees,
and grasses to name a few.
They are all plants, yet
they look different from
each other. As in the other
kingdoms you have studied,
Mosses and
Gymnosperms
Angiosperms
the plant kingdom has
Warts
divisions based on shared
Figure2.11. Examples of major groups of plants
characteristics. If you were
to place plants in divisions,
Self Assessment 2.10
what characteristics would
you use? Hint: Look at figure
1. What are the characteristic features of plants?
2.12 to find useful features to
classify plants.
Grade 9 Biology
35
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
plantae
(Embryophyta)
Bryophyta
Pteridophyta
Spermatophyta
(Amphibians of plant
(True root, stem and leaves,
(Seed producing, Vascular
kigdom, non vascular)
vascular tissue present)
tissue present)
Gymnospermae
Angiospermae(seeds
(naked seeded plants, seed
enclosed in ovary
not enclosed in ovary)
wall)
Dicotyledons
Monocotyledon
(embryo with two
single cotyledon
cotyledon)
in the embryo)
Activity 2.18: Interviewing
Key Terms
Ask a botanist about the
Angiosperms: Most diverse seed plant group. Only group that
economic, medicinal and
makes flowers and fruits.
ecological uses of plants
Bryophyte: is the common name for three lineages of plants:
(e.g., food, medicinal,
mosses, liverworts, and horn-worts.
ornamental, horticultural,
Dicots: Most diverse groups of angiosperms; members have two
cultural, spiritual, aesthetic,
seed leaves, branching leaf veins.
music and arts etc.).
Embryophyta: land plants; photosynthetic species that protect and
nourish the embryo on the parental body
Gymnosperm: Seed plant that does not make flowers or fruits; for
example, a conifer.
Monocots: Highly diverse angiosperm group; includes plants such
as grasses that have one seed leaf and parallel veins.
Seed plant (spermatophyte): Plant that produces seeds and pollen;
an angiosperm or gymnosperm.
Vascular plant: Plant having specialized tissues (xylem and phloem)
that transport water and sugar within the plant body.
2.6.5 Kingdom Animalia
Activity 2.19: Investigating
Objectives
Think about all the animals
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
you are familiar with. They
list the characteristic feature of the animal kingdom,
may be pets, animals in
describe characteristic features of invertebrates and
nature, or captive animals
vertebrates
such as in a circus or zoo.
list the common class of animals
This section explains what
all animals have in common.
What is an Animal?
List the characteristics you
know about that all animals
Kingdom Animalia includes all multicellular, heterotrophic,
share.
eukaryotic organisms. Constructing a good definition of an animal
36
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
is not straightforward, as there are exceptions to nearly every criterion
for distinguishing animals from other life forms. However, several
characteristics of animals, when taken together, sufficiently define
them.
Animals differ from both plants and fungi in their mode of nutrition.
Unlike plants, animals are not photosynthetic. Animals consume food
obtained from other organisms (i.e. they are heterotrophs). But unlike
fungi, most animals do not feed by absorption; instead, animals ingest
their food and then use enzymes to digest it within their bodies.
In contrast to plants and fungi, however, animals lack the structural
support of cell walls. Instead, animal cells are held together by structural
proteins, the most abundant being collagen, which is found only in
animals.
Many animals have two types of specialized cells not seen in other
multicellular organisms: muscle cells and nerve cells. In most animals,
these cells are organized into muscle tissue and nervous tissue,
respectively, and are responsible for moving the body and conducting
nerve impulses.
The ability to move and conduct nerve impulses underlies many of the
adaptations that differentiate animals from plants and fungi, making
muscle and nerve cells central to what it means to be an animal.
Most animals reproduce sexually.
Animals are very diverse. They are generally classified into two groups
based on the presence or absence of backbone as invertebrates (animals
with no backbone) and vertebrates (animals with a backbone (Fig. 2.13
-2.15).
Vertebrates
Invertebrates
Mammals
Fish
Porifera
Platyhelminthes
Annelida
Echinodermata
Birds
Reptiles
Cnidaria
Mollusca
Arthropoda
Amphibians
Arachnida
Cruslacea
Insecta
Myriapoda
Figure 2.13. Major groups of animals
Grade 9 Biology
37
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Activity 2.20: Collaborative Learning Groups
What are the two largest groups of animals recognized by biologists/
zoologists? Make a field visit in your school compound or village
and try to classify the animals you see/know into invertebrates or
vertebrates. (Hint: you could use a dichotomous key)
Invertebrates
(Without Backbone)
Annelid
Arthropod
Cnidaria
Echinoderm
Mollusk
Porifera
worms
Jointed legs
Stinging cells
Spiny-Skinned
Soft Bodied
Sponges
Two body openings
Jointed legs
Tantacles with
Bodies in 5 parts
Soft body with
No body opening
Simple nervous
More than one body
Stinging cells
Coverd in spikes or
external & internal
No Muscles,Nervers
system
setion
One body opening
spines
shells
of organs
Exoskeleton
Live in water
External skeleton
Have a foot of
Live in water
made on time
tentacles
Most have shells
Figure 2.14. Major groups of invertebrates
Key Terms
Anatomy: the study of internal structure, as revealed by dissection.
Invertebrates: are animals without a backbone.
Morphology: is the study of the form or outward appearance of
organisms.
Vertebrates: are animals with a backbone.
Self Assessment 2.11
Activity 2.21: Interviewing
1. What are the
Make internet search or ask a biologist about medically or
characteristic features of
agriculturally important insects (e.g., grasshopper, tsetse fly,
animals?
mosquito, honey bee, etc.) and list their importance (Hint:
2. What are the differences
economic, pollination, pest, aesthetic, music and arts, cultural,
between invertebrates
and vertebrates?
spiritual, vector, etc.).
38
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
VERTEBRATE CLASSIFICATION
Activity 2.22: Collaborative
Learning
Read a book or search on
Internet about important fish
AMPHIBIAN
FISH
REPTILES
species, mammals, and birds.
Thin and humid skin.
They live underwater
* The longest lived species on
Transformation through
They breateh throughout
the planet.
Then list their economic,
out their life cycle.
gills.
* Cold-blooded animals.
They change their breathing
Some of them have scales
Body covered with scales or
medicinal, aesthetic,
method (lungs, gills, skin).
covering their bodies.
shell.
They are born from eggs.
Fins help them to move
They can not chew.
cultural, spiritual, and/or
Cold-blooded animals.
under the water.
They are born from eggs.
They live on the ground and
Cold-blooded animals.
* They live on the ground or
ecological importance.
water.
They are born from eggs
in the water.
BIRDS
MAMMALS
Body covered with feathers.
They are bom alive from
They usually have porous
the mothers.
lightweigh bones to allow
They breathe through
them to fly.
lungs.
They live flying or on the
They live in the water, the
ground.
air and on the ground.
They have wings to fly.
They have their body
Their mouths are toothless
covered by fur.
beaks.
Warm-blooded.
Warm-blooded animals.
They are hatched from eggs
Figure 2.15. Major groups of vertebrates
2.7 Renowned Taxonomists in Ethiopia
Objectives
Activity 2.23: Collaborative
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Learning
Appreciate the works of renowned taxonomists in Ethiopia.
Do you know any renowned
Ethiopian taxonomist? If you
know one, please write the
name and the contribution
As stated in section 2.5 of this textbook, Ethiopia is known for high
of the renowned Ethiopian
degree speciesdiversity and endemcity. However, only few studies
taxonomist.
have been done to identify, name and classify the biodiversity at
different levels (e.g., gene, species, and ecosystem). Among the factors
that led to inadequate level of studies done in Ethiopia in the field of
biodiversity could be due to the few number of scientists educated
and trained in taxonomy despite the country's rich biodiversity.
Yet, as the result of efforts made over the past six decades, our country
has trained and educated a couple of renowned taxonomists that
contributed the publication of volumes of books on the Flora of
Ethiopia, for example. Among these scientists are Dr. Mesfin Taddese,
Professor Sebsebe Demissew, Professor Ensermu Kelbessa and
Professor Silesh Nemomissa to mention a few of them. In addition,
there are few other zoologists like Professor Abebe Getahun; who
contributed to the field of animal taxonomy. Below, we will discuss
briefly the contributions made by some distinguished Ethiopian
taxonomists to the scientific community in general and Ethiopian
society in particular.
Grade 9 Biology
39
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
ORD
Professor Sebsebe Demissew
Professor Sebsebe Demissew has participated in several successful
research projects universities in Europe and Africa. He has published
books and articles on the vegetation and plants of Ethiopia and
Africa. He is a member of national and international professional
organizations and has served as Chair of the Biological Society of
Ethiopia, Secretary-General of the Association for the Taxonomic Study
of the Flora Tropical Africa (AETFAT) in addition to being a Council
member of the International Association for Plant Taxonomy. He has
also served as a director of Flora of Ethiopia and Gulelle botanical
Garden.
Unit review
The characteristics of living things are movement, respiration, sensitivity, growth,
reproduction, excretion, nutrition, etc.
Classification is a way of sorting organisms into a meaningful order, traditionally using
morphology and anatomy, but recently also using DNA (molecular).
The science of naming, identifying and classifying organisms is known as taxonomy.
Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778), who is also known as the father of taxonomy, introduced a
taxonomic hierarchy of classification.
The taxonomic hierarchies are domains, kingdom, Phylum (division), class, order, family,
genus, and species
The three domains are archaea, bacteria and eukarya (i.e. protists, fungi, plants and animals)
Classification gives biologists a framework that allows them to study the relationships
between living and extinct organisms.
Taxonomy can be a useful tool for scientists who work in such areas as agriculture, forestry,
and medicine.
The binomial system is an internationally agreed system in which the scientific name of an
organism is made up of two parts showing the genus and the specific epithet.
In writing a scientific name, the first letter of name of the genus is a capitalized letter and
the specific name always starts with a small letter, for example, the scientific name of human
beings is Homo sapiens. The scientific names are underlined when handwritten or italicized
when printed.
40
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Ethiopia is endowed with high biological diversity (biodiversity) due to its geographical
location, topographical diversity and diverse climatic features. The country is a hot spot for
a diversity of wild plant and animal species with a high degree of endemicity
Dichotomous keys are used to identifying unfamiliar organisms. Dichotomous means two
branches, so the user is given a choice of two possibilities at each stage.
Whittaker's five-kingdom scheme consists of animals, plants, fungi, monera and protoctista
Monera (bacteria and archaea): do not typically have a nucleus or endomembrane system,and
they do not reproduce sexually. Members of both groups typically have cell walls.
Protists do not have a specific defining trait; they are a collection of many eukaryotic groups.
Most protists are single-celled, but there are multi-celled and colonial species. Life cycles
vary like nutrition; some species are autotrophs, others are heterotrophs.
Fungi are heterotrophs that secrete digestive enzymesto break down organic material,
then absorb the released nutrients. Some live as single cells; others grow as a multi celled
mycelium. All have cell walls with chitin.
Bryophytes: have no vascular tissues, seedless,
Gymnosperms: Vascular tissue present, "naked" seeds
Angiosperms: Vascular tissue present, Seeds form in a floral ovary that becomes a fruit and
monocots, dicots, and relatives
Animals are very diverse. They are generally classified into two groups based on the presence
or absence of backbone as invertebrates (animals with no backbone) and vertebrates (animals
with a backbone).
The invertebrates includes: sponges, flat worms, round worms, annelida, Mollusca,
Arthropoda (e.g., Insects, Arachnids, Crustacea & Myriapods).
The vertebrates includes: fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, & mammals.
Dr. Mesfin Taddese, Professor Sebsebe Demissew, Professor Ensermu Kelbessa, Professor
Abebe Getahun and Professor Silesh Nemomissa are few of the renowned Ethiopia
taxonomists.
Grade 9 Biology
41
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
Review Questions
Part One: Say true if the statement is correct or false if the statement is wrong.
1. Archaea have very different cell walls from bacteria.
2. Classification is the process of grouping things based on their similarities.
3. Ethiopia is a primary centre for Eragrostis tef and Guizotia abyssinica.
4. Gymnosperm are seed plant that does not make flowers or fruits
5. Linnaeus' developed a four Kingdom system of classification.
6. Some autotrophic bacteria make their own food the way plants do and they are
chemosynthetic.
7. The Greek philosopher Aristotle (384-322 BC) developed the first widely accepted biological
classification systems.
8. Fungi can reproduce either by vegetative, asexual reproduction through spores formation
and sexually.
9. Many animals have two types of specialized cells not seen in other multicellular organisms.
10. Unicellular algae are the basis of aquatic food chains and produce much of the oxygen in
Earth's atmosphere.
Part Two: Choose the best answer among the given alternatives.
1. A process by which an organism produces offspring is called
A. reproduction
B. homeostasis
C. development
D. inheritance
2. Bacteria that serve as decomposers are
A. photoautotrophs B. chemoautotrophs C. photoheterotrophs D. chemoheterotrophs
3. All fungi
A. are multicelled
B. are heterotrophs C. form flagellated spores D. all of the above
4. Most fungi obtain nutrients from
A. nonliving organic matter B. living animals C. living plants D. photosynthesis
5. Fungal infections are most common in
A. plants
B. mammals
C. insects
D. birds
6.
is the transmission of DNA to offspring.
A. reproduction
B. homeostasis
C. development
D. inheritance
7. Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya are three
A. famalies
B. kigdom
C. classes
D. domain
42
Grade 9 Biology
Unit Two: Characteristics and Classification of Organisms
8. Organisms require
and
to maintain themselves, grow, and reproduce.
A. DNA; energy B. nutrients; energy C. food; sunlight D. DNA; cells
Part Three: Think critically and answer the following questions.
1. How do viruses affect human health?
2. What are the major groups of vertebrates?
3. What ecological roles do bacteria play?
4. What ecological roles do fungi play?
5. Write the ecological and economic importance of insects
6. What structural and functional features do bacteria and archaea share?
7. How are plants important?
Grade 9 Biology
43
