Unit 3: Cells
Contents
Learning Competencies
3.1. What is a cell?
Define a cell
3.2. Cell theory
Outline the contributions of Theodor Schwann and
Matthias Schleiden to the development of the cell
3.3. Cell structure and function
theory
3.4. Types of cells
Compare and contrast the structures of plant and
3.5. Animal and plant cells
animal cells
3.6. Observing cells under a microscope
Differentiate between eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cells
3.7. The cell and its environment
Make temporary slides of plant and animal cells
3.7.1. Passive transport
Observe and draw animal and plant cell parts under
3.7.2. Active transport
the microscope
3.8. Levels of Biological Organization
Conduct substances across animal and plant cells
experiments about the movement of substances
across animal and plant cells (osmosis, diffusion)
Construct with examples the different levels of bio-
logical organization
3.1. What is a cell?
Recall
Objectives
Recall grade seven general
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
science lesson:
Unit 4: cell as the
explain how living things are composed of cells
basis of life
identify unicellular organisms from multicellular organism.
Activity 3.1: Group work
Cell is the smallest and the basic unit of living things. All living things
are composed of cells. Some of these living things consist of a single
1. Why do we study about
cell and are called unicellular organisms.
cell?
For example, paramecium is a unicellular organism. Most of the
2. List some important
biological activities take
unicellular organisms are invisible with naked eyes, but there are
place in the cell
some exceptions like chicken egg cells which can be seen with naked
3. Discuss in groups about
eyes. The other groups of living things such as plants and animals
the unicellular and
including humans which consist of many cells are called multicellular
multicellular organisms
organisms. The body of multicellular organisms is composed of many
cells of specialized types which work cooperatively. For example, in
44
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
the case of human body, everything you do, every action and every
Key Terms
thought are possible because of the processes that occur at the cellular
level. Each activity of our body is a result of the cooperative work of
Cell: is the smallest and
muscle cells for movement, nerve cells for gathering information and
the basic unit of living
brain cell for interpretation of message to action.
things. All living things
are composed of cells.
Attention
Unicellular organisms:
living things consist of a
Most cells are very small and are, therefore, visible only with a
single cell
microscope but an ostrich egg is a single cell with about 6 inches in
Multicellular organisms:
diameter and weighing about 1.36 kg; nerve cells in your body can
groups of living things
stretch several feet long, and nerve cells in giant squid can be more
composed of many cells
than 30 feet long!
3.2. Cell theory
Objectives
Activity 3.2 : Group work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discuss in group about the
describe cell theory,
cell theory
name scientists who played a role in the discovery of the cell
theory.
An English scientist, Robert Hooke was the first to observe cells and
to use the word cell for structures in living organisms. He did this
in 1665 after examining thin slices of plant material cork. He was
surprised by the regular appearance of the structure, which is 'pore
like' regular structures that Hooke called 'cells'. Each cell appeared to
be an empty box surrounded by a wall. Hooke had discovered and
described a cell, without realizing that it is the fundamental unit of all
living things.
After Hooke discovered cells in the first half of the seventh century,
other early Dutch Microbiologist Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632-
1723) used his lenses in building numerous microscopes, some with
magnifications approaching 300X. In 1674 he likely observed protozoa
Figure 3.1. Drawing of cork cells
for the first time and several years' later he observed bacteria. Those
published by Hooke
"very little animalcules" he was able to isolate from different sources,
such as rainwater, pond and well water, and the human mouth and
intestine. Leeuwenhoek is universally acknowledged as the father of
Attention
microbiology because, he discovered micro-organisms like protists
English natural philosopher
and bacteria.
Robert Hooke was the first
to observe cells in 1665,
More than 150 years later, German scientists, Matthias Schleiden and
naming the shapes he saw in
Theodor Schwann were the first to explain the basic views of what we
cork cellulae (Latin, "small
now call cell theory.
rooms") They are known to
us as cells.
In 1838, German botanist Matthias Schleiden, a botanist stated that
Grade 9 Biology
45
Unit 3: Cells
all plants are made up of cells, and a year in 1839, another German
zoologist Theodor Schwann reported that all animals are made up of
cells. The two German biologists, established cells as the natural unit
and function in living things, the entire animals and plants are made
up of these cells. Then a German pathologist, Rudolf Virchow (1856)
established the idea that cells arise only by the division of existing
cells. Based on the above discoveries, the principle of cell theory is
developed. The cell theory states that:
1. Living organisms are composed of one or more cells.
2. Cells are the smallest unit of life
3. Cells arise only by the division of a pre-existing cell.
Cells vary considerably in size and shape but they share certain
common features:
Every living cell is surrounded by a membrane, which separates
the cell contents from everything else outside.
Cells contain genetic material which stores all of the instructions
needed for the cell's activities. Many of these activities are chemical
reactions, catalysed by enzymes produced inside the cell.
Cells have their own energy release system that powers all of the
cell's activities, So cells can be thought of as the smallest living
structures - nothing smaller can survive.
3.3. Cell structure and function
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
identify the main structure of a cell,
state that the cytoplasm of all cells contains most organelles
like the nucleus, ribosomes, and rough endoplasmic
reticulum,
describe the function of the structure of a cell, and
list the main structure of a cell.
Cells have different structures which have different functions.
The organization of cells varies between different organisms. In
multicellular organisms, some cells have the same shape and same
function but other cells have different shapes and different functions.
For example, in the human body, the shape and function of nerve
cells are different from that of muscle cells.
46
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.3: Self-test
1. Read books and/or search the Internet for the function of the structure of a cell. Present your
report to your classmates.
2. Complete the following table based on your search
Function
Cell Structure
Control all activity of the cell
Control the transport of material into and out
of a cell
The place where protein is synthesized
Packaging of the materials in a cell
Produce energy
Dendrites
Axon
Muscle fiber
Cell body
Nucleus
Myelin sheath
Figure 3.2 Nerve cell
Cell
Activity 3.4: Group work
Nucleus
Make a group of five
Stripes caused by arrange-
ment of actin and myosin
students, examine Fig
3.2 and 3.3 carefully and
discuss the structures and
functions of the cell.
Figure 3.3 Muscle cells
Cells look like one another in certain important ways. One important
similarity between plant and animal cells is the presence of common
cell structures. The major structures these cells have in common are:
1. Nucleus
2. Cytoplasm, and
3. Cell (plasma) membrane.
Grade 9 Biology
47
Unit 3: Cells
In addition to the above structures, there are many tiny structures in
the cytoplasm called organelles. An organelle is a distinct structure
within a cell having a specific function. Some of these organelles have
a membrane, while others without membrane.
Cell Wall
Cell Membrane
Golgi Vesicles
Golgi
Ribosome
Apparatus
Smooth ER
Chloroplast
(No Ribosomes)
Vacuole
Nucleolus
Membrane
Nucleus
Raphide
Rough ER
Crystal
(Endoplasmic
Druse
Reticulum)
Crystal
Large Central
Vacuole
Mitochondrion
Amyloplast
Cytoplasm
(starch Grain)
Fig. 3.4 Structure of typical plant cell
Activity 3.5: Think-pair-share
What is the difference between the cell wall and cell membrane?
Answer the question in relation to their function, discuss in pair and
share your answer with the other classmate.
Cell wall
Cell wall is a rigid structure of a plant cell that provides structural
support and gives shape to the cell. It is found external to the cell
membrane. Fungal cells, some Protista cells such as algae and bacterial
cells also have cell walls. Animal cells have no cell wall.
Cell membrane
Cell membrane is an outer covering that separates the cell's interior
from its surrounding environment. Cell membrane is a very thin
selectively permeable structure. Cell membrane controls what enters
into and leaves a cell. It controls the entry of organic molecules, ions,
water, and oxygen into and out of a cell. Wastes, such as carbon dioxide
Attention
also leave a cell by passing through a cell membrane.
Cell membrane is semi-
Cytoplasm
permeable (selectively
Cytoplasm is a thick fluid-filled region in the cell containing cell
permeable) because it
organelles. The fluid material of the cytoplasm consists of 70 to 80
chooses what can go in and
percent water with different organic (proteins, carbohydrates) and
out of the cell
inorganic (ions such as sodium, potassium, calcium) molecules
48
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
dissolved in it. It is also the site where several chemical reactions such
Activity 3.6: Homework /
as protein synthesis take place.
Individual assignment
Nucleus
Using the Internet or books
as a source of information,
Nucleus is the largest organelle surrounded by the double-membrane.
study the relationship
Inside a nucleus, there are thread-like structures called chromosomes
between chromosomes,
that contain a very long molecule of DNA ( Deoxyribonucleic acid).
chromatin, and DNA.
The nucleus determines what the cell will be, for example, a blood cell,
a liver cell, a muscle cell or a nerve cell. The nucleus also controls cell
division. Within a nucleus there is a darker area called the nucleolus,
this is the site where new ribosomes are made.
Ribosomes
Attention
Ribosomes are small cellular structures that are found in large numbers
in all cells. The function of ribosomes is to synthesize proteins. They
Most cells contain one
are found either freely in the cytoplasm or attached to the rough
nucleus but there are
endoplasmic reticulum.
interesting exceptions.
For example, both the
Endoplasmic Reticulum
mature red blood cells of
mammals and the sieve tube
The endoplasmic reticulum is a complex system of interconnected
elements of the phloem of
double membranes. They contain fluid-filled spaces between the
flowering plants are without
membranes which allow materials to be transported throughout the
a nucleus. Both lose their
cell. There are two distinct types of the endoplasmic reticulum
nucleus as they mature. The
individual cylindrical fibers
Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum
of voluntary muscle consist
It gets its name from the dotted appearance of its surface. These
of a multinucleate sack.
dotted structures on it are the ribosomes. Proteins can be made
Fungal mycelia also contain
by these ribosomes. Proteins can be made and stored in the rough
multinucleate cytoplasm.
endoplasmic reticulum and transported around the cell in the small
sacs called vesicles.
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
This is endoplasmic reticulum without ribosomes. It is important in
the manufacturing of lipids.
Nucleus
Smooth ER
Rough ER
Figure 3.5. The Rough and Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum
Grade 9 Biology
49
Unit 3: Cells
Vesicles
Activity 3.7: Group work
Vesicles are a small stack-like collection of the membranous sac. They
What makes rough
store and transport and ship materials where they need to go. For
endoplasmic reticulum
example, a protein made by the rough endoplasmic reticulum may
rough?
be placed inside a transport vesicle and shipped to the Golgi bodies,
where it would be modified and tagged for shipment elsewhere. These
vesicles are found in the cell by fusing with the Golgi apparatus.
Golgi apparatus (Golgi body, Golgi complex)
Attention
Golgi apparatus is a smooth, concave, membranous structure.
Golgi apparatus is an
The Golgi apparatus with the vesicles functions in the collection,
organelle named by its
packaging, and distribution of molecules within the cell or even
discoverer (Italian scientist
outside the cell.
Camillo Golgi) who first
described this structure in
Proteins and lipids manufactured on the rough and smooth
1898.
endoplasmic reticulum are transported into the Golgi apparatus and
You can think of the Golgi
modified as they pass through it. These modified proteins and lipids
apparatus as a detailing
are then packaged into vesicles that pinch off from the Golgi apparatus.
facility that receives ship
These vesicles then diffuse to other locations in the cell, distributing
newly manufactured cars
(proteins), puts on the
the newly synthesized molecules to their appropriate place.
finishing touches, stores
Mitochondria
the completed cars, and
then ships them out when
Mitochondria are relatively large organelles found in the cells. It has
needed. Products made
a double membrane; the outer one controls the entry and exit of
in the ER reach the Golgi
materials. The inner membrane forms many folds on which some of
apparatus in transport
the chemical reactions of respiration take place and the site for the
vesicles.
synthesis of much energy. Mitochondria are often described as the
'powerhouse' of the cell since they are the sites of respiration.
Porin
Outer membrane
Inter-membrane space
IIIIS
Inner membrane
Matrix
Cristae
Activity 3.8: Group work
Why do you think some
metabolically active cells
such as muscle cells contain
Ribosome
thousands of mitochondria?
Circular DNA
Discuss in groups of three
ATP synthase
to five students and present
Electron Transport
what you have discussed to
Chain
your classmates.
Figure 3.6: Mitochondria
50
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Lysosomes
Attention
Lysosomes are little membrane-bound packages of digestive enzymes.
They contain digestive enzymes which can be used to digest bacteria
Lysosomes are involved
or other cells taken into the cell It is also break down unwanted or
in the breakdown of the
damaged organelles within the cell.
contents of 'food' vacuoles.
Digestive
For example, harmful
Enzymes
bacteria. Any foreign matter
or food particles are taken
Lysosome
up into these vacuoles is
Plasma membrane
then broken down by the
Digestion
digestive enzymes. This
occurs when lysosomes fuse
Food vacuole
with the vacuole.
Lysosomes also destroy
Figure 3.7: Lysosome
damaged organelles in this
Vacuoles
way.
Phagocytosis came from two
These are organelles that consist simply of a single membrane with
Greek words phagein which
fluid inside. Many plant cells have large vacuoles that occupy more
means to eat, and kytos is
than half of the cell volume. Vacuoles are small in the case of animal
vessel referring here to the
cell. Vacuoles perform a variety of functions in different kinds of cells.
cell.
Food vacuole found in some animals to digest food and in the case
of some unicellular organisms there is a contractile vacuole which is
function is to expel excess water. For example, amoebas and many
other unicellular eukaryotes have food vacuole in order to eat smaller
organisms or food particles, by a process called phagocytosis. Many
unicellular protists living in fresh water have contractile vacuoles
that pump excess water out of the cell, thereby keeping a suitable
concentration of ions and molecules inside the cell.
Chloroplasts
Chloroplasts are also double membrane-bounded organelles that
occur in the cell of green plants, mostly in the cells of the leaves.
Activity 3.9: Individual
assignment
They are the site for photosynthesis. They contain a green pigment
Make Internet search or
called chlorophyll that can trap the sunlight energy for the synthesis
refer books and list some
of carbohydrates.
unicellular eukaryotes which
have food vacuole and
contractile vacuole.
Energy
Sugars
Figure 3.8: Chloroplast trapping
sunlight energy to synthesize
Chloroplast
sugar
Grade 9 Biology
51
Unit 3: Cells
Centrioles and microtubules
The cytoplasm of cells consists of small cylindrical fibres called
microtubules that have a variety of roles, including moving
chromosomes during cell division. In addition, animal cells have
structures called centrioles that anchor to micro-tubules during cell
division.
Cilia and flagella
Cilia and flagella are the most common organelles for locomotion in
unicellular organisms.
Cilia are short, hair-like structures. Cilia are used for locomotion. It
can also be used to create a current in the fluid next to the cell. For
example, cilia occur in large numbers on the lining (epithelium) of
the air tubes serving the lungs (bronchi).
Flagella are long, thread-like structures, present in lesser number.
Flagellum extends from the plasma membrane and enables an entire
cell to move. When present, the cell has just one flagellum or a few
flagella. When present, cilia are smaller and many.
Figure 3.9. Cilia and Flagella
Cilia
Flagella
Key Terms
Organelles: small structures found in plant and animal cells. Some examples of organelles are: nucleus,
mitochondria, vesicles, and Endoplasmic reticulum.
Cytoplasm: is a thick fluid-filled region in the cell containing cell organelles. It is also the site where
several chemical reactions such as protein synthesis take place.
Nucleus: is the largest organelle which contains DNA and control all activity of the cell.
Ribosomes: are small cellular structures that are found in large numbers in all cells. The function of
ribosomes is to synthesize proteins
Rough endoplasmic reticulum: contains the protein synthesizing machinery called ribosome.
Vesicles: are small stack-like collections of the membranous sac. They store and transport and ship
materials in the cell.
Mitochondria: is the sites of respiration to produce energy.
Lysosomes: contain digestive enzymes which can be used to digest bacteria or break down unwanted
substance in the cell.
Chloroplast: are the site for photosynthesis, which contain a green pigment called chlorophyll that can
trap the sunlight energy.
52
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
3.4 Types of cells
Objectives
Activity 3.10: Group
work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Make a group of three to
describe the difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotic
five students and discuss
cells
the structures commonly
give examples of the two types of cell.
found in Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic cell, the common
Based on cell structure and cellular organization, cells are grouped
cell structures found in
into two types. These are Prokaryotic cells and Eukaryotic cells.
both prokaryotic cells and
eukaryotic.
Prokaryotic cells are usually much smaller than eukaryotic cells. They
have a much simpler structure and are thought to be the first cells
Give examples organisms
which have prokaryotic cells
to have evolved. Prokaryotic cells such as bacterial cells don't have
and eukaryotic
membrane-bound organelles or a nucleus. Eukaryotes such as plants
and animals cells, in contrast, have membrane-bound organelles and
a nucleus.
Prokaryotic cells
Prokaryotes are different from eukaryotic cells because of the
absence of a nucleus and other membrane-bounded organelles. These
Prokaryotic cells are generally much smaller than eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic organisms are unicellular. The cell wall acts as an extra
layer of protection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and prevents
dehydration.
Eukaryotic cells
Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a nucleus and other membrane-
bound organelles. For example, each organ in an animal's body is
specialized to perform a particular role, each organelle in a eukaryotic
cell has a distinctive structure and function. Prokaryotic organisms
are unicellular but eukaryotic organisms are usually multicellular.
Attention
The term Eukaryotic is derived from the Greek eu, true, and karyon, kernel, referring to the nucleus.
Thus Eukaryotic cells are cells with a "true nucleus".
Similarly, the term Prokaryotic is derived from the Greek pro means before and karyon means
nucleus; "before nucleus", reflecting the earlier evolution of prokaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells are
usually between 10 and 100 micro meters (mm) wide, while prokaryotes are between 1 and 10 m The
term Eukaryotic is derived from the Greek eu, true, and karyon, kernel, referring to the nucleus. Thus
Eukaryotic cells are cells with a "true nucleus".
Similarly, the term Prokaryotic is derived from the Greek pro means before and karyon means nucleus;
"before nucleus", reflecting the earlier evolution of prokaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells are usually
between 10 and 100 micro meters (mm) wide, while prokaryotes are between 1 to 10 mm in size.
Grade 9 Biology
53
Unit 3: Cells
A
B
Cell Wall
Capsule
Cell Membrane
Cell wall
Golgi Vesicles
Golgi
Plasma membrane
Ribosome
Apparatus
Cytoplasm
Smooth ER
Chloroplast
plasmid
(No Ribosomes)
Vacuole
pili-
Nucleolus
Membrane
Nucleus
Raphide
Rough ER
Crystal
(Endoplasmic
Druse
Reticulum)
Bacterial Flagellum
Crystal
Large Central
Ribosomes
Vacuole
Mitochondrion
Nucleoid (Circular DNA)
Amyloplast
Cytoplasm
(starch Grain)
Figure 3.10. A. Structure of a typical prokaryotic cell structure
(Example, Bacteria cell) B. Structure of a typical eukaryotic cell
(Example, plant cell)
Table 3.1 Comparison of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
Structure
Eukaryotic cells
Prokaryotic cells
Organelles
Membrane-bound organelles
No Membrane-bound organelles
(for example, nucleus, ER)
Ribosomes
relatively large
relatively small
Chromosomes
DNA arranged in long strands, asso-
DNA present, not associated with pro-
ciated with proteins
teins, circular plasmids may also
be present
Cell wall
always present in plant cells, made
always present, primarily made of Peptido-
of cellulose, never
glycan
present in animal cells
Cilia and flagella
sometimes present
some have flagella, but these have a differ-
ent structure from those in eukaryotic cells
3.5. Animal and plant cells
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list the structures of plant and animal cells, and
describe the differences in structure between plant and
animal cells.
Animal and plant cells have certain features in common like cell
membrane, nucleus, cytoplasm, mitochondria, and Golgi apparatus.
The animal and plant cell structures have also some differences. For
example, cell wall, chloroplast and large permanent vacuoles are
54
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
found in plant cells while centriole and lysosome are found only in
animal cells.
In addition, plant cells are usually larger and are more easily visible
under alight microscope than animal cells. The plant vacuole is
surrounded by a membrane and contains fluid. The fluid in the
vacuole is a solution of pigments, enzymes, sugars and other organic
compounds (including some waste products), mineral salts, oxygen
and carbon dioxide. Vacuoles help to regulate the osmotic properties
of cells (the flow of water inwards and outwards). Chloroplasts are
found in the green parts of the plant, mainly in the leaves.
A
Cell (Plasma) Membrane
Mitochondria
Chromatin
Nucleolus
Peroxisome
Rough Endoplasmic
Nucleus
Reticulum
Ribosomes
Vacuole
Smooth Endoplasmic
Centrosome
Reticulum
Golgi Apparatus
Microtubules
Golgi Vesicle
Lysosome
Cytoplasm
A
Endoplasmic
Reticulum
Nucleus
Golgi Apparatus
Chloroplast
Nucleolus
Vacuole
Peroxisome
Mitochondria
Ribosome
Cell Membrane
Amyloplast
Cell Wall
Cytoplasm
Fig. 3. 11. A. Animal cell as seen with an electron microscope
B. Plant cells as seen with an electron microscope
Grade 9 Biology
55
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.11: Self-test
Fill the following table by saying 'present' or 'absent' based on the
structure of animal and plant cell.
Features
Plant Cell
Animal Cell
Cell wall
Cell membrane
Nucleus
Chloroplasts
Vacuole
Mitochondria
Rough and smooth
endoplasmic reticulum
Golgi bodies
Ribosomes
Lysosome
3.6 Observing cells under a microscope
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
draw the cell structures as seen under the light microscope,
and
label the cell wall, cell membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus of
the cell.
A microscope is an instrument that can be used to observe small
objects, even cells. The image of an object is magnified through at
least one lens in the microscope. This lens bends light toward the eye
and makes an object appear larger than it actually is.
56
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.12: Laboratory Activity
In unit one, you have been introduced to the microscope. In this section, you will learn how to
observe the structure of plant and animal cells under a light microscope.
Objective: To study the structure of plant cells under a light microscope
For this activity, you will need:
a microscope
3
Two drops on slide
2
1
Pull inner
Place layer in
microscope slides
centre of slide
layer off
lodine
cover-slips
forceps
a mounting needle
a pipette
a lamp
5
Observe & draw
a piece of onion skin
4
Slowly lower
iodine solution
cover
Method
1. Using forceps, peel a piece of epidermal tissue from the inner side of an onion bulb
2. Place the epidermal tissue on a glass microscope slide.
3. Using a scalpel, cut out a 1cm square of tissue (discarding the rest) and arrange it in the
center of the slide, Observe the onion cell.
4. Then, add two to three drops of iodine solution for staining. (What do you think the reason for
staining? What additional structure can you see in this cell, which could not see in animal cell?
Which cellular structure is more visible following staining? Why?)
5. Using forceps, a mounting needle or a wooden splint, support a coverslip with one edge resting
near to the onion tissue, at an angle of about 45°.
6. Gently lower the coverslip over the onion tissue, trying to avoid trapping any air bubbles. (Air
bubbles will reflect light when viewing under the light microscope, obscuring the features you
are trying to observe).
7. Leave the slide for about 5 minutes to allow the iodine stain to react with the specimen.
8. The iodine will stain the cell
9. Place the slide onto the microscope stage, select the lowest power objective lens and focus on
the specimen.
10. Increase the magnification using the other objective lenses.
11. Make a large drawing of one cell and label the following parts: cell wall cell membrane,
cytoplasm, nucleus. What is the difference between staining and unstaining onion epidermal ell?
Grade 9 Biology
57
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.13: Laboratory Activity
Objective: To study the structure of animal cells under a light microscope
For this activity, you will need:
a microscope
microscope slides
cover slips
forceps
a mounting needle
a pipette
a lamp
cotton bud
absolute alcohol
methylene blue dye
Cheek cell
Method
1. Rinse your mouth with water to remove any fragments of food.
2. Take a cotton bud from a freshly opened pack.
3. Rub the cotton bud lightly on the inside of your cheek and gums to collect some cheek cells in
saliva.
4. Rub the cotton bud onto the center of a clean microscope slide, to leave a sample of saliva.
5. Repeat if the sample is too small.
6. Then drop the cotton bud into a container of absolute alcohol (why do we use alcohol in this
procedure?).
7. Add two to three drops of methylene blue dye. (What do you think the reason for staining
by methylene blue? Which cellular structure is more visible following staining? Why?) Using
forceps, a mounted needle or wooden splint, support a cover slip with one edge resting near to
the cheek cell sample, at an angle of about 45°.
8. Gently lower the cover slip over the tissue, trying to avoid trapping any air bubbles. (Air
bubbles will reflect light when viewing under the light microscope, obscuring the features you
are trying to observe.)
9. Leave the slide for a few minutes ( Why do we stay for a few minutes?)
10. Place the slide onto the microscope stage, select the lowest power objective lens and focus on the
specimen.
11. Increase the magnification using the other objective lenses.
12. Make a drawing of one cell and label the following parts: cell membrane, cytoplasm, nucleus.
13. Place your used slide in laboratory disinfectant or autoclaving before washing. Why do we
disinfect the used slides?
Note: This technique which involves studying the epithelial cells taken from the inside of the cheek
needs some safety rules because of the very small risk of transmitting the AIDS virus. However,
appropriate precautions should be applied to treat contaminated items
58
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
3.7 The cell and its environment
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define the terms diffusion and osmosis,
describe the importance of diffusion and osmosis for the
transport of gases and solutes, and
describe the importance of active transport.
The Cell membrane
As previously mentioned, the cell membrane is a selectively (semi)
Attention
permeable structure that controls what enters and leaves cells.
Thinking of the plasma
Activity 3.14 Think-pair share
membrane as your school
guard, who is always
1. If the cell membrane is to lose its selectivity, what do you
standing at the entrance of
think will happen to the cell? Discuss in pairs and share your
the school gate and control
answers with your classmates.
who and what enters and
2. List some of the substances which leave and enter the cell
leaves the school, which is
a good way of remembering
the cell membrane's
function.
Cells need food materials to get energy or to build up its cell structures.
Cells also need salts and water, which play a part in chemical reactions
in the cell. Cells also need to remove unnecessary substances such as
carbon dioxide.
The structure of a cell known as cell membrane is semi-permeable,
Key Terms
it controls the entering of necessary substances and the removal of
unnecessary ones. Materials can pass through the cell membrane either
Diffusion: is the net
passively by diffusion and osmosis or actively by active transport.
movement of molecules or
ions from a region of high
3.7.1 Passive transport
concentration to a region of
low concentration
Passive transport is the movement of substances down a concentration
gradient. This movement is from an area of high concentration to an
Osmosis: is the diffusion
area of lower concentrate on with-out the need for input of energy.
of water molecules
from a region of their
higher concentration
Attention
(dilute solution) to a
region of their lower
You can think of passive and active transport like rolling a ball on
concentration(concentrated
a hill. Imagine that the hill is made of molecules; the lower part
solution)
of the hill has few molecules, while the upper part of the hill has
lots of stacked molecules. If you want to roll a ball downhill (or let
Active transport: is
the movement of ions
molecules flow from where they're piled up to where they're not),
you don't have to use any energy. If you want to roll the ball uphill
or molecules across the
(or push molecules from where they're in low concentration to where
cell membrane, against a
they're in high concentration), you have to put in some energy.
concentration gradient,
using energy.
Grade 9 Biology
59
Unit 3: Cells
Diffusion
This is the movement of molecules from a region of high concentration
to a region of low concentration down the concentration gradient.
Diffusion is a passive transport of molecules; the molecules need
only spread themselves, or diffuse, across the membrane. The
diffusion of gases and solutes is important for any activity of the cell.
For example, oxygen is important for respiration and get into the cell
by diffusion.
Activity 3.15: Think- Pair -Share
Discuss in pair what will happen in the following situations, Dis-
cuss with your friend and share your idea with the other class-
mates.
1. When some odor, like incense stick is placed in one part of
our home
2. When tea bag is dipping in a glass of hot water
Extracellular Fluid
(a) If a drop of colored
ink is dropped into a
beaker of water
Lipid bilayer
(plasma membrane)
Cytoplasm
(b) its molecules dissolve
Time
Figure 3.13 Diffusion through a semi-permeable membrane of cell.
Factors influencing the rate of diffusion:
Concentration gradient: the higher the difference in the
concentration of a substance on either side of a membrane, the
(c) and diffuse
faster it will tend to diffuse from higher concentration to lower.
Temperature: increase in temperature causes an increase in the
kinetic energy that molecules and ions possess enabling them to
move faster.
Mass of the molecule: heavier molecules move more slowly;
.
(d) Eventually, diffusion
results in an even distri-
therefore, they diffuse more slowly while lighter molecules diffuse
bution of ink molecules
throughout the water.
faster.
Distance travelled: the farther the distance that a substance must
Figure 3.12. Diffusion of
molecules.
travel, the slower the diffusion rate.
60
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Surface area: The greater the surface area, the faster the total
diffusion is Cells that are involved in rapid absorption, such as those
in the kidney or the intestine, often have their 'free' surface membrane
formed into hundreds of tiny projections called microvilli which
increase the absorbing surface.
Cells increase their surface area
by in-foldings of the membrane
like these microvilli
Figure. 3. 14 Microvilli on the surface of small intestine
Activity 3.16: Group Work
Select one student for this activity, follow the instruction below and
discuss your findings with your classmates.
Objective: To study the diffusion of perfume odour from high
concentration towards the lower concentration.
For this activity, you will need: Bottle of perfume
Method
1. Ask your friend to spray some perfume on the front side of
your class.
2. Another student should counting number as the smell of the
perfume diffuse through the classroom
3. Each student should hand up when he/she smell the odor of
the perfume.
4. You'll see a wave of hands moving from the front to the back
and sides of the class as the molecules spread out by diffusion.
5. Discuss, how different students smell the odor of the perfume
at different times, how long it takes to reach the student in the
last row?
6. Repeat the activity by increasing the concentration of the
perfume and compare the time with the previous one
7. Do you get a different result when you increase the
concentration of the perfume?
Grade 9 Biology
61
Unit 3: Cells
Osmosis
Activity 3.17: Think- Pair
-Share
Osmosis is a special case of diffusion. Like other substances water can
Discuss with your friend
also move passively through cell membrane. It moves from a region
and share your idea with
of high concentration of water molecules (lower solute concentration)
the other classmates why
to a region of lower concentration of water molecules (higher solute
this happen in the following
concentration).
situations
1. Feeling thirsty after having
Activity 3.18: Think- Pair -Share
salty food.
Think about osmosis in terms of the solutes. Why do you think water
2. Swelling of resins and
moves toward the area with the greatest concentration of solutes?
other seeds when they are
Discuss with your friend and share your idea with the other classmates.
soaked in water
3. If you put a potato into
pure water, it swells up
The movement of water is affected by the concentration of substances
over time.
(solutes) dissolved in the water. Basically, water moves from areas
where there is more water to areas where less water is.
1
Partially Permeable Membrane
Key Terms
2
Hypertonic solution:
a solution with a high
concentration of solute
Solute
and a low concentration of
Molecule
water.
Water
Hypotonic solution:
Molecule
a solution with a low
A
B
A
B
concentration of solute and
Figure. 3. 15 Osmosis
high concentration of water.
1. Before osmosis: two solutions are separated partially permeable
Isotonic solution: when
membrane. B has a higher solute concentration than A. The
the cell and its surroundings
soluble molecules are too large to pass through the pores in the
have equal solute and water
membrane but the water molecules are small enough.
2. As the arrows in diagram A indicate, more water molecules moved
from A to B than from B to A, so the net movement has been from
A to B, raising the level of the solution in B and lowering in A.
The movement of water into and out of the cell depends on the type of
solution found in the cell surrounding (Environment found outside
the cell).
Attention
When a cell is in a hypertonic solution, water moves out of the cell,
Application of osmosis in
causing the cell to shrink or plasmolysed. In an isotonic solution,
day to day life
water diffuses into and out of the cell at the same rate, with no change
People have used osmosis
in cell size. In a hypotonic solution, water moves into the cell and
to preserve food like meat
pressure are applied to the plasma membrane causing turgidity of
and fish through salt
the cell. The strong cell wall of plant cells can resist this pressure to
preservation.
keep the cell from rupturing. This is not the case with animal cells as
animal cells lack cell wall.
62
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.19: Group work
Discuss in groups how our society uses the principles of osmosis for
the preservation of meat in the rural area where the refrigerator is
not available.
Osmosis in Plant cells
Cytoplasm
Osmosis in plants is very important to bring strength and rigidity to
Vacuole,
the plant cell. If a plant cell is surrounded by water or a solution more
dilute than its contents (hypotonic solution), water will pass into the
Cell Wall
vacuole of the plant. The vacuole will expand and press outwards
on the cytoplasm and cell wall. Then, the rigid cell wall expands
A. Cell placed in dilute solution or
water absorbs water by osmosis and
and exert the pressure back, preventing the cell from taking in too
becomes turgid
much water and bursting. The plant becomes very turgid, due to the
pressure of water pressing outwards on the cell wall.
Turgor pressure is necessary for plants to retain their upright
posture and the extended state of their leaves. In contrast, if a plant
cell is surrounded by water or a solution less dilute than its contents
(hypertonic solution), plant cells lose water and there will no longer
be any water pressure pressing outwards against the cell walls, the
B. Cell placed in concentrated solution
plasma membrane shrinks pulls away from the cell and the cell get
losses water by osmosis and becomes
faccid
plasmolysed. The plasmolysed cell wilts and eventually dies.
In this figure 3.16 A. shows that if the water concentration of the
solution surrounding the plant cell is too high, the cell swells and
turgid. B. If it is the concentration water in both is the same C. If the
solution surrounding the cell is too high, the plant cell plasmolysed.
C. Excessive loss of water by osmosis
causes the cell to become plasmolysed
Fig. 3.16. Osmosis in plant
Wilted
Turgid
Figure 3.17. The effect of osmosis in plant leaf
Without adequate water, the plant on the left has lost turgor pressure,
visible in its wilting. Watering the plant (right) will restore the turgor
pressure.
Grade 9 Biology
63
Unit 3: Cells
Osmosis in Animal Cells
The excessive uptake or loss of water by animal cells causes damages
to cells. The survival of an animal cell, thus, depends on its ability to
balance water uptake and loss.
In the case of animals particularly vertebrates, the concentration
of water in the blood is monitored by the brain and adjusted by
the kidneys. The regulation of water flow is by keeping the blood
concentration within narrow limits, the concentration of the tissue
fluid remains more or less constant.
The animal cell should be surrounded by fluid or blood plasma which
has the same concentration of water as the cell contents; there is no
net flow of water into or out of the cells. If not balanced, osmosis
can cause a serious problem in the animal cell. For Example, if the
surrounding solution has a high concentration of water (hypotonic)
than the cells, water will move into the cells by osmosis.
Water entering the cell will make the cell swell up. Animal cells
have no cell wall and the membrane has little strength, water would
continue to enter and the cells will eventually burst. This process
is called hemolysis of the cell which can occur in red blood cells.
Conversely, if the surrounding solution has a low concentration of
water (hypertonic) than the cells, water will pass out of the cell by
osmosis and the cell will shrink.
a
b
C
red cell
red cell bursts
remains normal
red cell shrinks
pure water or dilute solution with same
concentrated
solution (low
concentration as
solution (high
concentration of
red cell
concentration of
solute molecules)
solute molecules)
net movement of
water molecules
Fig. 3.18. (A) Shows that if the water concentration of the solution
surrounding the red blood cell is too high, the water moves to the cell
and the cell swells and bursts. (B) If the water concentration in red
blood cell and the surrounding solution is the same. (C)If the water
concentration of the solution surrounding the red blood cell is low,
the water moves from the cell to the surrounding solution and the cell
shrinks
64
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Hypertonic
Isotonic
Hypotonic
Activity 3.20: Group work
1. Make a group of five
students and discuss the
conditions that derive
us to drink water after a
heavy physical exercise?
Human Red cell
2. A farmer cultivates a
crop pant and he applies
too much chemical
H2O
fertilizers to the soil,
H2O
H,O
H,O
does this affect the
crop plant? What could
happen the crop plant?
Why?
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
Plant cell
Plasmolyzed
Flaccid
Turgid
Fig.3.19 Osmosis in plants and animal cell
Activity 3.21: Homework /Individual assignment
Using information from the internet or book, discuss how animals
living in freshwater regulate osmosis and how they protect their
body from bursting?
Osmosis in Ameba
Unicellular protozoans such as amoeba have contractile vacuoles.
Contractile vacuole are membranous structures which controls the
intracellular water balance by accumulating and expelling excess
water out of the cell, allowing cells to survive under hypotonic stress
as in pond water participate in osmoregulation of the cell and prevent
the bursting of cells.
The unicellular protozoans which dwell in freshwater consume excess
water, with the help of contractile vacuoles they drain excess water
out. It also helps them to protect the cell in the absence of cell wall.
Without these vacuoles, they might take in too much water, swell and
burst out.
Grade 9 Biology
65
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.22: Laboratory Activity
Osmosis in plant cells
Objective: To Investigating osmosis in plant cells
For this activity, you will need:
Potato,
salt solution,
Balance
1. Observing osmosis in potatoes:
prepare equal sized potato cubes and measure the weight
make a salt solution
bring another bottle and put pure water in it
put the potato cubes in pure water and salt solution. Speculate what will happen?
After 1hour observe their difference in size, weight, and conclude.
2. Observing osmosis in onion cell
Objective : To study plasmolysis using onion cell.
Epidermal strips are useful material for observing plasmolysis. Colored sap makes the observation
easier. Suitable sources are the inner surfaces of the fleshy storage and leaves of red onion bulbs.
Place the strips of the epidermis in a salt or sugar solution.
Place small pieces of the strips on glass slides.
Mount in the relevant solution.
Observe with a microscope.
What you observe about the shape of onion cell?
Draw the picture of the cell that you observe under microscope
Plasmolysis may take several minutes, then discuss in groups about your result.
66
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.23: Laboratory Activity
Investigating osmosis using model cell. Dialysis tubing is partially permeable. We can use dialysis
tubing to represent the cell membrane and the solution inside it to represent the cytoplasm.
Objectives: Objective: To Investigating osmosis in animal model cells
For this activity, you will need:
Dialysis tube,
sugar solution,
beaker.
1. Cut two pieces of dialysis tubing, each 15cm long. Tie one end.
2. Fill one dialysis tube with a concentrated sugar solution (tube A). Fill the other model cell
with water (tube B).
3. Put 'cell A' into a beaker of water and put 'cell B' into a beaker containing a concentrated
solution of sugar.
4. After 20 to30 minutes take out the two tubes. What happen to the two tubes? Is there any
difference in volume between tube A and tube B?
Tubes with a
concentrated
sugar solution
Water
Tube A
Tubes with water
Concentrated sugar
solution
Tube B
Grade 9 Biology
67
Unit 3: Cells
3.7.2 Active transport
Active transport is the movement of molecules from areas where
Attention
they're less concentrated to areas where they're more concentrated
Active transport allows
using energy. Active transport enables cells to use their stored energy
cells to maintain internal
to concentrate molecules inside or outside of the cell.
concentrations of
small solutes that differ
Active transport enables cells to use their stored energy to concentrate
from environmental
molecules inside or outside of the cell. Active Transport is the
concentrations. For
movement of particles through a cell membrane from a region of
example, compared with
lower concentration to a region of higher concentration against a
its surroundings, an animal
concentration gradient, using the energy released during respiration.
nerve cell has a much higher
concentration of potassium
Cells sometimes take in substances even though there is already a higher
ions and a much lower
concentration inside than outside. The substance is absorbed against
concentration of sodium
the concentration gradient. Less commonly, cells sometimes pump
ions. The plasma membrane
substances out, even though there is already a larger concentration
helps maintain these
outside. Some of the examples are: ion uptake by root hairs and
differences by pumping
uptake of glucose by epithelial cells of villi.
sodium out of the cell and
potassium into the cell.
Lower solute concentration
This particular case of
Solute
active transport (called the
sodium-potassium pump) is
XXXXXX
00000000
0000000
vital to the nervous system
of most animals.
XXXXXX
XXXXXX
......
0000000
ATP
Higher solute concentration
Fig 3.20 Active transport
3.8. Levels of Biological Organization
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define the terms tissue, organ and organ system, and
list some examples of human systems.
Activity 3.24: Think — Pair —
Share
Life forms a hierarchy of organization from atoms to complex
What is the smallest level
multicellular organisms. Atoms are joined together to form molecules,
of biological organization
which are assembled into more complex structures such as organelles.
that can display all the
These in turn form subsystems that provide different functions. Cells
characteristics of life?
Discuss with a partner and
can be organized into tissues, then into organs and organ systems
share your answers with
such as the nervous system. This organization then extends beyond
your classmates.
individual organisms to populations, communities, ecosystems, and
finally the biosphere.
68
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Activity 3.25: Think — Pair — Share
Discuss with a partner and share your answers with your classmates.
1. How do these different cells and relate to each other? Where do
body systems, like the digestive system and nervous system fit
into levels of organization?
2. Suppose one organ in a digestive system failed to work properly.
How would the digestive system be affected? Would it still be
able to function? Explain your reasoning.
3. What might happen if a plant organ, such as a leaf or stem,
became damaged? How would the organism be affected?
The organization of the biological world is hierarchical-that is, each
level builds on the level below it:
The cellular level. At the cellular level, atoms, the fundamental
elements of matter, are joined by S chemical bond into clusters called
molecules. Complex biological molecules are assembled into tiny
structures called organelles within membrane-bounded units we call
cells.
Most cells, when they have finished dividing and growing, become
specialized. When cells are specialized, they do one particular job,
they develop a distinct shape and special kinds of chemical changes
take place in their cytoplasm
The organism level. Cells in complex multicellular organisms exhibit
three levels of an organization. The most basic level is that of tissues
(for example nerve tissue), which are groups of similar cells that act
as a functional unit. The cells of each type have a similar structure
and function so that the tissue itself can be said to have a particular
function; for example, muscles contract to cause movement, xylem
carries water in plants. The tissues of the leaf include the epidermis,
palisade tissue, spongy tissue, xylem and phloem.
Key Terms
Tissues, in turn, are grouped into organs body structures composed
Tissues: group of cells that
of several different tissues that act as structural and functional units.
have the same function.
For example, your brain is an organ composed of nerve cells. Organs
Organs: group of tissues
consist of several tissues grouped to make a structure with a special
that work together to do a
function.
particular function.
For example, the stomach is an organ that contains tissues made from
Systems: different organs
epithelial cells, gland cells and muscle cells. These cells are supplied
which are working together
with food and oxygen brought by blood vessels. The heart, lungs,
Grade 9 Biology
69
Unit 3: Cells
intestines, brain and eyes are further examples of organs in animals.
In flowering plants, the root, stem and leaves are the organs.
At the third level of organization, organs are grouped into systems.
The digestive system, for example, consists of digestive organs like
the stomach and intestine. The different systems collectively form an
organism. An organism is formed by the organs and systems working
together to produce an independent plant or animal.
Activity 3.26: Group work
Give examples of some systems in the human body and discuss
The organs from which they are composed of.
Cell
Tissue
Organ
Organ System
Organism
Figure. 3.21 Level of organization in plants
Cell
Tissue
Organ
Organ System
Organism
Figure. 3.22 Level of organization in Animals
70
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
Unit review
In this unit, you have learnt about:
Cell theory is the unifying foundation of cell biology. All organisms are composed of one or
more cells. Cells arise only by the division of preexisting cells.
All cells share simple structural features.
All eukaryotic cells have a centrally located nucleus, a semifluid cytoplasm, and an enclosing
plasma membrane.
In eukaryotic cells, membranes partition into several functional compartments called
organelles. The largest organelle is usually the nucleus. Other organelles are located in the
cytoplasm, the region outside the nucleus and within the plasma membrane.
Nucleus is the structure of the cell which control all activities of the cell. Within the nucleus,
DNA and proteins make up chromatin fibers; each very long fiber is a single chromosome.
The nucleus also contains the nucleolus, which produces components of ribosomes.
Endoplasmic Reticulum is the structure consists of membrane-enclosed tubes and sacs
within the cytoplasm. Rough ER, named because of the ribosomes attached to its surface,
makes membrane and secretory proteins. The functions of smooth ER include lipid synthesis
and detoxification.
The Golgi apparatus refines certain ER products and packages them in transport vesicles
targeted for other organelles or export from the cell.
Lysosomes are sacs containing digestive enzymes, aid digestion and recycling within the cell.
Vacuoles include the contractile vacuoles that expel water from certain freshwater protists
and a large multifunctional central vacuoles of plant cells. Microtubules are an important
component of the cytoskeleton, an organelle that gives support to and maintains the shape
of, cells.
Cilia and eukaryotic flagella are appendages that aid in movement.
Animal and plant cells have a cell membrane, nucleus, cytoplasm and organelles like
mitochondria (singular: mitochondrion), Golgi apparatus.
The difference between animal and plant cells is the presence of centriole, chloroplast, cell
walls is large permanent vacuoles only in plant cells.
Passive transport is the movement of substances down a concentration gradient. This
movement is from an area of high concentration to an area of lower concentration without
the need for energy to be used. Whereas active transport is the movement of molecules from
areas where they're less concentrated to areas where they're more concentrated using energy.
Life forms a hierarchy of organization from atoms to complex multicellular organisms. Atoms
are joined together to form molecules, which are assembled into more complex structures
such as organelles. These in turn form subsystems that provide different functions. Cells can
be organized into tissues, then into organs and organ systems such as the nervous system.
This organization then extends beyond individual organisms to populations, communities,
ecosystems, and finally the biosphere.
Grade 9 Biology
71
Unit 3: Cells
Review Questions
i. Match the following organelles under column 'B' with their functions under column 'A'
A
B
1. Protein export
a. Mitochondria
2. Control cellular activity
b. Golgi apparatus
3. Digestion
c. Nucleus
4. Powerhouse of the cell
d. Lysosome
5. Photosynthesis
e. Chloroplast
ii. Choose the best answer for the following questions
1. Which one of the following structures is found in animal cells, but not in plant cells?
A. cell surface membrane B. centriole
C. chloroplast
D. Golgi body
2. When the cell or the surrounding environment contains a relatively high concentration of water,
we call it:
A. isotonic
B. hypertonic
C. hypotonic
D. Osmotic
3. Which structure is found in plant cells but not in animal cells?
A. Cell membrane
B. Mitochondrion
C. Cell wall
D. Nucleus
4. In which direction does the transport of water occur when a cell containing 1% sodium chlo-
ride is placed in seawater that contains 10 % sodium chloride?
A. From the cell to seawater
B. From seawater to cell
5. If you look into a microscope and view an unknown cell. What structure might you see that
would tell you that the cell is eukaryotic?
A. DNA B. nucleoid region C. a plasma membrane D. membrane-enclosed structures
called organelles.
iii. Fill in the blank space with appropriate words
1. A structure that supports and strengthen plant cell is
2. A structure that breaks down a captured bacterium and damaged organelle in the cell is
3. The sac-like structure used to transport protein is
.
4. A structure made up of a group of tissues, working together to perform a specific Function is
5. When the osmotic pressure is the same on both sides of a semipermeable membrane, each solu-
tion is said to be
.
iv. Answer the following questions.
1. What would happen to a person's red blood cells if the person is given an injection of pure water
(0% saline)?
2. Name three structures in plant cells that animal cells lack.
72
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 3: Cells
3. Name two structures that may be found in animal cells but not in plant cells.
4. List the structural features that prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells have in common. Briefly explain
why each of the structures you have listed is essential.
5. Assume that you are observing animal cell under the microscope and the animal cell looks
shrives, what type of environment or solution is found around this animal cell.
1. Fill the following table space by saying YES or No
Cell structure S
cheek cell (animal)
Onion cell (plant)
Nucleus
cell wall
chloroplasts
large vacuole
Cytoplasm
2. Fill the blank spaces of the table with appropriate level organization of some organ system
Cell
Tissue
organ
system
Red blood cell
cardiac muscle
Heart
Egg, sperm
Epithelial tissue of male and
Reproductive system
female reproductive organ
Mucous cell
Epithelial digestive tissue
Digestive system
Xylem or phloem
Xylem /phloem
root /stem
cells
Nerve cell
Nerve tissue
Nervous system
3. Fill in Fill the blank spaces of the table by saying YES or NO
Diffusion
Osmosis
Active transport
It is the movement of substances like O₂
It is movement of water
Movement of ions like K+
Energy is required
Grade 9 Biology
73
