Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Contents
Learning competencies
5.1 What is food?
Define nutrition
5.2 Nutrition
List the types of nutrients
5.3 Nutrients
Describe the role of a balanced diet especially for children, nurs-
5.4 Balanced diet
ing mothers, athletes, and people with HIV/AIDS
5.5 Deficiency diseases
5.6 Malnutrition
Describe with examples the sources and deficiency diseases of
vitamins and minerals.
5.7 Substance abuse
5.8 Types of diseases
Define malnutrition
5.8.1. Infectious diseases
Discuss the feeding habits that may lead to obesity
5.8.2. Non-infectious
Examine the effects of smoking, alcohol use, chewing khat, can-
diseases
nabis, and other drug use, on the health, social, economic, cultur-
5.9 Renowned Nutritionists
al, and psychological wellbeing
in Ethiopia
Explain the modes of transmission and prevention of infectious
and noninfectious diseases
List and appreciate renowned nutritionists in Ethiopia
5.1. What is food?
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Activity 5.1: Think-pair-
share
Explain about food
Discuss with your friend
next to you and share
Food is any beneficial substance that is eaten, drunk, or otherwise
your idea with the other
taken into the body to sustain life, provide energy, promote growth,
classmates.
etc. It is consumed to provide nutritional support for an organism.
1.How food is important for
Food is usually of plant, animal, or fungal origin, and contains
living things like us?
essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or
2.What would happen if
minerals.
someone don't eat food?
The importance of food in living things
3.Relate the importance of
food with the particular type
Growth: Food is the source substances necessary for making new
of food we eat. For example
cells, tissues and organs.
eating bread
Energy: living things undergo different biological and chemical
reaction in their bodies. These reactions in living things produce at
the same time require energy.
Grade 9 Biology
105
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Food is the sources of energy that fuel all the biological activities.
Running, jumping, moving, growing, reproducing, and all other
activities require energy.
Replacement of damaged tissues: Food is required for making new
cell and used to replace damaged cells of the body.
Protect from diseases: There are different types of diseases caused by
the shortage of specific groups of foods. Our body requires these food
groups to protect our body from deficiency diseases and to become
healthy.
5.2 Nutrition
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Explain about nutrition
Nutrition is the process of taking in food and converting it into energy
and other vital nutrients required for life. Energy obtained from food
is important for different activities of the body. The food we eat keeps
us alive and provides the nourishment for growth, repairs of our body
cells and maintain good health.
5.3. Nutrients
Objectives
Activity 5.2: Group work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list important nutrients
I. What is difference between
explain about the importance nutrients and their deficiency
nutrition and nutrients?
Nutrients: are important chemical substances that are found in foods.
II. Explain the function of
In human body, we need nutrients for growth, source of energy and
food
stay healthy. We obtain these nutrients from the foods we eat. The
five important classes of nutrients are: carbohydrates, proteins, lipids
(Fats and oil) vitamins, minerals and water.
Macronutrients and Micronutrients
The three nutrients, carbohydrate, protein and fats are required in
large quantities. Such nutrients are called macronutrients. In contrast,
minerals and vitamins are needed in very small quantities and are
called micronutrients.
Vitamins and minerals do not supply energy but they play an important
role in the regulation of the metabolic activity in the body and help in
the utilization of proteins, fats and carbohydrates. Minerals are also
used for the formation of body structure and skeleton.
106
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are types of nutrients that provide energy for the
human body. They are composed of three elements, carbon, oxygen
and hydrogen. The human body gets carbohydrate from green plants.
These green plants prepare carbohydrate in the form of starch by the
process of Photosynthesis. They combine carbon dioxide and water
using energy from the sun in order to produce carbohydrate. Such
carbohydrates are the major sources of energy in our diet. Starch is
abundant in potatoes, bread, maize, rice and other cereals. Sugar
appears in our diet mainly as sucrose (table sugar) and is added to
drinks and many prepared foods such as biscuits and cakes. Sugars
also occur naturally in many fruits and some vegetables. One gram
of carbohydrate can provide, on average, 16 kilojoules (kJ) of energy.
An unavailable or indigestible carbohydrate provides dietary fiber
that does not serve as a source of energy. This indigestible part is a
product of plant's cell walls that consists mainly of cellulose. Human
body does not have any enzymes for the digestion of this cellulose.
Therefore, the plant cell walls reach the large intestine (colon)
without being digested. This undigested part of the diet is called fiber
or roughage. The colon contains many bacteria that can digest some
of the substances in the plant cell walls to form fatty acids.
The fibre and the bacteria, which multiply from feeding on it, add bulk
to the contents of the colon and help it to recollect water. This softens
the feces and reduces the time needed for the undigested residues to
pass out of the body. Both effects help to prevent constipation and
keep the colon healthy and increase bowel movement. It is found in
vegetables, fruits, and grains.
There are three types of carbohydrates
Monosaccharide The simplest carbohydrate is simple sugar or
monosaccharide which include glucose, fructose and galactose.
These three monosaccharide each have six carbon atoms, so
they are also known as hexose sugars. Their molecular formula is
Attention
CH₁₀.
The energy produced from
Disaccharide: Similar to other carbohydrates, disaccharides are
the raw materials is usually
measured in units known as
comprised of hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen. It is the combination
calories; one calorie is the
of two simple sugars to form a complex sugar called disaccharide.
amount of energy needed
These are maltose (Glucose + Glucose), sucrose (Glucose +
to raise the temperature of
Fructose and lactose (Glucose + Galactose). The general chemical
1 g or cubic centimeter (cc)
formula of disaccharides is C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁.
of water in 1°C. The calorie
units usually referred to in
Polysaccharide, which is formed when many simple sugar join
biology and nutrition are
together. They are substances whose molecules contain hundreds
kilogram-calories (Kcal);
or thousands of monosaccharaides linked together into long
each is 1,000 gram-calories.
chains. polysaccharides are found in plant cell as cellulose and
Grade 9 Biology
107
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
starch. In addition it stored in animals as glycogen. The general
Activity 5.3: Home work
formula of (C H₁₀₅)n.
Referee to biology books in
Fats and Oils
the library or search from
the internet in order to list
Fats and oils are high-energy nutrients that provide 35 to 45% of caloric
example food that belong to
intake. One gram of lipid gives 37 kJ of energy. Like carbohydrates,
fructose, sucrose, starch etc.
fats and oils are composed of three elements, carbon, oxygen and
In which group of
hydrogen. Fats are obtained from animal source and are solid at
carbohydrate do honey and
room temperature while oils are from plant source and liquid at room
table sugar belong?
temperature. The major sources of fat are meat, milk, cheese, butter
and egg-yolk. We obtain oils from fruits, seeds (e.g. sunflower seed).
In human body, lipid is used to make fatty tissue, adipose tissue,
under the skin forms a layer that can reduce heat losses from the body.
Besides satisfying metabolic energy needs, dietary fat, also serve as a
vehicle for the absorption of the fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K).
Proteins
Proteins are nutrients, which provide growth of the body and build a
new cell. It is made up of amino acid composed of carbon, hydrogen,
Activity 5.4: Think-pair-
oxygen and nitrogen. In all living things, the structural part of the cell
share
is composed of protein.
Compare the amount
The major sources of dietary proteins from animals are meat, fish,
energy obtained from one
eggs, milk and cheese. Plants such as beans, chickpea, soy beans and
gram of carbohydrate and
the same amount of lipid.
nuts are also important protein sources.
Discuss with your friend
next to you and share
your idea with the other
classmates.
Table 5.1: Source and function carbohydrate, protein and fats.
Nutrient
Good food sources
Use in the body
Carbohydrate
Barley, wheat, potato,
storage; source of energy, An unavailable or
bread, sugary foods like
indigestible carbohydrate provides dietary
honey
fiber that does not serve as a source of energy.
Lipids (Fat/oil) oils
Butter, cheese, animal fat,
source of energy (twice as much as carbo-
are liquid at room
groundnuts (peanuts)
hydrate); insulation against heat loss; some
temperature, but fats
hormones; cell membranes; insulation of nerve
are solid
fiber
Protein
Meat, fish, eggs, soya,
Growth; tissue repair; enzymes; some hor-
groundnuts, milk
mones; cell membranes; hair; nails; can be
broken down to provide energy
108
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Vitamins (Types)
Vitamins are nutrients, which are essential in small quantities for
Activity 5. 5: Group work
human body. They are organic substances needed for chemical
Make a group each of with
reactions of human cells. Plants can make these vitamins in their
four or five students and
leaves, but animals as well as human have to obtain many of them
have a discussion on:
ready-made either from plants or from other animals. If any one of
I. List some foods, which are
the vitamins is missing or deficient in the diet, the vitamin- deficiency
the source of minerals and
disease may develop. Examples of vitamins: are vitamin A, vitamin E,
vitamins.
thiamine (vitamin B1) and riboflavin (vitamin B2), and vitamin C.
II. Think about the types
of food you ate in the past
Minerals
24 hours, construct a table
similar to that of table 5.1.
Minerals are inorganic substances, which are essential in small
and classify the foods you
quantities for human body. The major minerals, which are necessary
ate accordingly. Was it a
for human body, are Calcium, Iron, phosphorous and Iron.
balanced diet? If not, What
do you propose it should be?
Calcium is used to build teeth and bones, it make muscles to contract
and help for the transmission of nerve impulses. The important
sources of calcium are milk, cheese etc.
Iron is a mineral which synthesizes the hemoglobin of red
blood cells. Hemoglobin is a molecule, which carries oxygen in
blood. The sources of iron in the diet are red meat, liver, kidney, eggs,
groundnuts, Tikur teff etc.
Iodine is a mineral, which makes thyroid gland to work properly.
The source iodine is iodized salt and seafood.
Phosphorus is a mineral required to build bones in animal as well as
humans body.
Water
Body fluids such as blood, lymph and tissue fluid are mainly composed
of water. The transportation of digested food into the body cell and
excretion of excess salt and urea out of the body is possible because
of water. Thus, water acts as a solvent and as a transport medium for
substances throughout the body.
Activity 5. 6: Group work
Use reference books or your text book to fill the following table
Nutrient
Sources
Use in the body
Deficiency disease
Vitamin C
Vitamin D
Vitamin A
Iron
Iodine
Calcium
Grade 9 Biology
109
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Key Terms
Nutrients: are chemical substance found in food and used by the human body for growth, or to provide
energy.
Carbohydrates: are types of nutrients that provide energy for the human body. One gram of
carbohydrate can provide, on average, 16 kilojoules (kJ) of energy while
Fats and oils: types of nutrients divided into fats (solid at room temperature) and oil (liquid at room
temperature). One gram of lipid gives 37 kJ of energy.
Proteins: are nutrients used for growth of the body and build a new cell. It can also provide energy.
One gram of protein can provide 17 kJ of energy.
Vitamins: are nutrients that are essential in small quantities for human body. They are organic
substances needed for chemical reactions inhuman cells. The major vitamins are: Vitamin A, vitamin B,
Vitamin D, Vitamin C
Minerals: are inorganic substances, which are essential in small quantities. The major minerals are
Calcium, Iron, phosphorous and Iron.
Fiber: is the indigestible part of the vegetables and other plant material, prevent constipation and keep
the colon healthy.
5.4. Balanced diets
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain the meaning of balanced diet
list types of food which make a balanced diet
Ethiopia has multicultural societies. These diverse societies have
different types of cultural foods. All these foods are different in their
preparation, flavor and ingredients. In addition, different people prefer
different food types. Some may prefer to feed on vegetables; others
may carbohydrate, animal protein etc. Different food or diet may
contain important composition of the above important nutrients.
In contrast, some diet may result in health problem because it may
contain high amount of fat or high amount of animal protein etc.
Genfo
Beyaynetu
Figure 5.1. Ethiopian cultural
foods
Kitfo
110
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
The diet that contains all of the nutrients in the correct amount and
proportion is termed as a balanced diet. A balanced diet must contain
enough proportion of carbohydrates and fats to meet our energy
requirement. It should also contain enough protein of the right kind
to provide the amino acids to make new cells and produce tissues
growth. The diet must also contain vitamins and mineral salts, plant
fiber and water for normal functioning of the body. Therefore, a
balanced diet gives us all the essential substances that we need in the
right quantities.
proteins
Fats
Water
Key Terms
Diet: the food that you eat
Balanced diet: the diet that
contains all of the nutrients
The six
in the correct amount and
proportion
essential
Minerals
Carbohydrates
Deficiency disease: disease
nutrients
occurs when a person does
not have enough amount of
one particular nutrient and
suffers health problems.
Vitamins
Figure 5.2. Balanced diet
Balanced diet depends on age, sex, activities and lifestyles
Activity 5.7: Think — Pair -
Share
The feeding habit of people depends on where they live, their social
issues, their age, their sex their personal activity and physiological
Discuss with a friend next
conditions etc. For example, a pregnant woman should eat more food
to you and share your idea
for the development and growth of her baby. She should get more
with the other classmates.
minerals like calcium for the development of bone and teeth of her
Do you think that that our
baby. Children have a greater energy requirement than adults because
body needs energy when we
they are still in the process of growth. Young children also need more
are resting, such as lying on
protein than adult does because they are constantly developing and
our bed?
making new cells. Elderly people generally have lower energy and
If your answer is yes, why
protein needs. However, they need to eat a balanced diet in order to
do we need food when we
stay healthy.
lying on our bed?
Grade 9 Biology
111
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Naturally, female have a relatively higher fat content in their bodies
than male. Fat in female body is stored in fat tissue, such as under the
skin. These fatty tissues have a lower metabolic rate than muscular
tissue, so women generally have a lower energy requirement than men.
Therefore, men should eat relatively more energy food than women
should. Some jobs that involve physical activity require more energy
than less active jobs. People who are usually work physical exercise
such as athletes also require high energy and high protein diets. The
extra protein is required for muscle development.
Table 5.2: Energy requirement by the body depends on age, sex,
activities and lifestyles
Activity 5.8: Group work
Different groups of human
Energy used in a day/kilocalories
Male
Female
Make a group of four or five
students and:
8-year-old child
2031
2031
Compare the daily energy
Teenager, aged 14
2987
2318
requirements of the people
Adult office worker
2629
2342
shown in table 5.2 and
Adult manual worker
3585
2987
explain what makes the
differences in their energy
Pregnant woman
2390
requirement.
Breast-feeding mother
2748
5.5 Deficiency diseases
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain the meaning of deficiency disease
list the main deficiency diseases caused by different diets
identify different diet as a source balanced diet
Human body requires a balanced diet for normal functioning of the
body. If food intake in human body is inadequate in carbohydrate,
proteins, minerals or vitamins, it causes deficiency diseases. A
deficiency disease occurs when a person does not have enough
amount of one particular nutrient and suffers health problems as a
result. Examples of deficiency diseases are Kwashiorkor, Marasmus,
Anemia, Rickets and Scurvy etc.
Marasmus
Marasmus is a deficiency disease caused by inadequate carbohydrate
content in the human body. Like kwashiorkor, the incidence of ma
rasmus increases in children. The symptoms of marasmus are thin
arm and leg, little muscle, old-looking face. Peoples with this disease
are extremely thin with reduced fat and muscle tissue. Their skin is
112
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
thin and hangs in folds. Treatment involves delivery of an energy rich,
balanced diet.
Kwashiorkor
Kwashiorkor is a deficiency disease caused by inadequate protein
content in human body especially in children. Some symptoms of
kwashiorkor are dry or flaky skin, swelling of leg and abdomen, and
changes of the hair color, weakness and irritability. Protein deficiency
can often be cured or prevented by an intake of protein.
Old person's
face
Attention
Wrinkled skin
Distended
abdomen
The term 'marasmus' is a
Greek word, meaning decay.
Severe muscle
Wasting
Swollen
ankles
Figure 5.4. child suffering from
Figure 5.5. Child suffering
Marasmus
from Kwashior
Diseases caused by deficiency of minerals and vitamins.
Anemia
Anemia is a deficiency disease caused by the lack of iron. A human
adult should take enough amount of iron, which is important for the
normal functioning of the body. A human body could not produce
enough haemoglobin if the amount of iron in the blood is insufficient.
Less haemoglobin in the body results in less oxygen transportation.
If the oxygen level of blood became less, it results in less respiration
producing less energy. The symptom of anemia includes feeling weak,
tired and irritable. It can treat or protect by using iron capsules and by
odd shaped
consuming iron rich food.
skull
Activity 5.9: Think-pair-share
skeletal
deformities
Discuss with your friend next to you and share your idea with the
other classmates.
i. What is the function of vitamin D in the human body?
stunted
growth
ii. What is the main source of vitamin D?
Bowed legs
Rickets
Deficiency disease caused by the shortage of vitamin D is called
Rickets. It results in deformed bones in the legs of children. Vitamin D
Figure 5.6. Child suffering from
rickets
Grade 9 Biology
113
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
is the only vitamin that the human body can make upon exposure of
the skin to morning and evening sunlight. In addition, oily fish, butter,
milk, cheese and egg-yolk are some foods that provide vitamin D.
Vitamin D help in the absorption of calcium and phosphorus through
the gut wall, which is important to build bone and teeth.
Scurvy
Scurvy is a deficiency disease caused by a lack of vitamin C (ascorbic
acid). This deficiency disease occurs when fibres in the connective
tissue of skin and blood vessels do not form properly. This disease
causes bleeding under the skin, particularly at the joints, bleeding gums
and poor healing of wounds. Vitamin C can't be stored in the body
therefore, it is important to take it daily. The good sources of vitamin
C are oranges, lemons, grapefruit, tomatoes, fresh green vegetables.
Figure 5.6. an individual suffering from scurvy
Table 5.3: Summary of the major nutrients and their deficiency
diseases.
Name
Rich food sources
Use in body
Deficiency disease
Protein
Meat, fish, eggs,
To build cell structure, growth
Kwashiorkor
soya, groundnuts, milk
and repair.
Carbohy-
Barley, wheat, potato,
Provide energy
Marasmus
drate
bread, sugary foods like
honey
Vitamin C
oranges, lemons, other
tissue repair, resistance to
bleeding gums (scurvy)
citrus fruits
disease
Vitamin D
fish oil, milk, butter (also
strengthens bones and teeth
soft bones, legs bow out-
made by skin in the Sun)
wards (rickets)
Iron
liver, meat, cocoa, eggs
used in formation of hemo-
tiredness, lack of energy
globin in red blood cells for
(anemia)
transport of oxygen
Calcium
milk, fish, green vegetables
strengthens bones and teeth
weak, brittle bones and
teeth (rickets), muscle
weakness and cramps
114
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
5.6 Malnutrition
Objectives
Activity 5.10: Think-pair-
share
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain the meaning of malnutrition
Discuss with your friend
differentiate problems relating to malnutrition
next to you and share
discuss how stunting, wasting, underweight and micro-
your idea with the other
nutrient deficiency
classmate.
explain what cause obesity
Sometimes a person can eat
explain about body mass index (BMI)
a lot of food, can this cause
malnutrition?
Malnutrition is defined as the insufficient, excessive or imbalanced
consumption of nutrients, which leads to health problems. The causes
of malnutrition can be poverty, famine due to drought or flood, soil
erosion, wars, too little land for too many people, ignorance of proper
nutritional requirements.
The dual burden of malnutrition consists of both under nutrition and
overweight and obesity, as well as diet-related non communicable
diseases. Malnutrition causes tissue damage, growth retardation,
disorderly differentiation, reduce developing of children's brain
including negative behavioural issues which can cause poor intellectual
capacity, class repetition, reduce productivity.
Under nutrition the most common form of malnutrition is caused by
under nutrition of protein and dietary energy (Carbohydrate, lipids).
If the total intake of food is not sufficient to meet the body's need
for energy, it leads to loss of weight, muscle wastage, weakness and
ultimately starvation. Extreme reduction of diets, such as carbohydrate
foods can result in the deficiency disease like marasmus. The victims
of malnutrition due to food deficiencies have reduced resistance to
different types of diseases. Under nutrition addresses the following
four broad groups of conditions :
Wasting (low weight-for-height) is defined as low weight-for-height.
It often indicates recent and severe weight loss, although it can also
persist for a long time. It usually occurs when a person has not had
food of adequate quality and quantity and/or they have had frequent
or prolonged illnesses. Wasting in children is associated with a higher
risk of death if not treated properly.
Stunting (low height-for-age), is defined as low height for age. It is the
result of chronic or recurrent under nutrition, usually associated with
poverty, poor maternal health and nutrition, frequent illness and/or
inappropriate feeding and care in early life. Stunting prevents children
from reaching their physical and cognitive potential.
Grade 9 Biology
115
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Underweight (low weight-for-age) is defined as low weight-for-age.
Key Terms
Micronutrient deficiencies are a lack of vitamins and minerals that
Malnutrition: the
insufficient, excessive or
are essential for body functions such as producing enzymes, hormones
imbalanced consumption
and other substances needed for growth and development.
of nutrients, which leads to
health problems.
In contrast, when the diet contains too much fat it causes diseases like
coronary heart disease. If fatty substance builds up in the arteries,
Wasting : low weight for
it reduces the diameter of these blood vessels which results in blood
hight
clots and leads to heart attack.
Stunting; low height for age
Underweight: low weight
Obesity: If you eat more food than you want, your body stores the
for age
extra food as fat. Then the stored fat results in obesity (overweight).
Obesity: can be caused by
People with overweight may use diet contains fattening foods, such as
a high intake of fatty foods,
high fat foods and foods with a lot of sugar.
foods containing a lot of
In order to prevent malnutrition, it is better to
added sugar plus the effects
Consume diverse and nutrient dense food,
of too little exercise.
avoid junk foods and sugary foods,
do regular physical exercise, etc.
Obesity is caused because of an imbalance between the energy store
in human body and the energy released. An increase in consumption
of high-energy foods, without an equal increase in physical activity
leads to an unhealthy increase in weight. In other way, decreased levels
of physical activity can also result in an energy imbalance and lead to
weight gain.
People who are overweight and obese are at high risk to have health
problems such as, heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and
arthritis (worn joints).
Activity 5.11: Group work
Make a group, each with four or five students and discuss in group
about:
Which of the following activities may cause or may not cause
obesity?
Why does it may or may not cause obesity?
i. Sitting and watch TV
ii. Playing football in the field
iii. Playing computer games
iv. Going to school by Walking
V. Going to school by taxi
Fig 5.7 Persons with obesity
vi. Eating breakfast with high fats and sugars contents
116
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Obesity can be controlled by
Activity 5.12: Class work /
Eating less high energy foods (lower energy intake)
Individual assignment
Taking more exercise (increase energy output).
1. Calculate the BMI of a
Eating a balanced diet with a lower intake of energy
person who has a body mass
of 80 kg and he is 1.85m tall.
Is he/she likely to be obese?
Attention
If yes why?
2. Form a group of 5-7
There are two ways in which people can identify being obese:
students and go to nearby
being 20% above the recommended weight for his or her height
health facility, measure your
weight and height, calculate
having a body mass index (BMI) greater than 30. Body mass
your body mass index and
index = body mass (kg) / height2 (metres2)
compare it with your age
A person with a BMI Status below 18.5 is underweight,18.5-24.9 normal
then present to the students/
weight,25.0-29.9 overweight, 30.0 and above obese.
class
Adolphe Quetelet, a Belgian statistician and scientist, developed
BMI in the 19th century. He based the formula on measurements of
thousands of soldiers. It provided a useful guide to check on a healthy
body mass, but it may not tell the whole story. Fitness training builds
up larger muscles, which weigh more than fat and can make the BMI
of a very high therefore, athlete with a large frame appear in the
'overweight' category.
5.7. Substance abuse
Objectives
Activity 5.13: Think-pair-
share
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
describe the effects of tar and carcinogens in tobacco smoke
Discuss with your friend
on the gas exchange system
next to you and share
describe the short-term effects of nicotine and carbon
your idea with the other
monoxide on the cardiovascular system
classmate.
explain the social and psychological effect of chewing Khat
i. What are drugs?
discuss the consequences of doping.
ii. List some drugs which
have medicinal value
Drugs
iii. Can we get drugs from
A drug is any substance taken into the body that change and affects
food ? if your answer is
chemical reactions in the body. It can be taken legally to reduce a
yes list some of them
symptom such as a headache or to treat a different types of infection,
iv. List some stimulant
this is called medicinal drugs. There are also other drugs which could
drugs which are taken
also be one taken illegally in order to provide stimulation or induce
for recreational purpose.
sleep or create hallucinations (recreational drugs).
Can drugs be found in our food?
Drugs are present in many food products such as: tea, coffee, energy
drinks and alcoholic drinks. Though they have many useful medicinal
Grade 9 Biology
117
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
properties their stimulant properties can produce caffeine, a nasty
condition that can readily addict.
What is substance abuse?
Substance abuse is using legal or illegal drugs (substances) in the
wrong way or in the excess amount. Some of the drugs are medical
drugs taken legally to reduce a symptom and pain of diseases. These
drugs designed to suppress pain, treat and cure diseases. In addition
to medical substances, other legal substances are present in many
products such as:
tea, coffee and 'energy drinks' (caffeine)
tobacco(nicotine)
alcoholic drinks (alcohol)
Although these substances are legal, they can cause serious effects
when taken excessively or over long periods of time.
Peoples are using drugs illegally to provide stimulation, induce sleep,
or create hallucinations (recreational drugs) example of such drugs
are: alcohol, tobacco, Khat, heroin etc. Peoples are also using alcohol,
nicotine and caffeine for their pleasurable effects, to help them relax
or concentrate. Some of the commonly practiced drugs in our country
include:
1. Cigarettes smoking
Activity 5.14: Group work
Cigarette is made up of a plant called tobacco (Nicotiana tobacum)
which originally cultivated and used in Central America. People use
Make a group of four or
five students and make a
cigarette in order to stimulate their body or because they are addicted
discussion on some of the
to it.
common smokers reaction
The chemical composition of cigarette leads to addiction and problem
or their habits during
smoking.
in human health. The main components of cigarette or tobacco are
tar, carbon monoxide and Nicotine.
i. Tar
Tar is the black sticky substance found in cigarette that collects in the
Attention
lungs when the smoke cools. The health effect of tar can be chronic
bronchitis, lung cancer etc.
Currently, The smoking
of a flavored tobacco
Chronic bronchitis
called shisha has become
When people smoke cigarette, the chemical substance called tar
fashionable among young
accumulates in the bronchioles. Tar irritates the lining of the
people. However, the social,
bronchioles and stimulates the production of excess mucus. The
economic and psychological
effect of shisha is similar to
function of cilia in our lung is to remove dust, dirty and excess mucus
that of ordinary cigarette.
from the lining of lungs. However, when cilia damaged by smoking,
it will be difficult for cilia to remove the excess mucus and dirt. This
leads to the collection of dirt, bacteria and viruses that block the
118
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
bronchioles. This stimulates smoker's to cough which is an effort to
move the mucus, the bronchioles and bronchi becomes thicker. This
thickening of the bronchioles causes them to narrow and makes it
difficult to breathe, this leads to infections such as pneumonia. This
damage and obstruction of the airways is chronic bronchitis.
In addition, there are different chemical compounds in tar such as
carcinogen (produce cancer) compounds. Cancer starts because of the
changes in the epithelial cells of the lungs that lead to the development
of a mass of cells, known as a tumor. It is this tumor which results in
cancer.
Emphysema
Smokers usually have weakened alveoli wall because of the above
action of tar that result in coughing. During coughing, some of the
weakened alveoli burst. Then the amount of alveoli decrease as well
as absorbing surface of the lungs is greatly reduced. Then the smoker
cannot oxygenate his or her blood properly and the least exertion
makes the person breathless and exhausted. Bronchioles collapse
during expiration, trapping air in the alveoli, which often burst. This
condition is called emphysema.
ii. Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas found in cigarette. During
cigarette smoking, the carbon monoxide enters to lung. This carbon
monoxide diffuses across the walls of the alveoli and diffuses into
red blood cells where it combines with haemoglobin to form the
compound carboxy- haemoglobin.
The carbon monoxide combines permanently with hemoglobin. Then
no more oxygen is carried by hemoglobin that results in the reduction
of the volume of oxygen in blood. Therefore, less oxygen is supplied
to the heart. In this case, the heart beat increases to get more oxygen.
Carbon monoxide may also damage the lining of the blood vessels.
In this case, smokers put the health of their cardiovascular system at
risk. The damaging of the walls of arteries may lead to the build-up of
fatty tissue and the reduction of blood flow. This may result coronary
Activity 5.15: Think-pair-
share
heart disease (CHD) and stroke. These diseases are a major cause of
death and disability in the world.
Discuss with your friend
next to you and share
iii. Nicotine
your idea with the other
classmate.
Nicotine is a compound found in cigarette. It is a stimulating and
I. What is the function of
relaxing compound which has a molecular structure that allows it to
hemoglobin?
interact with our nervous system. In addition to its stimulating effect,
II. How does carbon
nicotine is a compound which produce addiction.
monoxide reduce amount of
When people smoke cigarettes, nicotine from cigarette is absorbed
oxygen in smokers lung?
Grade 9 Biology
119
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
through the alveoli to enter the Blood stream. Then it is able to go to
the brain through blood circulation.
In the brain, nicotine activates the release of dopamine. Dopamine is
the natural neurotransmitter substance associated with our experience
of pleasure. Long-term exposure to nicotine eventually comes to
have the reverse effect, actually depressing the ability to experience
pleasure. So more nicotine is needed to 'satisfy', and cigarettes become
addictive. Smokers find it increasingly hard to quit the habit.
Nicotine also increases the heart rate and blood pressure. It narrows
the arterioles, which increases blood pressure. It decreases the blood
flow, particularly in the hands and feet, and it makes blood clotting
more likely. It also increases the stickiness of blood platelets that
promote blood clotting.
Tar
Cadmium
material for paving roads
in battery acid
Arsenic
Carbon Monoxide
in rat poison
Butane
released in car
Lighter fluid
exhaust fumes
Lead
Formaldehyde
Acetic acid
in batteries
known as embalming fluid
ingredient in hair dye
Ammonia
Acetone
Figure 5.8 Substances in tobacco smoke
2. Drinking Alcohol
Alcohol is a socially acceptable drug in many countries including
Ethiopia. In Ethiopia, there are different types of alcohol drinks such
as Tella, Arekie (Katicala), Beer, Wine. When human body consumes
Attention
alcohol, it is absorbed through the wall of the stomach and small
intestine and it is absorbed into the blood. Alcohol gets distributed
The breaking down of
through- out the body by the help of blood circulation. It is absorbed
alcohol by liver enzyme
by liver cells and broken down by liver enzymes, There- fore its
happens more quickly in
concentration in the blood decreases gradually.
men than in women because
men have more of these
To decreases the risk of alcohol-related harms, the World health
enzymes and their enzymes
organization identifies a standard drink as having 10 grams of pure
tend to be more active. They
ethanol. It recommended no more than two drinks per day on average
also have more water and
for both men and women.
less fat in their bodies than
women do, which tends
Alcohol is a depressant. It affects the brain by slowing down the
to cause the concentration
of alcohol in the blood to
transmission of nerve impulses. Consuming larger quantities of
alcohol leads to:
decrease more quickly.
120
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
i. Loss of coordination,
ii. Loss of self-control.
Activity 5.16: Group work
iii. Loss of judgment and control of movements
Discuss with your friend
iv. Slower reaction times(the interval between receiving a stimulus
next to you and share
your idea with the other
and making a response) of judgment and slower reaction times
classmate.
Alcohol drink and addiction
What is the common
reaction of alcohol drunken
Some people become dependent upon alcohol and they are referred
man?
to as alcoholics. They feel tense and irritable. It is hard to cope with
Why is everybody
everyday problems without drinking they develop a tolerance as more
discouraged from drinking
enzymes that metabolize alcohol are made in the liver. They therefore
particularly when driving?
need to take greater quantities of alcohol to get the same effect.
Alcoholics can cause their families pain and unhappiness. They can
become aggressive after drinking and spend a lot of money on drink.
There are also other social problems such as crime, family disputes,
marital breakdown, child neglect and abuse, absenteeism from work,
Attention
vandalism, assault and violent crime including murder.
The liver is the site of the
Long-term effects of alcohol
breakdown of alcohol and
Drinking large quantities of alcohol over a number of years can lead
other toxins. Drugs are
to stomach ulcers, heart disease and brain dam- age. In addition, large
broken down in the body by
amount of alcohol damage the liver tissue and replaced by scar tissue
enzymes and the products
are excreted. The breakdown
known as cirrhosis. This condition may leads to death unless the
products can be detected in
person stops drinking.
the urine, and this is why
urine tests are carried out
3. Heroin
to see if people have been
Heroin is a powerful depressant that slows down the nervous system.
taking drugs. Athletes taking
It has a chemical structure that is similar to endorphins, a group of
part in competitions and car
chemicals that are found in the brain. Endorphins are made naturally
drivers who have been in
in the brain and provide relief when the body experiences pain or
accidents are routinely tested
stress.
for drugs.
Endorphins work on the synapses in the brain and preventing neurons
from transmitting impulses from pain receptors, so they producing
pain relief. When a person takes heroin, the heroin molecules bind
to the endorphin receptor sites, blocking nerve transmission. This
mimics the function of natural endorphins. Therefore, by using
heroin, the feeling of pain disappears and addiction produced. People
practice to take heroin to reduce the pain. This is how the body
develops a tolerance to the drug, and it has to be taken in ever-greater
quantities in order to feel euphoria or just to reduce the pain.
4. Cannabis
Cannabis is the most commonly used illegal drug in the world. It is
drug from Cannabis plant. Mostly it is the flower of cannabis plant,
harvested, dried, and used as drug. Some people named this drug
Grade 9 Biology
121
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
as weed, some call it pot, and others call it marijuana. This cannabis
plant has been used as a drug for both recreational and traditional
medicines for a long period. This drug contains a stimulant or
psychoactive component called Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
Peoples used this cannabis by smoking, vaporizing, together to food
and as extract.
Cannabis causes: enjoyment, different states of mind and sense of
time, difficulty concentrating, reduced short-term memory and body
action relaxation and it results in an increase in appetite. The effect of
Figure 5.9 Cannabis
cannabis in human body last for two to six hours, based on the quantity
of the drug used. When cannabis is taken at high amount, it causes
mental effects like: nervousness, panic, false beliefs, hallucinations,
suspicion, and psychosis.
5. Chewing khat
Khat (Catha edulis) is bushy plant whose leaves are chewed for its
stimulant effect. This plant is grown in southern Arabia and Eastern
Africa including Ethiopia, Somalia, and Kenya. Khat is usually
supplied as a bundle of leaves and fresh shoots wrapped in false
banana leaves.
Khat contains a chemical compound known as cathinone, which
affects central nervous system (CNS). This cathinone can be found
only in fresh Khat leaves. Chewing khat releases Cathinone into
the saliva that can be absorbed to the body easily. Only fresh leaves
are chewed, because cathinone soon degrades into old in dry plant
material.
Figure 5.10. Khat
Although khat can be ingested as an infusion or smoked, the most
common route of administration is to chew the fresh plant. The juice
of the masticated material is swallowed, while the residues are spat
out. In some places, teas from dried leaves are also consumed.
Ethiopia is one of the country where large number of people with the
habit of chewing chat. In the previous years, it was mainly cultivated
Activity 5.17: Group work
in eastern part of the country. However, currently, it is grown and
1. Make a group of four
consumed in all parts of the country.
or five students and make
This current increment in khat consumption brings socio-economic,
a discussion on some of
psychological and physical health consequence on the individuals
the social, economic and
involved. Chewing khat induce a state of joy and feelings of increased
behavioral problems of
alertness and stimulation. At the end its consequence results in a
chewing chat.
depressed mood, irritability, loss of appetite, gastritis and peptic ulcer,
2. What are the common
disease and difficulty sleeping. In addition, the habit of chewing khat
reactions of a person after
leads to some social problems like family fragment, multiple sexual
chewing chat? Why ?
practices and the spread of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) due
to unprotected sex. Early initiation of sexual activity was also reported
122
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
among Khat chewers.
6. Doping
The term "doping" refers to the use of prohibited medications, drugs,
Activity 5.18: Group work
or treatments in competitive sports It is practiced in athletes with
the intention of improving athletic performance. Performance
Make a group of four or
enhancing drugs (PEDs) is another term used to for drugs used by
five students and make a
athletes to improve their athletic performance.
discussion on:
1. All athletes test their blood
The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) uses a battery of blood
and urine before the athletics
and urine tests to determine if athletes are cheating. A key tool is the
competition. Why?
biological passport program, which tests all athletes for doping and
2. Have you heard about
performance enhancing drugs.
doping? If yes, discuss its
Why is doping such a big deal?
meaning.
The most important reason doping is a big deal is the fact that many
of these substances can have harmful and long-lasting side effects
which may include :
Cardiovascular: irregular heart rhythm, elevated blood pressure,
heart attack, sudden death.
Central Nervous System: insomnia, anxiousness, depression,
aggressive behavior, suicide, headache, addiction with withdrawal,
psychosis, tremor, dizziness, stroke
Attention
Respiratory: nose bleeds, sinusitis
The word doping is probably
derived from the Dutch
Hormonal: infertility, gynecomastia (enlarged breasts), decreased
word dop, the name of an
testicular size, low sex drive, acromegaly (coarse bones in face, hands,
alcoholic beverage made of
and feet), cancer
grape skins used by Zulu
warriors in order to enhance
The second issue is more of a moral dilemma. These banned substances
their prowess in battle.
are used to gain an unfair advantage which significantly diminishes
the spirit of competition.
The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), has a program which has
a purpose, to protect the athletes' fundamental right to participate in
doping-free sport and thus promote health, fairness and equality for
athletes worldwide.
What substances are banned from use?
Some drugs are banned both in and out of competition due to their
performance enhancing properties, while others are only banned
during competition. Another reason for banning a drug is due to their
ability to mask the presence of a different banned drug during testing.
In general, the following classes of drugs are banned: Street drugs,
stimulants, anabolic steroids, peptide hormones (i.e. human growth
Grade 9 Biology
123
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
hormone [hGH]), alcohol and beta blockers (for archery and rifle
Key Terms
shooting only), diuretics, beta-2 agonists, anti-estrogens, blood
Drugs: refers to any
doping, and gene manipulation.
substance taken into the
body that modifies or affects
Prohibited list: some drugs are listed on Prohibited list which is the
chemical reactions in the
document identifying the substances and methods that are prohibited
body.
in competition, out of competition, and in particular sports.
Heroin is a powerful
The criteria for adding a substance to the prohibited list are:- Must
depressant affecting the
nervous system. It is taken
meet any 2 of the following 3 criteria:
into the body in the form
It has the potential to enhance or enhances sport performance;
of injection. People often
It represents an actual or potential health risk to the athlete;
share needles for injection.
Sharing needles can result
It violates the Spirit of Sport.
in infections such as HIV/
Substances & methods prohibited at all times: all prohibited
AIDS
substances in this class are non-specified substances anabolic agents
Nicotine: it is also a
are prohibited, ptide hormones, growth factors, related substances,
stimulant, it increases pulse
and mimetics, growth factors and growth factor modulators, beta-2
rate and narrows blood
vessels which can cause
agonists, hormone and metabolic modulators, diuretics And gene
damage
doping, masking agents, blood doping, Substances & methods
prohibited in competition: Stimulants, narcotics, cannabinoids,
Emphysema: walls between
alveoli break making large
glucocorticoids
sacs, reducing surface area
massively and making
Prohibited in particular sports:- Beta-blockers
difficult to breathe.
For athletes who need a banned drug for legitimate medical reasons,
Carbon monoxide:
the anti-doping programs offer a way to request a therapeutic use of
irreversibly bonds with
exemption (TUE) so the athlete can use the drug. The athlete must
hemoglobin which can lead
have a physician complete a TUE form that states the athlete needs
to oxygen starvation
the drug to treat their medical condition and that an alternative non-
Cannabis: stimulant or
banned drug is not available or insufficiently treats their condition.
psychoactive component
The TUE is reviewed by a medical committee, which either allows the
called Tetrahydrocannabinol
athlete to take the drug or denies the athlete's request.
(THC)
Cathinone ; a chemical
Doping Consequences
compound found in
Khat which affects central
1. Physical and Mental Health: - Physical health: depending on
nervous system (CNS).
the substance, the dosage, and the consumption frequency, doping
products may have particularly negative side effects on health. Some
Doping is the use of
prohibited medications,
damages to the body are irreversible and may lead the athlete's life
drugs, or treatments in
to be in great danger. The following section will outline the possible
competitive sports.
health consequences and sports benefits to using certain groups of
doping substances.
Steroids: General side effects:
Increased risk of liver disease
Increased risk of cardiovascular disease
High blood pressure
124
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Acne
Baldness
In Males: Shrinking testicles, sexual side effects (reduced sperm
production, impotence, libido disorders) Breast growth
In Females: Deepening of voice Excessive hair growth on face &
body abnormal menstrual cycles
Enlarged clitoris
Erythropoietin (EPO)
Increased blood viscosity (thickness/stickiness)
Pulmonary embolism
Increased risk of heart attack and stroke
General weakness
High blood pressure
Human Growth Hormone
Severe headaches
Loss of vision
High blood pressure and heart failure
Diabetes and tumors
Crippling arthritis
Irreversible acromegaly
Enlargement of the hands & feet
Protruding forehead, brow, skull & jaw
Heart enlargement
Water retention
Liver and thyroid damage
2. Psychological health- Some doping substances may not be
detrimental to the body but exercise an impact on mental health. It
has been scientifically evidenced that anxiety, obsessive disorders, or
psychosis are direct consequences of doping.
Psychological dependence
Increased aggression
Mood swings
3. Social consequences- The existence of an athlete who was held
guilty of doping may be completely disrupted. Indeed, doping may
represent a danger to health, but it may also be prejudicial to fame,
respect, and creditworthiness. Even in the future negative findings are
regularly questioned by the media and the entourage. The poor image
will remain in the collective unconscious and the athlete could remain
isolated.
Grade 9 Biology
125
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
4. Financial consequences:- As regards high-performance sports, an
infringement of anti-doping rules often leads to a loss of income, the
reimbursement of prize money, and of sponsorship money. An athlete
suspended for several years, or even life-banned, cannot earn his/her
living as usual and can be forced countries loss foreign treasures from
athletes even banned countries from any sport competition in the
world.
5. Sporting consequences:- A doping violation may mean loss of
results, rankings, medals, and qualification places at events. It could
also have an impact on members of a team causing medals to be lost
a day-to-day basis.
6. Legal consequences:- Doping may have major legal consequences.
A doped athlete may be suspended, i.e., he/she may not take part in a
sports competition on or in organized training sessions.
Problems of using drugs
Peoples start using substances because of different reasons. Some
people taking substances for stimulation, some for recreational value,
and others use it because of the pressure from other people. Whatever
the reason, the effect is almost similar among all the users. When
substance users first start taking a substance, users may think they can
control how much they use. However, when time passes, they may
want more of the drug to get the same feeling or effect. Over time
some people can reaches beyond abuse to addiction. Addiction can
produce health, social, economic and cultural problems. Some of the
problems that drug users faced are:
Eat more or less than normal
Change their friends a lot
Stop taking care of themselves
Sleep at unusual hours
Lack concern in things they used to love
Have problems at work or with family
Spend more time alone than they used to
Switch quickly from feeling good to bad
Financial problems - stealing, loss of job
Strong desire to use the substance
difficulty to keep a job,
family breakdown and homelessness, tendency to avoid
friends and families,
Preferring the company of other addicts, and so they become
isolated from the society
How people recover from drug addiction?
Addictions are treatable. With the right plan and resources, recovery
126
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
is possible. The following are important steps in recovering.
Anyone who is addicted for any drug should admit to his friends, and
to himself, that he has a problem.
Find support from others.
Rewrite daily routine.
Enjoy the small successes.
Recognize and avoid relapse.
Reach freedom, and stay there
5.8. Infectious and noninfectious diseases
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
identify infectious and non-infectious diseases
list the major infectious diseases
explain about modes of transmission and prevention of
infectious diseases
explain about COVID-19
Disease is a condition in which the body does not function normally,
and which produces symptoms such as: headache, increased body
temperature, pain, distress or feeling weak. There are two types of
diseases are called infectious and non-infectious diseases.
Activity 5.19: Group work
Make a group of four or five students and discuss about
i. The difference between infectious and non-infectious diseases
ii. List two infectious and non-infectious diseases.
iii. List some diseases that occur in your surrounding and arrange them in the following table.
Name of the disease
Infectious
Non infectious
causes
1.
2.
3.
5.8. 1. Infectious diseases
Infectious diseases are diseases that are caused by disease causing
organisms. These types of diseases can be transmitted from person to
person such as HIV-AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria etc. Disease causing
organisms are organisms, which cause diseases. Examples of disease
causing organisms are bacteria, virus, protozoa, and fungi.
Grade 9 Biology
127
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
There are different types of infectious diseases that caused by different
Attention
disease causing organisms. Their difference is based on:
Endemic: This disease is
the type of host that they infect, some infect human, some infect
occurring when disease-
only plant etc.
causing agent exists
permanently in specific
their mode of transmission, some are transmit by insects, some by
place or population, For
contaminated water/food etc.
example malaria is endemic
in Afar region.
type of disease causing organisms, some are caused by viruses,
Epidemics are diseases that
some by bacteria etc.
occur suddenly and then
the severity of the disease, such as the common cold, measles
spread in a specific area or
and influenza, only affect us for a short period of time. Others,
within a specific population
such as tuberculosis (TB), human immune deficiency virus (HIV)
group, For example, in 2015
Ebola was epidemic in west
infection may last a much longer time.
Africa.
Transmission of infectious diseases
Pandemic is an epidemic
that spreads far more widely
An understanding of the biology of the pathogen and its mode of
throughout the whole world.
transmission is essential to control and prevent the disease. Different
It affects a huge number of
infectious diseases have different mode of transmission.
people. Example COVID-19
Some infectious diseases are transmitted from one per- son to
another by direct contact with a patient.
Other infectious diseases are transmit by drinking contaminated
water or by eating contaminated food, (food or water contains
disease-causing organisms like bacteria and virus). This is because
the infectious organisms can survive in water, human food, faeces
Some infectious diseases are transmitted by insect bite.
Some infectious diseases are transmitted by sexual inter-course
etc.
Preventing infections and control methods of infectious diseases
Control is an attempt to break transmission cycles by removing the
conditions that favour the spread of the disease causing organisms.
1. Vaccination: is a major control measure for many infectious
diseases; it works by making the body to defend against disease
causing organisms.
2. Personal hygiene; people of all ages should wash their hands after
using the toilet and before handling or eating food; this protects
the entrance of disease causing organisms into our body.
3. Hygienic food preparation: food should be covered to keep flies
away, kitchen surfaces should be cleaned to kill bacteria, and food
should be cooked exhaustively to make sure any bacteria are killed.
4. Boiling cooking and/or drinking water to kill the pathogens
128
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
5. Proper waste disposal: household waste should be put into covered
bins and collected at regular intervals.
6. Sewage treatment: toilet waste is a serious health threat if it is not
disposed properly. Water pipe should be arranged far from toilet
drainage. For example, the disease causing organism that cause
giardia and cholera are transmitted through contamination of
drinking water by faeces and sewage.
Human immune deficiency virus infection/ acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV-AIDS)
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome is caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) HIV infection rates are especially
Activity 5.20: Think — Pair -
high sub-Saharan Africa including Ethiopia. Peoples who have HIV
Share
in their body are called HIV-positive or HIV carriers. Usually, these
Discuss with your friend
HIV positive people do not show any symptom of the disease for
next to you and share
several years after infection. Infection of HIV starts when the virus
your idea with the other
classmate.
infects and enters to T-lymphocytes. These are cells that defend our
body from diseases.
Explain the difference
between being HIV-positive
HIV replicates and survives in human T-lymphocyte cells. During its
and having AIDS
replication HIV, destroys these T-lymphocytes cells. As a result the
number of T-lymphocytes gradually decrease which leads to declining
of disease resistant mechanism of the body. When the body reduced in
its dis- ease resistant mechanism, it causes acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS). AIDS is the result of opportunistic diseases like
pneumonia, TB, cancers; weight loss, diarrhoea etc.
Transmission of HIV-AIDS
HIV can be passed from one person to another by direct exchange of
body fluids such as:
Fluid transfer from one person to another during sexual
intercourse
Blood transfusion from one person to another, during blood
donation
Sharing needles in intravenous drug users
Mother to fetus across placenta, more often, through the mixing
of blood during birth
Mother to infant in breast milk
Prevention and control of HIV-AIDS
There are no cure drug for HIV-AIDS and no vaccine for HIV, there-
fore it is very important to prevent this disease by the following meth-
ods.
Grade 9 Biology
129
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
All blood should be tested before transfusions in activity of blood
Attention
donation
T- Lymphocyte cells
Needles used by intravenous should be sterile and used only once.
(Immune cells) have another
name called T-helper cells
People should avoid multiple sexual activity
that defend our body from
Using condoms, If condom is properly used, it can pre-vent the
infection. Opportunistic
virus transmission from carrier to healthy per-son
diseases: disease caused by
different disease causing
HIV-positive mother should be treated with appropriate retroviral
organisms that occurs when
drugs. These retro-viral drugs can also significantly increase the
the body diseases resistance
length of time between a person be-coming infected with HIV and
mechanism.
developing symptoms of AIDS and can significantly prolong life.
Retroviral drugs are drugs
that are used to stop or
Tuberculosis (TB)
reduce viral replication in
Tuberculosis is another example of infectious disease caused by
human, but they don't kill
the virus.
the bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis and rarely by
Mycobacterium bovis. These bacteria live inside human cells, mainly
in the lungs. TB has many symptoms like cough, chest pain, shortness
of breath, fever, sweating, weight loss etc. After infection, some people
develop TB quite quickly, while in others the bacteria remain inactive
for many years. This difference is because of the difference in disease
resistance ability between peoples.
TB transmission
TB bacteria can enter the lungs in airborne droplets. It spread when
infected people with the active form of the illness cough or sneeze. The
bacteria are carried in the air in tiny droplets of liquid. Transmission
occurs when people who are uninfected inhale (breath in) the
droplets. These happen rapidly in places where many people are living
Key Terms
in crowded conditions such as very crowded public transportation.
Drug resistance bacteria:
The other transmission way is by consuming undercooked meat and
are bacteria that does not
killed by commonly used
unpasteurized milk. This type of transmission mainly occurs for the
drugs. More powerful
TB transmits from infected animals.
called second line drugs
Prevention and control of TB
are important to kill these
resistant bacteria.
There are drugs and vaccines that are important to treat and prevent
Vector: is an organism that
this disease
carries a disease-causing
organism and transmit from
Treatment of TB: A person, who shows symptoms relating to TB,
one person to another or
should his/her sputum sample tested for the presence of TB bacteria.
from an animal to a human.
If a person is positive for TB, then patients should be isolated while they
For example Anoph-
are in the most infectious stage (which is at two to four weeks). The
eles mosquito.
treatment involves using several drugs to ensure that all the bacteria
are killed. The treatment also need about six to nine months. If the
bacteria not killed by treatment, it may be because of drug resistance
TB.
130
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Vaccine: The only vaccine available for TB is the BCG vaccine, which
is derived from animal TB bacteria and protects up to 70-80%of
people who receive it. This vaccine is given during early child or
infant stage. The effectiveness of the vaccine decreases with in old age.
TB is relating to reduced immunity of the body, increasing standards
of people who are living with HIV and treating HIV infected people
help to reduce the incidence of TB.
Avoid overcrowding: TB is a disease transmitted by inhales the
bacteria when infected person cough and sneeze. Therefore, covering
the mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing reduces the spread of
TB bacteria, and good ventilation is important to prevent this disease.
Avoid eating undercooked meat and avoid drinking unpasteurized
or not boiled milk. This is important to prevent TB transmission from
animal to human.
Malaria
Activity 5.21: Group work
Make a group, each with four or five students and discuss in group
about:
i. The causes of malaria,
ii. If you are living in malaria endemic area observe your
surrounding and discuss how malaria is transmitted from
patient to healthy person ( If your living area is not endemic
for malaria, please use reference or internet to answer this
question).
iii. What is vector?
iv. How can we prevent malaria?
Malaria is caused by protozoa known as plasmodium Protozoa.
Malaria is found in many parts of the world where Anopheles mosquito
species that can act as vectors are found. It is very common in tropical
and subtropical regions where humidity is high, a comfortable
environment for mosquito breeding. Female Anopheles mosquitoes
feed on human blood to obtain the protein they need to develop their
eggs. If the person they bite is infected with Plasmodium, they will
take up some of the plasmodium together the blood meal. When
the mosquito feeds again another healthy person, she injects the
plasmodium with her saliva. Then the parasites enter the red blood
cells, where they multiply.
Grade 9 Biology
131
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
infective stages of parasite
cell division produces thousands
invade mosquito's salivary glands
of immature malarial parasites
6-12 days
infected mosquito
takes blood meal
male and female gametes of parasite
fuse in mosquito's stomach
infective stages
of parasite enter
bloodstream and
then liver cells
24 hours
liver
mosquito takes
infected blood meal
parasites leave liver cells
and enter red blood cells
maturation and production of parasite's
48-72 hours
male and female sex cells (gametes)
Figure 5.11. Life cycle of malaria
The life cycle of Plasmodium. Plasmodium has two hosts which
are human and mosquito. The reproduction of plasmodium taken
place in both hosts, sexual reproduction in mosquito and asexual
preproduction in human
Prevention and control of malaria
There are three main ways to control malaria:
Reducing the population of mosquitoes. This can be done by
removing sources of water in which they can breed. Sometimes,
it is possible to use Biological controls like fish which feeds on
the larva of the mosquito. In addition using insecticide to kill
Activity 5.22: Individual /
mosquito is another way to reduce the number of mosquito.
Home work
Avoiding mosquitoes bite: This can be done by sleeping under a
Construct the table that
mosquito net, or using insect repellant.
shows the cause, method of
transmission, and prevention
Using anti-malarial drugs such as Artemisinin combination
and control methods for
therapy ( ACT) or Quartem and chloroquine to treat infected
infectious diseases like
people. However, in many parts of the world Plasmodium has
Ameba, Giardia,. Typhoid
evolved resistance to some of these drugs. Chloroquine resistance
fever.
for plasmodium falciparum is widespread in parts of South
America, Africa; newer drugs such as mefloquine are used in
these areas.
132
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Corona virus large family of viruses belongs to family coronaviridae
which cause diseases in mammals and birds. This virus has extracellular
covering structure called lipid envelop. The virus also has club shaped
spikes proteins on the outer surface of the virus.
The viral envelope is made up of a lipid bilayer membrane (M),
envelope (E) and spike proteins(S). The E and M protein are the
structural proteins that combined with the lipid bilayer to shape
the viral envelope and maintain its size. S proteins are needed for
interaction with the host cells.
Spike Glycoprotein (S)
M-Protein
Hemagglutinin-esterase dimer(HE)
Envelope
RNA and N Protine
E-Protrin
Figure 5.12 Structure of COVID-19
While SARS had occurred in 2003 in China, MERS occurred in
Middle East countries in 2012. COVID-19 virus (previously called
novel coronavirus) is a new strain of a coronavirus that first emerged
in China in December1, 2019. The first case of pneumonia outbreak
was reported in Wuhan, China. On 31 December 2019, the outbreak
was traced to a novel strain of coronavirus that was given the name
SARS-COV-2 by the international committee on Taxonomy of
Key Terms
Viruses.SARS-CoV-2 may have originated in an animal and changed
"coronavirus" : is de-
(mutated) so it could cause illness in humans. In March 2020, the
rived from
Latin
World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 as a
corona , meaning "crown"
pandemic. The disease caused by SARS-COV-2 known as coronavirus
or "wreath", itself a borrow-
disease 2019 (COVID-19).
ing from Greek
Incubation period: is a
Most people infected with the COVID-19 experience mild to
period from the time of
exposure or entrance of
moderate respiratory illness and recover without requiring special
infectious agent up to the
treatment. Older people and those with underlying medical problems
time of the appearance of
like cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, and
signs or symptoms of the
cancer are more likely to develop serious illness.
disease.
Grade 9 Biology
133
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Activity 5.23: Think- pair-
share
Discuss with a friend next to
you and share your idea with
the other classmate. What is
pandemic?
Fig. 5. 13 Pandemic of COVID-19
How does the coronavirus spread?
The COVID-19 virus spreads primarily through the droplets and virus
particles released into the air when an infected person breathes, talks,
laughs, sings coughs or sneezes. When many people are gathered and
if there is poor ventilation, these droplets can be inhaled or land in the
mouth, nose or eyes of a person close. It can also spread, if a person
touches a surface with the virus on it and then touches his or her
mouth, nose or eyes.
What are the symptoms of COVID-19
COVID-19 symptoms can be very mild to severe. Even some people
have no symptoms. The most common symptoms are fever, cough,
and tiredness, shortness of breath, muscle aches, chills, sore throat,
headache, chest pain, and loss of taste or smell. This list is not all
inclusive. These symptoms may appear two to fourteen days after
exposure.
How is COVID-19 diagnosed?
COVID-19 is diagnosed or tested by taking fluid sample from nose
or mouth and testing it through a laboratory test. Laboratory testing
is important because some people with the coronavirus do not have
symptoms at all.
Prevention and control of COVID-19
There are many steps you can take to prevent yourselves from getting
the COVID-19 virus and spreading it to others.
Follow important precautions or instructions:
keep at least 6 feet (2 meters) of distance between
134
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
yourself and people outside your household.
avoid crowds and indoor places that have poor ventilation.
wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 sec-
onds, or use an alcohol based hand sanitizer that contains at least
60% alcohol.
wear a mask in public places, especially when social distancing is
difficult.
cover your mouth and nose with your elbow or a tissue when
you cough or sneeze.
Throw away the used tissue. Wash your hands rightaway.
avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth
clean and disinfect surfaces you often touch on a daily basis.
Vaccine: currently there are different type's vaccines produced by
different countries. Examples of these vaccines are AstraZeneca's
AZD1222 BioNTech's BNT162 etc. Currently, large number of people
in different country including Ethiopia receives these vaccines.
COVID THE
Counge
COVID
Vaccine
EXCHE
Figure 5.15. Vaccine for corona
If you are suspect COVID-19 or if you are ill withCOVID-19 take the
following precautions to avoid spreading the COVID-19 virus:
stay home from school and public areas, except to get medical
care.
avoid public transportation, taxis and ride-sharing if possible.
wear a face mask around other people.
isolate yourself as much as possible from others in your home.
use a separate bedroom and bathroom if possible.
avoid sharing dishes, glasses, bedding and other household
items.
Grade 9 Biology
135
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
5.8. 2 Non-infectious diseases
These are disease caused by malnutrition, chemical effect, inherited
or genetic factor etc. These diseases are not caused by disease causing
organisms. Some of the non-infectious diseases that you have learnt
previously in this chapter are:
diseases caused by malnutrition like Kwashiorkor, Scurvy, night
blindness marasmus etc.,
disease caused by cigarette smoke like lung cancer , Chronic
bronchitis etc.
In addition there are other examples of sickle cell anemia, cancer,
allergies, diabetes, podoconiosis, etc.
Tobacco use, physical inactivity, the harmful use of alcohol and
unhealthy diets are all increase the risk of dying from non-
infectious diseases.
Unhealthy diets and a lack of physical activity may show up in
people as raised blood pressure, increased blood glucose, elevated
blood lipids and obesity. These can lead to cardiovascular disease,
the leading non infectious disease in terms of premature deaths.
Detection, screening and treatment of non-infectious diseases , as
well as palliative care, are key components of the response to non-
infectious diseases.
5.9 Renowned Nutritionists in Ethiopia
Nutritionists are researchers or scientists who study nutrition.
Activity 5.24: Home work /Individual assignment
Using Internet and books as a source of information write a
paragraph on known nutritionists In Ethiopia.
136
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 5: Human Health, Nutrition, and Disease
Unit review
Nutrition is the process of taking in food and converting into energy and other vital nutrients required
for life. The important function of food in living things: Growth, repair, energy, Replacement of
damaged tissues, Protect from diseases.
Nutrients are important chemical substances in food. These important nutrients are:
Carbohydrates: are one type of nutrients which provide energy for the human body. One gram of
carbohydrate can provide 16 kJ of energy
Protein: Proteins are nutrients used for growth of the body and build a new cell when it is damaged.
It is made up of amino acid composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. One gram of protein
can provide 17 kJ of energy
Lipids (Fats and oil) another nutrient which provide energy, composed of carbon, hydrogen oxygen.
One gram of lipid can provide 37 kJ of energy
Vitamins: are nutrients organic substances which are essential in small quantities for human body.
Minerals: Minerals are inorganic substances which are essential in small quantities
Water: Major composition of body fluid
Fiber: help to prevent constipation and keep the colon healthy.
The diet which contains all of the nutrients in the correct amount and proportion is called a balanced
diet.
A deficiency disease occurs when a person does not have enough amount of one particular nutrient
and suffers health problems as a result. Examples of deficiency diseases are kwashiorkor, marasmus,
anemia, rickets and scurvy etc. Malnutrition is caused by under nutrition.
Obesity is overweight which is caused as a result of an imbalance between the energy in human body
and the energy he or she released.
Substance abuse is using of legal or illegal drugs/ substances in the wrong way or in the excess amount.
The three important substances found in cigarette are: tar, carbon monoxide and nicotine.
Tar is a black sticky substance found in cigarette produce chronic bronchitis and lung cancer Carbon
monoxide is a poisonous gas found in cigarette which can produce heart disease and stroke.
Alcohol gets distributed throughout the body by the help of blood circulation. It is absorbed by liver
cells and broken down by liver enzymes, Therefore its concentration in the blood decreases gradually.
Khat is bushy plant whose leaves are chewed for its stimulant effect. The scientific name of this plant is
known as Catha edulis plant which is grown in southern Arabia and Eastern Africa, including Ethiopia,
Somalia, and Kenya.
A disease is an illness or disorder of the body or mind that leads to poor health; each disease is associated
with a set of signs and symptoms.
Infectious diseases are diseases that are caused by causative agent organism.
Non-infectious diseases are not caused by pathogens. They are inherited or genetic diseases and others
are deficiency diseases.
Grade 9 Biology
137
Unit 4: Reproduction
Review Questions
I. Choose the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which of the following nutrient provide more energy?
a. Protein b. Carbohydrate
c. Lipids
d. Vitamins
2. Which of the following is not belong to deficiency diseases?
a. Kwashiorkor b. Diabetes
c. Marasmus d. Scurv
3. Which of the following diet is composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen?
a. Carbohydrate b. Lipids
c. Protein
d. all
4. Which of the following minerals are used to synthesize the hemoglobin of red blood cells?
a. Iodine
b. Calcium
c. Iron
d. Phosphorus
5. Which of the following group of people needs high amount of balanced diet?
a. Athletes
b. Pregnant women c. Children
d. All
6. Which of the following is not the result of obesity?
a. heart disease b. high blood pressure c. diabetes
d. Marasmus
7. Substance abuse is
a. using legal drugs in the wrong way
b. using illegal drugs/ in the wrong way
c. using legal or illegal drugs for medical purpose
d. a and b
8. What are the chemicals found in tobacco?
a. Carbon monoxide
b. Nicotine
c. Tar
d. All
9. What type of drug is alcohol?
a. Depressant
b. Stimulant
c. Activator
d. all
10. What is the stimulant or psychoactive component found in cannabis
a. Tetrahydrocannabinol b. Cathinone
c. Nicotein
d. Tar
II. Fill in the blank space with appropriate words
1. Tuberculosis is caused by the bacterium called
2. Deficiency disease caused by the shortage of vitamin D is
III. Answer the following questions
1. Discuss the feeding habits that may lead to obesity.
2. List the components of a balanced diet and give a good source of food for each.
3. Explain the modes of transmission of infectious diseases.
4. What are the three substances which are banned from use during sport competition?
138
Grade 9 Biology
