Unit 1: Introduction to Biology
Sections
Learning competencies
1.1 Definition of Biology
Define Biology
1.2 Why do we study Biology?
Explain why Biology is studied?
1.3 The scientific method
Plan a biological investigation using the scientific
1.4 Tools of a Biologist
method
1.4.1 Laboratory tools
Identify some common tools of a Biologist
1.4.2 Field tools
Utilize a microscope
1.5. Handling and using of light Microscope
Execute general laboratory safety rules
1.5.1 Parts and function of light microscope
1.5.2 Handling and using microscope
1.6. General Laboratory Safety Rules
1.1 Definition of Biology
Objectives
Key Terms
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Biology: came from two
define Biology
Greek words bios means life,
explain the relation of biology and other subjects
and logos meaning study.
Biology is the scientific study of life or living things.
What does it mean to be "alive"?
It seems very difficult to objectively define life in a simple sentence.
Activity 1.1: THINK-PAIR-
But, we recognize life mainly by common characteristics shared by
SHARE
living systems.
Write down the common
properties of living things
Living things are composed of one or more cells, they can grow,
that distinguish them from
reproduce, they transmit genetic information to their offspring, they
non-living things and
need the energy to accomplish work, they can maintain relatively
compare your answer with
constant internal conditions (homeostasis) and they are capable of
other students.
evolutionary adaptation to the environment etc.
What is a scientific study?
Biologists study about living things using a scientific method that
involves asking questions, suggesting possible answers; and testing for
the validity of the answers through experimentation. This scientific
study follows the study of structures and processes that we can verify
observe and measure, either directly or indirectly with the help of
tools and technology, such as microscopes.
Grade 9 Biology
1
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Activity 1.2: Group
What relationships does Biology have with other fields of natural
work
sciences?
Make a group of students
and discuss how the
The study of biology is a point of merging information and tools
knowledge of biology
from all natural sciences. For example information about naturally
can be applied in the fields
occurring elements in living organisms, chemical bonding, molecules,
of agriculture, medicine,
acids ,bases and other related things can be studied using the tools and
food processing, food
principles of chemistry. Other scientific concept like conversion of
preparation, preparation of
radiant energy into organic molecules by photo-synthesis is studied
beverage etc. and present it
with the knowledge of chemistry and Physics.
to your class.
1.2 Why do we study Biology?
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain why biology is studied
give examples of biological application
Attention
Human beings have an inborn curiosity about the natural world
Application of Biology in our
that leads them to study about living organisms and their habitats.
day to day life:
Studying biology helps to understand how living things work, how
Wine-making, the
they function and interact with the environment. Biology touches our
brewing, the baking of
bread and the production
everyday life in many ways. For example, biologists have discovered
of cheese all depend on
drugs that are used to treat different human diseases. Many biologists
fermentation processes
are working on problems that critically affect our lives, such as how
brought about by yeasts,
our animals and plants body work, how ecosystems work, how
other fungi and bacteria,
advancements in genetics and cell biology are transforming to medicine
or enzymes from these
and agriculture, as well as the use of forensics biology to investigate
organisms.
crime, Furthermore, studies how ecology is helping societies evaluate
Antibiotics, such as
environmental issues, such as global warming, how fermentation is
penicillin, are produced by
used to produce alcoholic drinks such as beer and wine. In addition,
mould fungi or bacteria.
biological studies are used in treating patients suffering from AIDS,
The production of
tuberculosis, and some types of cancer.
industrial chemicals such
as citric acid or lactic acid
1.3. The Scientific Method
needs bacteria or fungi
to bring about essential
Objectives
chemical changes.
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Sewage disposal depends
on bacteria in the filter
explain about scientific method
beds to form the basis
explain about the meaning of hypothesis
of the food chain that
practice about formulating hypothesis
purifies the effluent.
practice doing scientific experiment and drawing a bar graph
Discovery of the structure
Biology is a science of inquiry.
of DNA and forensic
analysis of DNA samples
What comes to your mind when you hear the word science?
from crime scenes.
Biologists are always curious about why things happen or how things
2
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
happen. By asking questions and seeking science-based responses
known as the scientific method, they come up with new theories to
explain new findings. The scientific method involves a series of steps
that guide scientists through such scientific investigations. Biologists
study the living world by posing questions about it. The general steps
of the Scientific methods are:
Observation
The scientific study begins with careful observations (often a problem
to solve) that leads to a question. The observations can be made either
directly (e.g. using your sense organs) or indirectly using scientific
tools such as microscopes.
Asking Questions
The observations usually lead the scientist to ask questions (inquiry).
Forming of a hypothesis
A hypothesis is proposed scientific explanations (possible answers)
for a set of question (s).To solve a problem, one can propose several
hypotheses. Scientific hypotheses should be testable.
Testing the hypothesis
Hypothesis can be tested through experimentation. Any scientific
experiment must have the ability to be duplicated because the "answer"
the scientist comes up with (whether it supports or rejects the original
hypothesis) can't become part of the scientific knowledge unless other
scientists can perform the same experiment and achieve the similar
results. If a hypothesis is not supported by experimental data, one can
propose a new hypothesis.
Making conclusions about the findings
Scientists consider their original hypotheses and ask whether they
could still be right in light of the new information gathered during the
experiment. If so, the hypotheses can remain as possible explanations
for how things work. If not, scientists reject the hypotheses and try
to come up with alternate explanations (new hypotheses) that can
explain what they've seen.
Communicating the findings
When scientists complete some work, they write a paper that explains
exactly what they did and the results they obtained. Then, they submit
the paper to a scientific journal in their field. In addition, the findings
will be printed in scientific journals and assist teachers and students
Key Terms
in the field.
Hypothesis: a proposed
Example of a hypothesis testing in everyday life
scientific explanation
Suppose you want to use your torch (hand lamp) to find a missing pen
Grade 9 Biology
3
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
in your bedroom. When you switch the torch on, it is not working.
The following flow chart will illustrate hypothesis testing for a torch
that doesn't work.
Observation: The torch does not work.
Question: Why the torch does not work?
Hypothesis 1: The bulb burnt out or
Hypothesis 2: The bulb is improperly screwed in.
Experiment 1: Replacing the bulb
Experiment 2: Reinstalling the bulb
Result 1: The torch does not work (the first hypothesis is rejected).
Result 2: The torch works (the second hypothesis is accepted).
Figure 1.1. Application of the scientific method to common problems in
our surroundings
Activity 1.3: Application of Scientific Method
Objective: To determine the importance of temperature for seed germination,
1. Form a group
2. Germinate bean seeds at different temperatures like:
Group one in room temperature;
Group two in colder place like outside your room or in refrigerator;
Group three in hotter place like inside the kitchen; and
3. Then give your possible hypothesis for the differences in germination.
4. Measure the times of germination and length of the seedlings for the different groups
5. Draw a bar graph based on the result of your experiment using X axis for measurement of time
/hour of germination (1st day of germination, 2nd day of germination, 3rd day of germination
etc.) and at Y axis indicate the length of the germinated plants. (You can measure the length of
your germinating plants using ruler).
6. Interpret the results and conclude the result.
7. Report your result to your friend in your class.
4
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
1.4. Tools of a Biologist
Objectives
Activity 1.4. Class work
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Recall what you learn in
your grade seven general
identify the major tools of biologists
science lesson and write
describe the functions of the identified biologist tools
down the names of the
tools used by biologists
Biologists use different types of tools in the laboratory and field for
and compare your answer
with your partners.
scientific investigations. Some of the tools are used for measuring,
some are used for observation and some are used for culturing micro-
organisms.
1.4.1. Laboratory tools of biologist
Hand lens
Most cells cannot be seen with the naked eye. A hand lens has a higher
magnification than our naked eye. It consists of a convex lens fixed
within a circular metallic loop and is attached to a metallic or wooden
handle.
The main function of hand lens is to provide an enlarged image of the
object placed under it. But hand lens is not sufficient to observe the
detail in cells. There is a need for providing high magnifications tools
such as microscope.
Frame
convex lens
Handle
Figure 1.2 Hand lens
Activity 1.5: Laboratory Activity
Attention
Objective: To study the magnification and focusing of radiation
The important function of
using hand lens
microscope is magnification
Materials hand lens, Pieces of paper
and resolution.
1. Draw a dot on the piece of the paper.
Magnification is the number
2. Observe the dot using a hand lens.
of times larger an image
is, than the real size of the
3. What happened? Did the dot get bigger than the original size?
object. Resolution can be
Why?
defined as the ability to
4. Bring the hand lens to where the sun light is available.
distinguish between two
5. Put the piece of paper under the hand lens and stay for some
separate points.
minute.
6. What happened to the paper? Why?
Grade 9 Biology
5
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
The Microscope
One of the most important tools of the biologist is a microscope. A
microscope is an instrument used to study objects that are too small
to be seen with a naked eye. The microscope magnifies the image of
small objects making them visible to the human eye. For example,
microscopes are used to observe the shape of bacteria, fungi and
parasites.
There are several kinds of microscopes. The major types are:
light microscope and
electron microscope
A light microscope is called light microscope because it uses a beam
Figure 1.3. Light microscope
of light to view specimens. There are two types of light microscopes,
Simple light microscope which consists of a single lens while a
Key Terms
compound light microscope consists of two or more glass lenses.
Microscope: an instrument
used to observe and study
Activity 1.6 Classwork
objects that are too small
How many lens does hand lens have?
to be seen by the naked
Discuss with your friend next to you.
eye. It magnifies the
image of small objects
Light microscope: the
A compound light microscope is the most common microscope used
microscope uses a beam of
in biology. It consists of two lens systems (a combination of lenses) to
light to view specimens
magnify the image of an object up to 2000x. Each lens has a different
Electron microscopes: the
magnifying power. A compound light microscope with a single eye-
microscope uses a beam of
piece is called monocular; one with two eye-pieces is said to be
electrons (instead of a beam
binocular.
of light) and electromagnets
(instead of glass lenses)
Electron microscopes on the other hand use a beam of electrons
to enlarge the image of an
(instead of a beam of light) and electromagnets (instead of glass lenses)
object
to enlarge the image of an object. These microscopes provide a higher
magnification than light microscopes and are used for observing
extremely small micro-organisms such as viruses.
Glass slides and cover slips: The microscope slides are used to
support an specimens being examined under the microscope.
The cover slips are the small square or circle shaped thin glass sheets
that are used to cover specimens on the glass slide to protect from
further addition of any chemical or dirt and it is also used to protect
the microscope and prevent the slide from drying by locking the
moisture. Cover slides provide better view under the microscope.
Figure 1.4. Glass slide and
Although the tool most closely associated with a biologist is the
cover slides
microscope, there are several common tools used by biologists in the
laboratory and on field.
6
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Autoclave: is the equipment used to sterilize (kill micro-organisms)
different biological samples. An autoclave sterilizes contaminated
materials including culture media, and bacterial spores by exposing
them to high temperatures and highly pressurized steam.
Attention
Culturing is the procedure used to grow microorganisms in a
controlled environment. Many microorganisms reproduce very
quickly. Culturing of micro-organisms also have important function
Figure 1.5. Autoclave
like in medicine (Penicillin) and for food (beverage) preparation.
Wine and beer making uses culturing on a large scale, as it does in
cheese making, bio-fuel production, and many other endeavors.
There are many ways of killing microorganisms, including chemical
disinfectants, flame, dry or wet heat, ultraviolet light, and ionizing
radiation such as X-rays or gamma rays. The problem is, some bacteria
form spores, which are resistant to chemical disinfectants, including
bleach. In these situations, it is very important to use autoclaving
which kill microorganisms as well as their spores.
Incubator: is a device used to maintain a specific environment
for culturing. An incubator is an instrument that maintains the
temperature best suited for the growth of different types of micro-
Figure 1.6. A Bacteriological
organisms.
incubator
Petri dishes: are flat dishes with a matching cover of a slightly larger
diameter. They are available in glass and plastic form. Petri dishes
are used with gelling culturing media, such as agar, and placed in the
autoclave to sterilize it.
Figure 1.7. Petri dishes
Culture tubes: are available in a huge range of sizes, shapes, materials,
and so on. They are used to culture micro-organisms. Culture tubes
may be used with solid (gel) culturing media or with liquid (broth)
culturing media, and then placed in the autoclave for sterilization.
Figure 1.8. Test tubes
Flasks: is an apparatus having a flat bottom and a long narrow neck,
which allows easy mixing of the solution without spilling out the
content it is also used to gently heat the content inside with a gentle
swirling motion of the flask It is essentially a large-volume culture
tube that is used only with broth media and flasks are used to produce
large populations of micro-organisms. They are available in a variety
of shapes and sizes.
Figure 1.9. flasks
Grade 9 Biology
7
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Balance: is useful for making up solutions accurately, weighing
specimens, and so on.
.........................
Figure 10. Balance
Dropper: A dropper consists of a glass tube that has a small opening
at one end and is attached to a vacuum rubber bulb at the other end. A
dropper is used when it is required to control the amount of solution
being added to a reaction.
Figure 1.11. Dropper
Tongs
Tongs are metallic scissors-shaped laboratory instruments. It is used
to Lifting or picking up hot objects such as heated crucible, beakers,
dishes, or flasks.
Figure 1.12. Tongs
Dissecting Tool Kit
Dissecting Tool Kit is used to dissect animals such as frogs, fetal pigs,
mice, etc. It consists of all the necessary tools required to carry out
the process of dissection such as a catheter, groove probe, scalpel,
surgical scissors (straight and curved), mayo scissors (straight and
curved), dissecting forceps (with and without teeth), dissecting pin,
Figure 1.13 dissecting kit
etc.
Dissecting pan
Dissecting pan is equipment is used as a pan on which the specimen is
kept while it is being dissected to study its internal organs.
Figure 1.14 dissecting pan
8
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Crucible
Crucible is a small container made up of ceramic or metal which is
able to withstand high temperatures, and therefore, it is generally
used to melt elements.
Figure 1.15. Crucible
Beaker
Beaker is a cylindrical glass container used for making up solutions,
holding hot or cold water or ice baths, and so on.
PLATE
Figure 1.16. Beakers
Hotplate
Figure 1.17 Hot plate
Hotplate is useful for heating solutions, making up an agar culturing
medium, and so on.
pH meter is used to measure the pH (acidity or basicity) of substances.
5.88
Thermometer is an instrument that measures the temperature of
substances.
Figure 1.18. pH mete
Figure 1.19. Thermometer
Forceps are used to hold or pick up small objects. They are available
in a variety of shapes and sizes.
Figure 1.20. Forceps
Spatula
A spatula is used for mixing substances into a solution, stirring the
Figure 1.21. Spatula
solution, and scrapping objects. It is shaped like a spoon
Wash Bottles
Wash bottles which are mainly used to rinse various laboratory
materials. Wash bottles are flexible in nature that allows the user
to adjust the water pressure as per the need by squeezing the bottle
100ml
250ml
500ml
18
accordingly.
Figure 1.22. Wash bottles
Grade 9 Biology
9
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Bunsen burner or alcohol burner
This apparatus produces a single open flame and it is used for heating
and sterilization purposes in the various experiments conducted in
labs.
Figure 1.23. Bunsen burner
1.4.2. Field tools
Insect nets -It is insect collecting nets which is composed of some
Figure 1.24. Insect net
sort of net bag made of cloth or fine mesh that is attached to a wire
loop, which is attached to a wooden or metal pole.
Fishing net is a net used for fishing. Nets are devices made from fibres
woven in a grid-like structure. Some fishing nets are also called fish
traps. Fishing nets are usually meshes formed by tying a relatively thin
thread.
1.5. The Light Microscope
Figure 1.25. Fish net
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
handling the microscope
use the microscope
Most microscopes have several different powerful lenses attached
to them, allowing the viewer to inspect the content at more than
100 times its actual size. Biology as modern science would not exist
without the microscope, and good microscopes are essential for day-
to-day activities for most biologists. In addition to their importance,
microscopes are extremely expensive, therefore it is very important
to know the function of all structures of microscope and handle the
device properly before we are using it in the laboratory.
When we observe an image under light microscope, light rays are
focused on to the image on a microscope slide. This Light which
transmitted through the specimen is then focused by two types of
lenses known as eye and objective lens. The enlarged produced by
these two lenses. A compound light microscope magnification is the
product of eye and objective lenses, x10 eyepiece and x40 objective,
the total magnification is x400.
10
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Activity 1.7: Classwork
Fill the following table by calculating the exact magnification.
Eye lens magnification
Objective lens magnification
Total lens magnification
X5
X500
X10
X40
X100
X1000
Activity 1.8: Practical Activities
In this section, you will learn how light microscope magnifies objects by eyepiece and objective
microscope.
Objective: To study focusing of a light microscope
Materials needed for this activity: a microscope, microscope slides, cover slips
A. Take a piece of paper and make sure it is transparent
B. Write letter C or P on the paper
C. Put the paper on the stage of microscope
D. Use low power objective move the paper from side to side till you get a clear focus/image
E. Draw the letter that you observe. What difference have you seen between the letter on the paper
and the image under the microscope? Why?
F. Replace/move the low power objective with middle power objective
G. What do you see? What makes this difference?
1.5.1. The parts and function of the light microscope
Microscopes are generally made up of structural parts for holding and
supporting the microscope and its components and the optical parts
which are used for magnification and viewing of the specimen images.
This section define the parts of a microscope and the functions they
perform to enable the visualization of specimens.
Eyepiece
Eyepiece is the part found at the top of the microscope and is used
to look through the microscope. It is also named as the ocular. Its
standard magnification is 10x with an optional eyepiece having
magnifications from 5X to 30X.
Eyepiece tube
Eyepiece tube is the eyepiece holder. It carries the eyepiece just above
the objective lens. In some microscopes such as the binoculars, the
eyepiece tube is flexible and can be rotated for maximum visualization.
Grade 9 Biology
11
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Activity 1.9: Group
Objective lenses
work
Objective lenses are major lenses that further magnify the specimen at
Look at the picture on the
different intensities with multiple objective lenses. Mostly they have a
figure 1.26.
magnification power of 4X-100X.
Write the parts of the
microscope parallel to the
Arm
number and discuss in
Arm is a holder connected to all components that function as a support
groups about the function of
for the microscope so that the microscope can be used properly.
each parts.
Body tube
Body tube connects the eyepiece to the objective lenses.
Nose piece
Nose piece is rotating mount that holds many objective lenses.. It is
1
movable hence it allows to change the magnification.
2
The Adjustment knobs
The Adjustment knobs are knobs that are used to focus the microscope.
3
4
There are two types of adjustment knobs i.e. fine adjustment knobs
5
and coarse adjustment knobs.
6
7
Fine adjustment: regulate the distance between object and
9
8
objective, to achieve the necessary sharpness. The fine focus
10
11
moves the stage only minimally.
12
Coarse adjustment: Brings specimen into general focus. Coarse
adjustment also moves the stage to adjust the difference between
the object and the objective. The function of the coarse focus is to
Figure 1.26. The parts of the
capture the exact distance roughly and quickly.
light microscope
Stage
Stage is the section in which the specimen is placed for viewing.
Stage clip
Stage clip acts as a holder for the object plate and ensures that it doesn't
fall out of place accidentally.
Aperture
Aperture is a hole on the microscope stage, through which the
transmitted light from the source reaches the stage.
Microscopic illuminator
Microscopic illuminator is the microscopes light source, located at the
base. It is used instead of a mirror. It captures light from an external
source of a low voltage of about 100v.
Condensers
Condensers are lenses that are used to collect and focus light from the
illuminator into the specimen. They are found under the stage next to
the diaphragm of the microscope. They play a major role in ensuring
12
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
clear sharp images are produced with a high magnification of 400X
and above.
Diaphragm
Diaphragm is also known as the iris. It is found under the stage of the
microscope and its primary role is to control the amount of light that
reaches the specimen. It's an adjustable apparatus, hence controlling
the light intensity and the size of the beam of light that gets to the
specimen.
Base
Base is the very bottom part. Base serves to accommodate all parts of
the light microscope.
1.5.2 Handling and using a light microscope
Be very careful when removing the Microscope from the cabinet.
Carry the microscope properly, always grip the microscope by
the arm and put your hand beneath its base. Hold the microscope
upright at all times. Do not bump it against anything.
Make sure that the slide is clean and dry before putting it on the
stage.
Put the slide on the stage, with the most promising region exactly
in the middle of the hole in the stage that the light comes through.
Always focus on low power (4X objective) first even if eventually
you need high power magnification.
Focus with the larger coarse-focusing knobs first, then when you
have nearly got the image in focus make it really sharp using the
smaller fine-focusing knobs.
If you want to increase the magnification, move the slide so the
most promising region is exactly in the middle of the field of view
and then change to a higher magnification lens.
Use immersion oil only with the 100X objective (oil immersion
lens) in place.
Use only one drop of oil.
Always focus by moving the lens and the specimen further apart,
never closer to each other.
Never touch the surfaces of the lenses with your fingers or
anything else.
Lower the stage and then remove the slide when you are done.
Always clean the microscope when you are done. (use a lens
paper and the alcohol)
Always place the 4X objective over the stage and be sure the stage
is at its lowest position before putting the microscope away.
Grade 9 Biology
13
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Always turn off the light before putting the microscope away.
Always return the microscope to the correct cabinet.
Always place the oculars toward the back of the cabinet
Always wrap the cord correctly before putting the microscope
away.
1.6. General Laboratory Safety Rules
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
explain about laboratory safety rules
identify the major laboratory safety rules
Safety is the condition of being protected from harm or other danger.
Safety can also refer to the control of recognized hazards in order to
achieve an acceptable level of risk. Laboratory safety is important
before we do any activities in the laboratory:
working carefully in the laboratory,
dealing with minor problems before they become major problems,
keeping safety constantly in mind are some of the safety rules.
Activity 1.10
Figure 1.27. Dress and safety for the laboratory
Look at the picture on
the figure 1.27 and
Important general laboratory safety rules are
recall what you learned in
1. Following the instructions
your grade seven general
science subject to answer
It is critical to read and listen the laboratory procedure and be familiar
the following questions.
with all the steps, from start to finish. It is very important to know
Discuss in groups.
how to use all of the lab equipment before you begin.
1. Why goggles and
2. Knowing the location of safety equipment
laboratory coats used?
It is mandatory to have a fire extinguisher and first-aid kit readily
2. Why is hair tied back?
in the laboratory. It's important to know the location of the safety
3. List some safety rules
equipment and how to use it. It's a good idea to periodically check
14
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
equipment to make sure it is in working order. Review lab safety signs
and look for them before starting an experiment.
3. Dressing for the laboratory
Strong
Sharp Object
It is important to wear protective cloths including a laboratory coat,
Magnetic Field
safety goggles, gloves, hearing protection, long pants, a long-sleeve
shirt, and leather shoes or boots that fully cover your feet (NO sandals).
4
Wear a disposable respirator mask when you handle chemicals that
are toxic. The dressing procedure should be based on the nature of
Corrosive
Electrical
Substance
Hazard
the experiment.
4. Never eat or drink in the laboratory.
Don't eat or drink in the science laboratory. It is forbidden to store
food or beverages in the same refrigerator that contains experiments,
Biohazard
Laser
chemicals, or cultures.
Hazard
5. Never taste or sniff chemicals.
Avoid tasting or smelling chemicals or biological cultures. Tasting or
SSS
smelling some chemicals can be dangerous or even deadly. The best
Hot Surface
Cold Hazard
way to know what's in a container is to label it and read before use,
so get in the habit of making a label for glassware before adding the
chemical.
6. Act responsibly in the laboratory.
Toxic
Flammable
Never randomly mixing chemicals to see what happens. It may result
Material
Material
an explosion, fire, or release of toxic gases.
7. Cleaning the experiment area in the laboratory and storing the
waste properly.
Radiation
Explosive
Every laboratory session should begin and end with your glassware,
Hazard
Material
chemicals, and laboratory equipment clean and stored properly.
Figure 1.28. Signs for general
laboratory safety rules
8. Handling chemicals properly
Wear a disposable respirator mask when handle chemicals that are
toxic. Never allow laboratory chemicals to contact your bare skin.
9. Knowing what to do with laboratory accidents
If someone burn or if he exposed to chemical immediately flood the
burned area with cold tap water for several minutes to minimize the
damage done by the burn.
10. All laboratory personnel should place emphasis on safety and
chemical hygiene at all times.
Never leave containers of chemicals open. All containers must have
appropriate labels. Unlabelled chemicals should never be used.
Grade 9 Biology
15
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Unit Summary
Biology is the scientific study of living things.
Living organisms interact with themselves and the environment at all levels of biological
organizations.
Biological inquiry depends on a scientific method. Scientists follow a method while performing
scientific experiments and writing up the results.
By following the scientific method carefully, scientists make sure that their conclusions are based
on observations and that other scientists can repeat their experiments.
The steps for scientific method includes: observations, questions, hypothesis, experiment,
conclusion (result) and communication with other Scientists.
Biologists use different types of tools in the laboratory and field. Some of the tools are used for
measuring, some are used for observation and some are used for culturing micro-organisms. Of
all the tools, the most important scientific tools of the biologist is a microscope. A microscope is
an instrument that is used to see very small objects by a process called magnification.
Laboratory safety is mainly important before we do any activities of the laboratory. Working
carefully in the laboratory, dealing with minor problems before they become major problems,
keep safety constantly in mind, and chances of any problems you have will be very minor ones.
16
Grade 9 Biology
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
Review Questions
I. Choose the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which of the following is not a property of life?
a. Populations of organisms rarely change over time.
b. Living things exhibit complex but ordered organization.
c. Organisms take in energy and use it to perform all of life's activities.
d. Organisms reproduce their own kind.
2. Which of the following is the correct procedure of scientific method?
a. Experiment conclusion application Question observation
b. Question observation experiment analysis prediction result
c. Observation question hypothesis prediction, experiment results conclusion
d. Observation question opinion conclusion hypothesis
3. Hypothesis in biology is best described as
a. possible explanation of an observation.
b. an observation that supports a theory.
c. a general principle that explains some aspect of life.
d. an unchanging statement that correctly predicts some aspect of life.
4. Which of the following is not the correct method of handling chemicals?
a. wearing a disposable respirator mask when handling chemicals that are toxic
b. never allow laboratory chemicals to contact your bare skin
c. never put chemicals open
d. return and pour the unused (left over) chemicals to its original container
II. Write short answer for the following questions
5. Write the main difference between light and Electron microscope.
6. Write the function of the following common laboratory tools.
Types of tools
Function
Flasks
Test tubes
Wash bottle
Dropper
Test tube rack
Spatula
Dissecting Pan
Wash bottle
Mortar and pestle
Grade 9 Biology
17
Unit One: Introduction to Biology
7. Look at the following laboratory safety signs and write their meaning.
8. Why does a microscope have several objective lenses?
9. What will happen to the field of view in a microscope as you close the diaphragm? Explain your
answer.
10. Why should you always focus a microscope by moving the objective lens away from the specimen?
11. Explain the importance of adding oil immersion when using high power objective? How?
12. List at least three field tools used by biologists.
18
Grade 9 Biology
