Unit 4: Reproduction
Contents
Learning competencies
4.1 Introduction to reproduction
Appreciate that life perpetuates from genera-
4.2 Asexual reproduction
tion to generation through reproduction.
4.3 Types of asexual reproduction
Define asexual and sexual reproductions
4.3.1 Fission
Describe asexual reproductions in bacteria,
4.3.2 Fragmentation
fungi, animals, and plants
4.3.3 Budding
Compare and contrast the advantages and dis-
advantages of asexual and sexual reproduction
4.3.4 Vegetative reproduction
Describe the biological, psychological, and
4.3.5 Parthenogenesis
social changes during the puberty stage
4.4 Sexual reproduction in human
Differentiate between the primary and sec-
4.5 Primary and secondary sexual characteristics
ondary sexual characteristics of males and fe-
4.6 Male reproductive structures
males in humans
4.7 Female reproductive structures
Identify the structure and functions of the
4.8 The Menstrual cycle
male reproductive organs.
4.9 Fertilization and pregnancy
Identify female reproductive structures and
their functions.
4.10 Methods of birth control
4.11 Sexually transmitted infection: transmission
Outline the phases of the menstrual cycle
and prevention
Define fertilization and pregnancy
Discuss the methods of prevention of preg-
nancy
Describe the types, modes of transmission
and preventive mechanisms of sexually trans-
mitted diseases
4.1 Introduction to reproduction
Activity 4.1. Reflective
Objectives
discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
As you know, there were
people living in Ethiopia or
appreciate that life perpetuates from generation to
elsewhere thousand years
generation through reproduction
ago and all were passed away
but still there are people
living there. Why? Though
What is reproduction?
individuals of a species are
Reproduction is one of the unique characteristics of life. The ability of
mortal, life continues from
generation to generation.
organisms to reproduce to form their own kind is the one characteristic
What biological processes
that best distinguishes living things from non living matter. Two
are responsible for this?
modes of reproduction are recognized: asexual and sexual. In asexual
reproduction, there is only one parent and with no special reproductive
organs or cells. Each organism is capable of producing identical copies
74
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
of itself as soon as it becomes an adult. Sexual reproduction as a rule
involves two parents, each of which contributes special germ cells (egg
or sperm) that in union (fertilization) develop into a new individual.
4.2 Asexual reproduction
Objectives
Activity 4.2: Concept
mapping
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define asexual reproduction
No organism can live
differentiate the process of asexual reproduction
forever, but part of it lives in
tell the advantages and disadvantages of asexual
its offspring. Offspring are
produced by the process of
reproduction
reproduction. This process
may be sexual or asexual, but
What is common to all types of asexual reproduction?
in either case, it results in the
continuation of the species.
Asexual reproduction is the production of individuals without gametes
Discuss the differences and
(eggs or sperm). It includes a number of distinct processes, all without
similarities you observe
involving sex or a second parent. Asexual reproduction appears in
among the different types of
bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes and in many invertebrates,
asexual reproduction.
fungi and plants. However, asexual reproduction is absent among
vertebrates. The basic forms of asexual reproduction are fission
(binary and multiple), budding, and fragmentation. For example, a
small piece of stem planted in the soil may form roots and grow into a
complete plant (Fig.4.1).
Asexual reproduction has couple of advantages - no mate is needed;
no gametes are needed; all the good characteristics of the parent
are passed on to the offspring; and offspring will grow in the same
favourable environment as the parent. Plants that reproduce
asexually usually store large amounts of food that allow survival.
The disadvantages are there is little variation created, so adaptation
to a changing environment (evolution) is unlikely. If the parent has
no resistance to a particular disease, none of the offspring will have
resistance. Lack of dispersal can lead to competition for nutrients,
water and light.
cut
Figure 4.1. Vegetative
propagation in plants
Grade 9 Biology
75
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.3 Types of asexual reproduction
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
describe the process of asexual reproduction in bacteria,
protists, fungi, animals and plants
explain the mechanism of fission
discuss the mechanism of fragmentation
describe the mechanism of budding
investigate the mechanism of vegetative propagation
describe the mechanism of parthenogenesis
Attention
4.3.1 Fission
The cells of some species,
What are the steps of fission?
such as bacteria, can divide
In fission, the organism divides into two (binary fission) or more
every 20-30 minutes.
(multiple fission) equal parts. Binary fission is common among
When placed on a solid
bacteria, algae and protozoa. In binary fission, the body of the
growth medium in a petri
dish, a bacterial cell and
unicellular parent divides by mitosis into two approximately equal
its daughter cells undergo
parts, each of which grows into an individual similar to the parent. In
repeated cellular divisions
bacteria, the cell simply divides into two and each new cell becomes
and form a group of
an independent organism (Fig.4.2). However, before a bacterium
genetically identical cells
divides, the bacterial nucleus is replicated (copied) to produce two
called a bacterial colony.
identical copies so that the daughter cells receive one copy each.
Such rapid rate of bacterial
Alternatively, the nucleus of the orgasms divide repeatedly and each
cell reproduction is one
reason why a small number
daughter nucleus breaks away together with a small portion of the
of bacteria can seriously
cytoplasm, resulting in the production of many daughter cells. This
contaminate our food
is common among some parasitic protozoa, for example, malarial
products.
parasites. Also, some invertebrates reproduce through fission.
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 4.2. Binary fission in bacteria
4.3.2 Fragmentation
What is fragmentation?
Fragmentation is one of the most common modes of asexual
reproduction involving the breakdown of a parent organism into
parts that develop into whole organism. Fragmentation is observed
in fungi, plants, animals and algae. For Example, Spirogyra, the
filamentous green-algae undergoes fragmentation which results in
many filaments. Each filament grows into matured filament (Fig.4.3).
76
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Also a multicellular animal (e.g., worms) breaks into two or more
parts, with each fragment capable of becoming a complete individual.
Many invertebrates can reproduce asexually by simply breaking into
two parts and then regenerating the missing parts of the fragments.
Grows
Fragment 1
Fragment 2
Fragment 3
Figure4.3. Fragmentation in filamentous green-algae
4.3.3 Budding
Activity 4.3: Experiment
In budding, the two daughter cells are unequal. Why?
on budding and
fragmentation
Another common type of asexual reproduction is budding. In this
Make a field visit in
mode of reproduction, the organism divides into two unequal parts. It
your village and collect
is common in fungal species and invertebrates. During the process, a
specimens of organisms that
bulge forms on the side of the cell, the nucleus divides mitotically, and
reproduce with budding.
the bud ultimately detaches itself from the mother cell. For example,
Do experimentation on
in some fungi such as yeasts, a bud develops on the surface of either
budding and fragmentation.
the yeast cell or the hypha, with the cytoplasm of the bud being
Material required 10%
continuous with that of the parent cell. The nucleus of the parent cell
glucose solution , yeast,
then divides; one of the daughter nuclei migrates into the bud, and
microscope, slide, cover
the other remains in the parent cell (Fig.4.4.). Budding also occurs
slip, dropper and test tube.
commonly in some invertebrate animals such as hydra.
5 µm
Figure 4.4. Budding in yeast
Grade 9 Biology
77
Unit 4: Reproduction
Sporulation
Key Terms
Why sporulation is an ideal means of asexual reproduction in coloniz-
Chromosome: the
ing different habitats?
hereditary material that
The majority of fungi, however, reproduce asexually by the formation
carry the biological
information
of spores (i.e., sporulation). Spores are dispersed often by air currents
and if they reach a suitable situation, they grow new hyphae. The
Hypha (pl. hyphae): the
hyphae develop into a mycelium (Fig. 4.5; left). At the tip of the
long filamentous branches
found in fungi
hyphae, a swelling or sporangium - spore sac forms. Penicillium and
Mucor are examples of mould fungi that grow on decaying food or
Mitosis: type of cell division
that produce two identical
vegetable matter (Fig. 4.5; right).
daughter cells
Mycelium: the vegetative
part of a fungus, consisting
Spores
of a network of fine white
filaments (hyphae)
Spore: reproductive cell
Germination
Conidiophore
Vertical
hyphae
Subsurface
hyphae
Mycelium
Figure 4.5. Asexual reproductions in fungi
4.3.4 Vegetative propagation
Vegetative propagation is a method of asexual reproduction in plants
where structures with lateral meristems such as roots, stems, buds,
and leaves give rise to new self-supporting individual. The following
are types of vegetative reproduction.
Natural Vegetative propagation
Stolons(runners)
What is a stolon?
Runners originate from auxiliary bud in a lower portion of plant
and grow along the surface of the soil. In the cultivated strawberry,
for example, leaves, flowers, and roots are produced at every other
node on the runner. Just beyond each second node, the tip of the
runner turns up and becomes thickened. This thickened portion
produces first adventitious roots and then a new shoot that continues
the runner. Thus a complete plant may develop and take root at the
node, nourished for a time by food sent from the parent plant through
the stolon. Eventually, the stolon dries up and withers, leaving an
independent daughter plant growing a short distance away from the
parent.
78
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Rhizome
What is a rhizome?
In many plants, horizontal shoots arise from lateral buds near the
stem base and grow under the ground. Such underground horizontal
stems are called rhizomes. At the nodes of the rhizome are buds, which
may develop to produce shoots above the ground. The shoots become
independent plants when the connecting rhizome dies. Many grasses
propagate by rhizomes; the couch grass (Fig. 4.6) is a good example.
Blade
Tiller
Stolon
Crown
Rhizome
Root system
Figure 4.6. Reproduction using stolon and rhizomes
Corms
What is a corm?
Corms are similar to rhizomes, except they are more rounded and
fleshy (such as in gladiolus). Corms contain stored food that enables
some plants to survive the winter.
Tubers
What is a tuber?
Tubers are modified stems that may store starch, as seen in the potato
Activity 4.4:
(Solanum sp.). Tubers arise as swollen ends of stolons, and contain
Experimentation on
growing potato plants
many adventitious or unusual buds. If the tubers are left in the ground
from tuber.
or transplanted, the buds will produce shoots, using food stored in the
Make a field visit to your
tuber (Fig. 4.7.).
village and collect specimens
of potato plants. Materials
Bulb
required include potato
What is a bulb?
tubers, razor blade, iodine
solution, microscope,
A bulb, which functions as an underground storage unit, is a mod-
slide, cover slip, and large
ification of a stem that has the appearance of enlarged fleshy leaves
pot. Take a note on the
emerging from the stem or surrounding the base of the stem.
morphological features and
grow potato plants from
tubers.
Grade 9 Biology
79
Unit 4: Reproduction
Lateral bud
Leaf
Stem
Fleshy Leaves
Side bud
Main Bud
Reduced Stem
Root
Tuber
Rhizome
Forming
New tuber
Root
Lateral bud
Old tuber
shrivelling
Activity 4.5:
Figure 4.7. Asexual reproduction with tuber and bulb
Experimentation on
growing onion plants from
Artificial Vegetative propagation
bulbs.
Artificial methods of asexual reproduction are frequently used to
Make a field visit in your
give rise to new and sometimes novel, plants. They include grafting,
village and collect specimens
cutting, layering, marcotting and micro propagation.
of onion plants. Material
required bulb and pot
Grafting
containing soil mixed with
Grafting is an artificial method of asexual reproduction used to
compost. Take a note on
produce plants combining favourable stem and root characteristics.
the morphological features
The stem of the plant to be grafted is known as the scion. The root is
and grow onion plants from
called the stock.
bulbs.
Cutting
Plants such as hibiscus and Aibika are propagated through stem
cuttings where a portion of the stem containing nodes and internodes
is placed in moist soil and allowed to root. In some species, stems can
start producing a root even when placed only in water. For example,
leaves of crotons or tanget will root if kept undisturbed in water for
several weeks.
Layering or runner
A method in which a stem attached to the plant is bent and covered
with soil. Young stems that can be bent easily without any injury are
the preferred plant for this method.
Self Assessment 4.1
1. Discuss the mechanisms of multiple fission.
2. When a food is left open for two or three days, one observes a
fruiting body on the food. The taste of food changes? Why?
3. What makes parthenogenesis unique as compared to other mode
of asexual reproduction?
80
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.3.5 Parthenogenesis
Attention
Why offspring produced by parthenogenesis is commonly called "virgin
birth"?
Whip tail lizard
(Aspidoscelis uniparens)
Some species of animals (e.g., bees) are able to reproduce asexually.
produces females by
Among common honeybees (Apis mellifera), a queen bee might lay
employing parthenogenesis.
2,000 eggs per day. Nearly all of these eggs are fertilized by sperm the
All the members of this
queen has received during one of her nuptial fights, and each one
species are female, and
of these eggs will develop into one of the worker bees of the colony
all reproduction in the
every one of them a female. A queen can, however, choose to let
species comes through
parthenogenesis. Thus, each
some of her eggs go unfertilized; no sperm from a male ever fuses
new lizard develops solely
with these eggs, yet bees develop within them and hatch from them.
from one of her mother's
Since egg and sperm do not come together in this process, this is not
eggs, meaning that each is a
sexual reproduction. Instead, each of these bees has been derived
clone of her mother.
through parthenogenesis: a form of asexual reproduction in which
an unfertilized egg develops into an adult organism. Among the
honeybees, all the bees derived through parthenogenesis are males
these are the few drones of a bee colony.
4.4 Sexual reproduction in Humans
Objectives
Activity 4.6. cooperative
learning
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Read books and
describe the mechanism of sexual reproduction
write advantages and
compare and contrast asexual and sexual reproduction
disadvantages of sexual
reproduction.
What is sexual reproduction?
Sexual reproduction involves the production of sex cells. It almost
always involves two parent organisms. These sex cells are called
gametes and they are made in reproductive organs. The gametes are
Key Terms
produced through meiosis. Sexual reproduction starts with the union
Egg: female gamete
of sperm and an egg in a process called fertilization. This can occur
Fuse: union(fertilization) of
either inside (internal fertilization) or outside (external fertilization)
egg and sperm
the body of the female. Fertilization results in the formation of a single
Gametes: reproductive cell
cell called a zygote. The zygote then grows into a new individual. The
(sex cells - egg or sperm)
female gametes are always larger than the male gametes and are not
Meiosis: type of cell
mobile.
division whereby
gametes are produced
Sperm: male gamete
Zygote: fertilized egg
Self Assessment 4.2
1. What are the advantages of asexual reproduction as compared to
sexual reproduction?
Grade 9 Biology
81
Unit 4: Reproduction
Activity 4.7. Inquiring and
4.5 Primary and secondary sexual characteristics
researching
Objectives
During puberty, humans
mature physically and
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
become able to reproduce.
differentiate between the primary and secondary sexual
What are the major
characteristics of males and females in humans
biological, psychological and
describe the biological, psychological, and social changes
sociological changes that
during the stage of puberty
occur during puberty?
At what ages do you think
What are primary sexual characteristics?
males and females go
through puberty?
The human males are born with the penis, scrotum and testicle
whereas females are born with vagina, uterus, and ovaries. These are
the primary sexual characteristics in males and females, respectively.
At puberty or adolescence these characteristics change markedly.
What are secondary sexual characteristics?
Key Terms
Puberty begins in the early teen years. Puberty or adolescence
Hormones: Are chemical
is the time when secondary sex characteristics begin to develop.
messengers secreted by
Secondary sexual characteristics begin to develop so that sexual
endocrine glands.
maturity is reached. Sexual maturity means that the potential for
Puberty: the time
sexual reproduction exists. Secondary sexual characteristics in males
when secondary sex
include:
characteristics begin to
develop; as secondary
growth and maintenance of the male sex organs,
sexual characteristics begin
to develop, so does sexual
an increase in body hair, an increase in muscle mass,
maturity, the potential for
increased growth of the long bones of the arms and legs, and
sexual reproduction.
deepening of the voice.
Secondary sex characters:
characteristics that are
What role do hormones play in puberty?
not primarily involved in
formation and delivery of
The glands of the endocrine system release hormones (chemical
egg/sperm, but that are
substances) which control the development and activity of the
essential for behavioral
male reproductive system. The changes that occur during puberty
and functional success of
are controlled by sex hormones. These hormones are secreted by
reproduction.
the endocrine system. The onset of puberty in males causes the
hypothalamus to produce several kinds of hormones. These hormones
interact with the pituitary gland.
Puberty in females begins in the early teen years. In females, LH
causes eggs to be released into the oviduct whereas FSH stimulates the
development of follicles in the ovary. A follicle is a group of epithelial
cells. These epithelial cells surround a developing egg cell. FSH also
causes a hormone called estrogen to be released from the ovary. It is
responsible for the secondary sex characteristics of females. Secondary
sexual characteristics in females include:
Increase in growth rates of the long bones of the arms and legs.
82
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Develop more hair, especially under the arms and in the pubic
Attention
area.
The hypothalamus secretes
The hips broaden, and more fat is deposited in the breasts,
a hormone that causes the
buttocks, and thighs.
pituitary gland to release
two other hormones. The
The menstrual cycle begins.
hormones are follicle-
What are the psychological and social changes during puberty? How do
stimulating hormone (FSH)
they affect life of the youth?
and luteinizing hormone
(LH). When FSH and
Young people must adjust to remarkable physiological, anatomical,
LH are released into the
and psychological transformations during the process of puberty.
bloodstream, are carried
to the testes. In the testes,
Their bodies change rapidly, and thus their body image also changes.
FSH causes the production
Any deviations of their bodies from what they or their peers consider
of sperm cells. LH causes
"normal" can lead to low self-esteem. For example, females will worry
the endocrine cells that are
about the size of their breasts and other aspects of their figures and
in the testes to produce the
will not feel feminine if these are not in line with the norm of their
male hormone testosterone.
peers. Similarly, a male may worry about the size of his penis or
Testosterone influences the
his physique; and if these are not within the norm, he will feel that
production of sperm cells.
something is wrong with him. Young people should realize that there
Testosterone is responsible
for the growth and
is considerable variation in the timing of the stages of puberty among
development of secondary
different individuals, and that most people develop into "normal"
sex characteristics in
adults in the course of their sexual and physical maturation.
the male. The FSH and
LH are also secreted in
An individual who reaches puberty later or earlier than his or her peers
females and influence the
can suffer psychological pain. If not handled in a constructive fashion,
development of secondary
early or late puberty can lead to poor self-esteem and problems in
sex characteristics.
sexual and other areas of life. For example, late-developing males may
suffer from a poor self-image, and this can influence them in later
life. They tend to have a lower occupational attainment, get paid less,
marry later, and have fewer children than other men of the same adult
height. Early maturing males, on the other hand, can have an easier
time of it. They tend to be held in higher esteem by their peers because
of their broad shoulders and masculine physiques. Early-maturing
females suffer more than early-maturing males. Because of their
mature bodies (large breasts), their peers make the assumption that
they are sexually experienced and sexually "easy," whereas in actuality,
early maturing females tend to be submissive, socially indifferent, and
low in popularity. Therefore, such individual should get medical or
psychological advice to cope up with problems related early or late
puberty.
Adolescence is the period between puberty and adulthood, when a
good deal of social learning takes place. The length of this period of
youth is socially determined. Its length could be influenced by nature,
culture, and civilization. Biologically, teenagers are adult after they
have reached puberty, when they are capable of having children.
Grade 9 Biology
83
Unit 4: Reproduction
Self Assessment 4.3
Economically, they are adult when they can support themselves and
possibly a family. Morally, they are adult when they are responsible
1. What are the two hor-
for their actions, can express love in a mature manner, and can
mones involved in male
have productive and meaningful relationships. During adolescence,
puberty released by the
teenagers must achieve economic and moral adulthood; deal with
pituitary gland?
separation from family.
2. What are the secondary
sex characteristics in
females?
4. 6 Male reproductive structures
Activity 4.8. Reflective
Objectives
discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
The main function of
Identify the structure and functions of the male reproductive
the organs, glands and
hormones of the male
organs.
reproductive system is to
produce sperm and deliver
What are the functions of the male reproductive organs?
them to the female. Discuss
the roles of the various parts
The male reproductive system of vertebrates, such as human males
of the male reproductive
,
includes testes, epididymis, vas deferens, accessory glands, and a
system. Draw and label parts
penis. Paired testes are the sites of sperm production. Each testis is
of the male reproductive
composed of numerous seminiferous tubules, in which the sperm
organ along with their
develop. The sperm are surrounded by cells, which nourish the
function.
developing sperm. Between the tubules are cells which produce the
male sex hormone (testosterone). In most mammals, the two testes
are housed permanently in a sac-like scrotum suspended outside the
abdominal cavity. This odd arrangement provides an environment
of slightly lower temperature, since in most mammals (including
humans) viable sperm do not form at temperatures maintained within
the body.
The sperm travels from the seminiferous tubules to epididymis, where
sperm maturation occurs and then to a vas deferens, the ejaculatory
duct. The vas deferens joins the urethra, a duct that carries both sperm
and urinary products through the penis. Three sets of accessory glands
open in to the reproductive channels: a pair of seminal vesicles, a
single prostate gland, and the pair of bulbourethral glands (Fig.4.8).
Fluid secreted by these glands furnishes food to the sperm, lubricates
the female reproductive tract for sperm, and counteracts the acidity
of the vagina so that the sperm retain their viability longer after being
deposited in the female. Semen is a mix of sperm, proteins, nutrients,
ions, and signalling molecules. Sperm constitute less than 5 percent of
semen volume.
84
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Bladder
Seminal
Vesicles
Pubic Bone
Vas deferens
Rectum
Urethra
Anus
Prostate
Epididymis
Figure 4.8 Parts of male
Testicle
Scrotum
reproductive systems
How does the structure of a sperm relate to its function?
The sperm has a "head" that is packed full of genetic material and
covered by an enzyme. The enzymes help the sperm penetrate an egg.
At its other end, the sperm has a flagellum that it uses to swim toward
an egg. In the midsection contains many mitochondria that supply
the energy required for flagellar movement (Fig.4.9).
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Flagellum
cap
Figure 4.9 Parts of a sperm cell
Head(5pm) Midpiece(6pm)
Tail(55pm)
Key Terms
Self Assessment 4.4
Bulbourethral glands: secrete a lubricating mucus into the urethra
which helps clear the urethra of residual urine.
1. What is the advantage
of testes located in the
Epididymides: a pair of ducts in which sperm formed in testes
scrotum?
mature; each empties into a vas deferens.
2. What does the mid piece
Penis: male organ of intercourse.
of the sperm contain?
Prostate gland: produces alkaline secretions that help raise the
3. What are the function
pH of the female reproductive tract, making this passage more
of seminal vesicle and
hospitable to sperm.
protest gland?
Scrotum: pouch of skin that encloses a human male's testes.
4. What is the purpose of
Semen: sperm mixed with secretions from seminal vesicles and the
the vas deferens?
prostate gland.
5. Which glands secrete
Seminal vesicles: are exocrine glands which secrete fructose-rich
alkaline fluids?
fluid into the vasa deferentia.
Seminiferous tubules: inside a testis, coiled tubules that contain
male germ cells and produce sperm.
Testosterone: main hormone produced by testes; required for sperm
production and development of male secondary sexual traits.
Vas deferens: one of a pair of long ducts that convey mature sperm
toward the body surface.
Grade 9 Biology
85
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.7. Female reproductive structures
Objectives
Activity 4.9. Investigating
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discuss the roles of the
Identify female reproductive structures and their functions.
different parts of the female
reproductive systems. Draw
What are the functions of female reproductive organs?
and label the various parts
along with their function.
A human female's gonads-her ovaries-lie deep inside her pelvic
cavity. They produce and release egg. They also secrete estrogens and
progesterone, the main sex hormones in females. Estrogens trigger
development of female secondary sexual characteristics and maintain
the lining of there productive tract. Progesterone thickens the lining
of the reproductive tract in preparation for pregnancy.
Adjacent to each ovary is an oviduct, a hollow tube that connects the
ovary to the uterus. Both oviducts open onto the uterus, a hollow, pear
shaped organ. The uterine lining consists of glandular epithelium,
connective tissues, and blood vessels. The bottom of the uterus, a
narrowed region called the cervix, opens into the vagina. The vagina,
which extends from the cervix to the body's surface, is the organ of
intercourse and the birth canal.
Externally visible organs of the reproductive tract are called genitals.
Female genitals include two pairs of liplike skin folds that enclose the
openings of the vagina and urethra. Adipose tissue fills the thick outer
folds, the labia majora. Thin inner folds are the labia minora. The
clitoris lies near the anterior junction of the labia minora. It contains
erectile tissue and is highly sensitive to tactile stimulation. The
opening into the vagina is often reduced in size in the virgin state by
a membrane, the hymen, although in today's more physically active
females, this membrane may be much reduced in extent (Fig.4.10).
The paired ovaries of the human female, contain many thousands of
eggs. During a woman's fertile years, except following fertilization,
approximately 13 eggs mature each year, and usually the ovaries
alternate in releasing eggs. Because a woman is fertile for only about
30 to 35 years, of the approximately 400,000 eggs in her ovaries at
birth, only 300 to 400 have a chance to reach maturity; the others
degenerate.
The uterine tubes or oviducts are lined with cilia for propelling the egg
away from the ovary from which it was released. The two ducts open
into the upper corners of the uterus, or womb, which is specialized
for housing the embryo during its intrauterine existence. It consists
of thick muscular walls, many blood vessels, and a specialized lining:
the endometrium. The uterus is designed to hold more than one
developing embryo.
86
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Fimbriae
Uterine fallopian tube
Ovary
Urinary bladder
Cervix
Clitoris
Anterior fornix
Urethra
Rectum
Urethral opening
Vagina
Labia majora
Anus
Labia minora
Vaginal opening
Figure 4.10 Female reproductive systems
Ovulation
What is ovulation?
In humans, egg production occurs before birth. A girl is born with
Self Assessment 4.5
about 2 million eggs. At puberty hormonal changes prompt eggs to
mature, one at a time, in an approximately twenty eight- day ovarian
1. How are eggs produced?
cycle. As the cycle begins, the follicle enlarges and a fluid filled cavity
2. How are eggs released?
forms around it. About two weeks after the follicle began to mature, its
wall ruptures and ovulation occurs. The egg and surrounding follicle
cells are ejected into the adjacent oviduct. After ovulation, cells of the
ruptured follicle develop into a hormone-secreting corpus luteum. If
pregnancy does not occur, the corpus luteum breaks down, and a new
follicle will begin to mature (Fig.4.11).
4
Day 4-5:
3
Day 2-4:
2
Day 1:
Blastocyst reaches uterus
Cell division
Fertilization
Inner cell
Zygote
Blastocyst
Fallopian
Ovary
Egg
tube
5
Day 5-9:
1
Ovulation
Blastocyst implants
Uterus
Figure 4.11 Ovulation
Grade 9 Biology
87
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.8 The Menstrual cycle
Objectives
Activity 4.10: Concept
mapping
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Outline the phases of the menstrual cycle
Discuss the major changes
during the menstrual cycle.
Also discuss the about
What cyclic changes occur in the ovary and uterus?
importance menstrual
hygiene and its health
The ovarian cycle described in the previous section is coordinated
benefits. Preparations of
with cyclic changes in the uterus. We refer to the approximately
menstrual hygiene materials
monthly changes in the uterus as the menstrual cycle. The first day
from locally available
of the menstrual cycle is marked by onset of menstruation (flow
resources.
Phase), which is the flow of bits of uterine lining and some blood
from the uterus, through the cervix, and out of the vagina.
FSH stimulates maturation of an ovarian follicle. The interval of
follicle maturation before ovulation is the follicular phase of the cycle.
During this time, cells around the egg secrete estrogens that stimulate
the endometrium to thicken. The rise in estrogens encourages the
pituitary to release more LH. The flow of LH causes the follicle to
swell and burst. LH trigger for ovulation. The luteal phase of the cycle
begins after ovulation. LH stimulates formation of the corpus luteum,
which secretes some estrogens and a lot of progesterone. These
hormones cause the uterine lining to thicken and encourage blood
vessels to grow through it. The uterus is now ready for pregnancy
(Fig.4.12).
A woman enters menopause when all the follicles in her ovaries have
either been released during menstrual cycles or have disintegrated
as a result of aging. With no follicles left to mature, production of
estrogen and progesterone is diminished and menstrual cycles cease.
Menopause is known only in humans and two species of whales.
Activity 4.11: Home work
Key Terms
Make internet search
Corpus luteum: a structure that secretes the hormones estrogen and
or ask a midwife nurse
progesterone; progesterone causes changes to occur in the lining of
(Gynecologist) in your
the uterus that prepare it to receive a fertilized egg
village (clinic) about
Flow phase: The first phase of the menstrual cycle.
menstrual cycle and the
Follicular phase: The second phase of the menstrual cycle
three phases of the cycle
and, menstrual hygiene
Luteal phase: The third phase of the menstrual cycle
present your results your to
Menstrual cycle: the series of changes in the female reproductive
classmates.
cycle that occur each month, which include producing an egg and
preparing the uterus for receiving the egg
88
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Ripening of follicles
Ovulation
Ripening of the corpus luteum
Ovulation
Menstruation
Progesterone
Estrogen
LH (luteinizing hormone)
FSH(follicle-stimulating hormone)
Start of the cycle
Day 7
Day 14
Day 21
Day 28
Figure4.12 Menstrual cycle
Menstrual hygiene and health benefits
Self Assessment 4.6
These hygiene practices can help females stay healthy and comfortable
1. What are the three
during period:
phases of the menstrual
Wear lightweight, breathable clothing (such as cotton underwear).
cycle?
Tight fabrics can trap moisture and heat, allowing germs to thrive.
2. What is shed during
menstrual flow?
Change menstrual products regularly. Trapped moisture provides
3. What two female
a breeding ground for bacteria and fungi. Wearing a pad or period
hormones are secreted
underwear for too long can lead to a rash or an infection.
by the corpus luteum?
Keep genital area clean. Wash the outside of vagina day. In the
4. Adolescent girls are
more exposed for iron
bathroom, good to wipe from the front toward the back, not the
deficiency anemia.
other way. Use only water to rinse vulva. The vagina is a self-
cleaning organ.
Use unscented toilet paper, tampons, or pads. Scented hygiene
products can irritate the skin and impact your natural pH balance.
Drink enough liquids. This can help wash out your urinary tract
and help prevent infections, like vaginal candidiasis.
Track and monitor your period. Your menstrual cycle is a valuable
marker for your overall health. Irregular periods can be a sign of
conditions like diabetes, thyroid dysfunction, and celiac disease.
Visit a healthcare provider for annual check-up. An annual full
check-up includes a pap smear, a pelvic exam, and a breast exam.
These exams are essential for good reproductive health as they can
catch early signs of cancer or other health issues.
Grade 9 Biology
89
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.9 Fertilization and pregnancy
Activity 4.12 Jigsaw
Objectives
groups
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
The union of an egg and a
define mating, fertilization and pregnancy
sperm results in a fertilized
describe process of twin formation and types
egg. This single cell must
undergo many changes
Mating and fertilization
before it develops into a
fetus. List the changes that
What is mating?
you know occur in the
Sexual arousal in the male results in an erection. That is, the penis
developing embryo and
becomes firm and erects as a result of blood flowing into the erectile
fetus.
tissue. Arousal in the female stimulates the lining of the vagina to
produce mucus. This lubricates the vagina and makes it easy for the
erect penis to enter. In the act of copulation, the male inserts the penis
into the female's vagina. The sensory stimulus in the male, which
results in the ejaculation of semen into the top of the vagina.
What is fertilization?
The sperm swims through the cervix and into the uterus by wriggling
movements of their tails. They pass through the uterus and enter the
oviduct. If there is an ovum in the oviduct, one of the sperm may bump
into it and stick to its surface. The sperm then enters the cytoplasm
of the egg and the male nucleus of the sperm fuses with the female
Figure 4.13. Fertilization
nucleus. This is the moment of fertilization (Fig.4.13). The released
egg is thought to survive for about 24 hours; the sperm might be able
to fertilize an ovum for about 2 or 3 days. So there is only a short
period of about 4 days each month when fertilization might occur. If
this fertile period can be estimated accurately, it can be used either to
Attention
achieve or to avoid fertilization (conception).
Neural tube defects (NTDs)
are birth defects of the
Twins (Multiple births)
brain, spine, or spinal cord.
How are twins formed?
It occurs when the neural
Many mammals give birth to more than one offspring at a time, each
tube does not close properly
in very early within the
member of which has come from a separate egg. There are some
first month of pregnancy.
mammals, however, that have only one offspring at a time, although
Women should take folic
occasionally they may have more than one.
acid rich foods before and
during pregnancy. Folic
Human twins may come from one zygote (identical, or monozygotic
acid supplementation is
twins) or two zygotes (non-identical, dizygotic, or fraternal twins).
recommended at least
Fraternal twins do not resemble each other any more than other
three months before
children born separately in the same family, but identical twins
pregnancy to prevent NTDs.
are, of course, strikingly alike and always of the same sex. Triplets,
Recommended to take folic
quadruplets, and quintuplets may include a pair of identical twins.
acid rich foods, including
folate supplement prior to
The other babies in such multiple births usually come from separate
zygotes. About 33% of identical twins have separate placentas, but the
pregnancy.
other identical twins share a common placenta.
90
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Pregnancy and development
What is implantation?
The fertilized egg (zygote) first divides into two cells. Each of these
divides again, so producing four cells. The cells continue to divide
in this way to produce a solid ball of cells (Fig. 4.14), an early stage
in the development of the embryo. This early embryo travels down
the oviduct to the uterus. Here it sinks into the lining of the uterus,
a process called implantation. The embryo continues to grow and
produces new cells that form tissues and organs. After 8 weeks, when
all the organs are formed, the embryo is called a fetus. One of the
first organs to form is the heart, which pumps blood around the body
oviduct Placenta
of the embryo. Inside the uterus the embryo becomes enclosed in a
fluid-filled sac called the amnion or water sac, which protects it from
Implanted
embryo
damage and prevents unequal pressures from acting on it. The fluid is
(12mm)
called amniotic fluid.
Uterus
cervix
Developing
Developing
Vagina
ear
eye
(a) 5 week
Placenta
Umblical
cord
Umblical
cord
Embryo
3 weeks
4 weeks
6 weeks
8 weeks
(60mm)
Amnion
Figure 4.14 Human embryo developmental stages until week eight
(water sac)
The oxygen and food needed to keep the embryo alive and growing
are obtained from the mother's blood by means of a structure called
(b) 10 weeks
Placenta
the placenta. The placenta becomes closely attached to the lining of
the uterus and is attached to the embryo by a tube called the umbilical
Umblical
cord. Oxygen and nutrients such as glucose and amino acids pass
cord
across the placenta to the embryo's bloodstream. Carbon dioxide
Amnion
passes from the embryo's blood to that of the mother. Blood entering
Embryo
(250mm)
the placenta from the mother does not mix with the embryo's blood.
amniotic
Figure 4.15 shows the human embryo from 5 to 35 weeks surrounded
cavity
Uterus
by the amnion and placenta.
(c) 5 months
Placenta
Embryo
(470mm)
Uterus
Amnion
cervix
Figure 4.15 Growth and development in the uterus (5 to 35 weeks)
(d) 35 weeks(a few
weeks before birth)
Grade 9 Biology
91
Unit 4: Reproduction
4.10 Methods of birth control
Activity 4.13: Collaborative
Objectives
learning groups
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Contraception, the
discuss the methods of prevention of unwanted pregnancy
deliberate prevention
explain the advantages and disadvantages of different birth
control methods.
of pregnancy, can be
achieved in a number of
What can prevent unwanted pregnancy?
ways. Some contraceptive
methods prevent gamete
As little as 4 weeks after giving birth, it is possible, though unlikely,
development or release
that a woman may conceive again. Frequent breastfeeding may reduce
from female or male
the chances of conception. Nevertheless, it would be possible to have
gonads; others prevent
children at about 1-year intervals. Most people do not want, or cannot
fertilization by keeping
afford, to have as many children as this. All human communities,
sperm and egg apart;
therefore, practice some form of birth control to space out births and
and still, others prevent
limit the size of the family. Family planning methods could be natural
implantation of an
or artificial.
embryo. Discuss methods
Some family planning methods such as condoms can help prevent the
of use, mechanisms of
transmission of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.
action; advantages and
disadvantages; degree of
Family planning /contraception reduce the need for abortion,
effectiveness of different
especially unsafe abortion.
birth control methods.
Family planning reinforces people's rights to determine the number
and spacing of their children.
By preventing unintended pregnancy, family planning/contraception
prevents deaths of mothers and children.
Benefits of family planning / contraception
Preventing pregnancy-related health risks in women
Reducing infant mortality
Empowering people and enhancing education
Reducing adolescent pregnancies
Slowing population growth
4.10.1. Natural methods of family planning
Abstinence
This is the most obvious way of preventing a pregnancy. This involves
a couple avoiding sexual intercourse. In this way, sperm cannot come
into contact with an egg and fertilization cannot happen. It is the
effective method with added advantage of preventing exposure to
sexually transmissible pathogens.
Fertility Awareness/Natural Family Planning
Fertility awareness methods rely on understanding the most likely
time that ovulation will take place during the monthly cycle, so that
intercourse is avoided, or a barrier method is used.
92
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Fertility awareness methods include:
Standard Days Methods
Calendar Rhythm Method
Symptothermal Method
Ovulation Method
The effectiveness of fertility awareness methods range from 98% with
perfect use to 78% with typical use. Although an important option for
women worldwide, fertility awareness methods overall are less effective
than other methods. Male partners must be continuously cooperative.
Physiologic changes (that is recent childbirth, current breast-feeding,
early menstruation, discontinuation of other hormonal methods,
approaching menopause) can affect reliability.
Withdrawal (Coitus Interruptus)
The withdrawal method for pregnancy prevention refers to the moment
a man pulls his penis out of his partner's vagina before ejaculation to
avoid ejaculating the sperm. Preventing sperm from entering the vagina
(and thus the uterus and fallopian tubes) and fertilising an ovum.
Effectiveness: In terms of pregnancy prevention, withdrawal
effectiveness is similar to that of the male condom. Effectiveness is
ninety six percent (96%) with perfect use and eighty percent (82%)
with typical use. Consider back-up method such as emergency
contraception if ejaculation begins before withdrawal.
Advantages
Withdrawal requires no money, devices, hormones, or medical
provider, making it available to anyone.
Disadvantages
Provides no protection against sexually transmitted infections
and HIV.
Requires a great degree of self-control. For some men, it may
be difficult to ensure that they withdraw before ejaculation has
started.
For some people, pleasure may be diminished by the
interruption of sexual intercourse.
Monitoring body temperature
If it were possible to know exactly when ovulation occurred, intercourse
could be avoided for 3-4 days before and 1 day after ovulation. At
the moment, however, there is no simple, reliable way to recognize
ovulation, though it is usually 12-16 days before the onset of the next
menstrual period. By keeping careful records of the intervals between
menstrual periods, it is possible to calculate a potentially fertile period
of about 10 days in mid-cycle, when sexual intercourse should be
avoided if children are not wanted. On its own, this method is not very
Grade 9 Biology
93
Unit 4: Reproduction
reliable but there are some physiological clues that help to make it
more accurate. During or soon after ovulation, a woman's temperature
rises by about 0.5 °C. It is reasonable to assume that 1 day after the
temperature returns to normal, a woman will be infertile. There is
25% chance of pregnancy per year.
Cervical mucus
Another clue comes from the type of mucus secreted by the cervix
and lining of the vagina. As the time for ovulation approaches, the
mucus becomes more fluid. Women can learn to detect these changes
and so calculate their fertile period. By combining the 'calendar',
'temperature' and 'mucus' methods, it is possible to achieve about
80% 'success', i.e. only 20% unplanned pregnancies.
Natural methods have no side effects and this method is permitted
by most religions. Carried out with care and scientific precision
about recording techniques it can be very effective. Depends on full
co-operation of both partners and it is not always easy to pinpoint
ovulation so pregnancy can result. There is a chance of 10 pregnancies
per 100 women per year.
4.10.2 Artificial methods of family planning (barrier methods)
Female Condom
Activity 4.14: Survey/
Interviewing/ role play
The female condom is a polyurethane sheath - one end is inserted into
Make Internet search
the vagina while the other remains outside of the vagina and provides
or ask a midwife nurse
some protection to the external genitalia. It contains a silicone
(Gynecologist) in your
lubricant. Additional lubricant is provided with each condom.
village (school clinic)
about artificial methods of
Effectiveness: Female condom effectiveness is ninety five percent
family planning methods.
(95%) with perfect use, and eighty percent (80%) with typical use.
Alternatively, you could
assign one of your classmate
Advantages: Dual protection against pregnancy, and STI/HIV,
to act as midwife nurse
accessible without prescription, causes few medical side effects,
(Gynecologist) and ask
some people find female condoms to be more comfortable and less
her/him about methods
constricting than male condoms, as they are wider.
of use; advantages and
disadvantages; degree of
Disadvantages: Coitus dependent, more expensive than male condoms,
effectiveness of different
challenge to use in relationships with weak partner cooperation and/
birth control methods.
or intimate partner violence
Male Condom
Male condoms are available in latex, lambskin, and polyurethane.
All three materials effectively prevent pregnancy. Lambskin contains
small pores that may permit the passage of bacteria and viruses. Thus
they are not recommended for infection prevention.
Effectiveness: Male condom effectiveness is ninety eight percent
(98%) with perfect use, and eighty five (85%) with typical use.
94
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Advantages: Provides protection against both pregnancy and STI/
HIV, widely accessible without a prescription, causes almost no
medical side effects.
Disadvantages: Coitus dependent, reduced sensitivity for men however,
this may be an advantage for preventing premature ejaculation, some
men have difficulty maintaining erections, especially when they are
inexperienced condom users, challenge to use in relationships where
there is weak partner cooperation and/or intimate partner violence or
coercion and latex allergy.
Diaphragm
A thin rubber disc, placed in the vagina before intercourse, covers the
cervix and stops sperm entering the uterus. Condoms and diaphragms,
used in conjunction with chemicals that immobilize sperm, are about
95% effective. However, a diaphragm does not prevent the risk of
transmission of STIs (Fig. 4.16). There are no side effects, offers
some protection against cervical cancer. It must be initially fitted by
a doctor. May be incorrectly positioned or damaged and allow sperm
past. Gives better protection against pregnancy when combined with
spermicide. There is a chance of 2.5 pregnancies per 100 woman years.
Spermicides
Spermicides are chemicals which, though harmless to the tissues, can
kill or immobilize sperm. The spermicide, in the form of a cream, gel
or foam, is placed in the vagina. On their own, spermicides are not
very reliable but, in conjunction with condoms or diaphragms, they
are effective.
Intra-uterine device (IUD)
A small T-shaped plastic and copper device, also known as a coil, can
be inserted by a doctor or nurse into the wall of the uterus, where it
probably prevents implantation of a fertilized ovum. It is about 98%
effective but there is a small risk of developing uterine infections, and
it does not protect against STIs. Once inserted, no further steps need
to be taken. It is relatively effective at preventing implantation and
pregnancy. It can cause pain and heavy periods; can cause uterine
infections which may lead to infertility. If pregnancy does occur, it
has a high chance of being in the Fallopian tubes (ectopic pregnancy).
There is a chance 2.5 pregnancy per 100 woman years
Intra-uterine system (IUS)
This is similar to an IUD; is T-shaped and releases the hormone
progesterone slowly over a long period of time (up to 5 years). The
hormone prevents ovulation. An IUS does not protect against STIs.
Contraceptive pill
The pill contains chemicals, which have the same effect on the body
Grade 9 Biology
95
Unit 4: Reproduction
as the hormones oestrogen and progesterone. When mixed in suitable
proportions these hormones suppress ovulation and so prevent
conception. The pills need to be taken each day for the 21 days
between menstrual periods.
There are many varieties of contraceptive pill in which the relative
proportions of oestrogen- and progesterone-like chemicals vary.
They are 99% effective, but long-term use of some types may increase
the risk of cancer of the breast and cervix. The pill does not protect
against STIs.
Contraceptive implant
This is a small plastic tube of about 4 cm long which is inserted under
the skin of the upper arm of a woman by a doctor or nurse. Once
in place, it slowly releases the hormone progesterone, preventing
pregnancy. It lasts for about 3 years. It does not protect against STIs,
but has more than a 99% success rate in preventing pregnancy.
Contraceptive injection
This injection, given to women, contains progesterone and stays
effective for between 8 and 12 weeks. It works by thickening the mucus
in the cervix, stopping sperm reaching an egg. It also thins the lining
of the uterus, making it unsuitable for implantation of an embryo. It
does not protect against STIs.
Surgical methods
Male sterilization - vasectomy
This is a simple and safe surgical operation in which the man's sperm
ducts are cut and the ends sealed. This means that his semen contains
the secretions of the prostate gland and seminal vesicle but no sperm
so cannot fertilize an ovum. Sexual desire, erection, copulation and
ejaculation are quite unaffected. The testis continues to produce sperm
and testosterone. The sperm are removed by white cells as fast as they
form. The testosterone ensures that there is no loss of masculinity.
The sperm ducts can be rejoined by surgery but this is not always
successful.
Female sterilization- laparotomy
A woman may be sterilized by an operation in which her oviducts are
tied, blocked or cut. The ovaries are unaffected. Sexual desire and
menstruation continue as before, but sperm can no longer reach the
ova. Ova are released, but break down in the upper part of the ovi-
duct. The operation cannot usually be reversed. Both vasectomy and
laparotomy are almost 100% guaranteed to prevent pregnancy and
permanent control of fertility. Remove the problem of human error
in contraception. For women in particular it involves a general an
96
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
aesthetic. Not easily reversible. There a chance of 0.05 pregnancies
per 100 woman years.
condom
contraceptive
Oral
calander rhythm
diaphragm
injection
contraception
method
IUD
spermicide
implant
surgical
coitus interruptus
female condom
sterilization
Figure 4.16 The different Contraceptive methods used by females and
males
Self Assessment 4.7
Sterilization is the permanent prevention of gamete production or
1. What are the
release. For women, the most common method is tubal ligation, the
disadvantages of
sealing shut or tying off (ligating) of a section of each oviduct to
diaphragm?
prevent eggs from traveling into the uterus. Similarly, vasectomy in
2. What are the
men is the cutting and tying off of each vas deferens to prevent sperm
disadvantages of
from entering the urethra. Sex hormone secretion and sexual function
vasectomy and
are unaffected by both procedures, with no change in menstrual cycles
laparotomy?
in females or ejaculate volume in males. Although tubal ligation and
3. Why is abstinence
vasectomy are considered permanent, both procedures can in many
important for the youth
cases be reversed by microsurgery.
like you?
4.11 Sexually transmitted infections (STIs):
Activity 4.15: Inquiry and
Transmission and prevention
research projects
Read books or search in
Objectives
Internet or ask a clinical
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
nurse in your village
describe the types, modes of transmission and preventive
(school clinic) about the
mechanisms of sexually transmitted infection
most common sexually
transmitted infectious
in Ethiopia (e.g., HIV/
AIDS, syphilis, gonorrhea,
What are causes and effects of common sexually transmitted infec-
trichomoniasis and
tions,and how are they treated?
chancroid). Discuss causes,
the modes transmission and
Sexually transmitted infections are infections which spread through
methods of preventions.
Grade 9 Biology
97
Unit 4: Reproduction
sexual contact. Trichomoniasis, syphilis, gonorrhea, chaceriod and
HIV/AIDS are the common STIs in Ethiopia.
Trichomoniasis
It is caused by the flagellated protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis. Many
infected people do not have symptoms, but some infected women
have a yellowish discharge, and a sore, itchy vagina. In both sexes, an
untreated infection can cause infertility. Some epidemiological studies
suggest that, in men, untreated trichomoniasis may increase the risk
of benign prostate enlargement and aggressive prostate cancer. A
single dose of an antiprotozoal drug can quickly cure the infection.
Both partners should be treated.
Chlamydia
It is caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. Chlamydias are small bacteria.
In women, an infection of the reproductive tract by bacteria most
often goes undetected. Some women and most men experience
painful urination; most infected men have a clear or yellow discharge
from the penis. Left untreated, a Chlamydia infection can scar the
reproductive tract and lead to infertility in both sexes. An infection
can be passed from a mother to child during birth, causing pneumonia
and conjunctivitis in the newborn. Chlamydia can be cured with
antibiotics.
Gonorrhea
Is the second most common bacterial STI is caused by Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. Men usually develop symptoms within one week of
becoming infected; yellow pus oozes from the penis and urination
becomes frequent and painful. By contrast, most women have no
early symptoms. In both sexes an infection can damage reproductive
ducts and cause sterility. Gonorrhea is treated with antibiotics, but
strains resistant to the most widely used antibiotics are increasingly
common. Gonorrhea could harms the joints and skin, but can also
affect the heart and liver.
Syphilis
Is caused by Treponema pallidum, a spiral shaped bacterium. During
sex with an infected partner, these bacteria get onto the genitals or into
the cervix, vagina, or oral cavity. They slip into the body through tiny
cuts. If untreated, the infection can become systemic. Skin chancres
appear and the liver, bones, and eventually the brain can be damaged.
Like gonorrhea, syphilis is treated with antibiotics.
98
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
HIV/AIDS
Activity 4.16: Peer
conferencing
The disease is now known as Human Immunodeficiency Virus, or
HIV. HIV kills immune cells in the body. HIV leads to Acquired
AIDS: Acquired Immune
Immune Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS. Once attached, the virus can
Deficiency Syndrome. The
virus that causes AIDS is the
penetrate the immune cell. The virus may remain inactive for months.
human immunodeficiency
Spread of HIV
virus (HIV). Discuss the
transmission mechanisms
The disease HIV is spread from an infected person through blood
of HIV; the different control
or body fluids. This can occur through direct contact with the
method of the spread of
infected blood or body fluids. It also can occur through contact
AIDS and responsible sexual
with objects that have been contaminated by infected blood or body
behavior and HIV/AIDS
fluids. Intimate sexual contact and use of contaminated intravenous
needles are known methods of disease transmission. HIV also can
be transmitted by blood transfusion if the blood is contaminated. A
pregnant woman who has HIV can transmit it to her fetus. The virus
also can be transmitted through breast milk.
What are the symptoms of AIDS?
The first symptoms of AIDS may not appear for as many as ten years
after a person is infected. During this time, the AIDS virus reproduces,
infecting more and more immune cells. People infected with HIV may
develop AIDS. Early symptoms of AIDS may include swollen lymph
nodes, loss of appetite, weight loss, fever, rashes, night sweats, and
fatigue. It is not known how many people who are infected with HIV
will develop AIDS. AIDS weakens the body's immune system and
the body cannot fight off other infectious diseases or certain forms of
cancer.
Prevention and control of HIV
Abstinence from intimate sexual contact protects against HIV
and other sexually transmitted diseases. HIV transmission can be
prevented among users of illegal drugs if they do not share needles.
When AIDS first appeared, there were no effective drugs. Today, there
is a range of drugs that can be given separately or as a 'cocktail', which
slow the progress of the disease. Research to find a vaccine and more
effective drugs is ongoing. There is a range of blood tests designed to
detect HIV infection. These tests do not detect the virus but do indicate
whether antibodies to the virus are in the blood. If HIV antibodies are
present, the person is said to be HIV positive. The tests vary in their
reliability and some are too expensive for widespread use.
Control of the spread of STIs
The best way to avoid sexually transmitted infections is to avoid
having sexual intercourse with an infected person. However, the
symptoms of the disease are often not obvious and it is difficult to
recognize an infected individual. So the STI is avoided by not having
Grade 9 Biology
99
Unit 4: Reproduction
sexual intercourse with a person who might have the infection. Such
persons are:
prostitutes who offer sexual intercourse for money
people who are known to have had sexual relationships
with many others
Casual acquaintances whose background and past sexual
activities are not known.
These are good reasons, among many others, for being faithful to
one partner. The risk of catching a sexually transmitted infection can
be greatly reduced if the man uses a condom or if a woman uses a
female condom. These act as barriers to bacteria or viruses. If a person
suspects that he or she has caught a sexually transmitted infection,
treatment must be sought at once. Treatment is always confidential.
The patients must, however, ensure that anyone they have had sexual
contact with also gets treatment. There is no point in one partner being
cured if the other is still infected. STIs that are caused by a bacterium,
such as syphilis and gonorrhea, can be treated with antibiotics if the
symptoms are recognized early enough. However, HIV is viral so
antibiotics are not effective.
Self Assessment 4.8
1. What are the common sexually transmitted infections in Ethiopia?
How do we control them?
100
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Unit review
Reproduction is one of the ubiquitous properties of life. The ability of organisms to repro-
duce to form their own kind is the one characteristic that best distinguishes living things
from nonliving matter.
Asexual reproduction is the process resulting in the production of genetically identical off-
spring from one parent. It occurs without gametes or fertilization.
The basic forms of asexual reproduction are fission (binary and multiple), budding, and
fragmentation.
Many flowering plants reproduce asexually by vegetative propagation. The stolon of the
strawberry plant is a horizontal stem that grows above the ground, takes root at the nodes
and produces new plants. Rhizomes, corms, bulbs and tap root may store food, which is
used to accelerate early growth.
Sexual reproduction is the process involving the fusion of the nuclei of two gametes to
form a zygote and the production of offspring that are different from each other. The male
gamete is small and mobile. The female gamete is larger and not often mobile. The female
gamete of an animal is an egg.
Fertilization is the fusion of gamete nuclei. Fertilization happens when a sperm enters an
ovum and the sperm and egg nuclei join up (fuse). The fertilized egg (zygote) divides into
many cells and becomes embedded in the lining of the uterus. Here it grows into an em-
bryo.
The human males are born with the penis, scrotum and testicle whereas females are born
with vagina, uterus, and ovaries. These are the primary sexual characteristics in males and
females, respectively.
Secondary sexual characteristics in males include: growth and maintenance of the male sex
organs, an increase in body hair, an increase in muscle mass, increased growth of the long
bones of the arms and legs, and deepening of the voice.
Secondary sexual characteristics in females include: increase in growth rates of the long
bones of the arms and legs, develop more hair, especially under the arms and in the pubic
area, the hips broaden, and more fat is deposited in the breasts, buttocks, and thighs, the
menstrual cycle begins.
Young people must adjust to remarkable physiological, anatomical, and psychological
transformations during the process of puberty.
Young people should realize that there is considerable variation in the timing of the stages
of puberty among different individuals, and that most people develop into "normal" adults
in the course of their sexual and physical maturation.
Adolescence is the period between puberty and adulthood, when a good deal of social
learning takes place.
Biologically, teenagers are adult after they have reached puberty, when they are capable of
having children.
Economically, they are adult when they can support themselves and possibly a family.
Morally, they are adult when they are responsible for their actions, can express love in a
mature manner, and can have productive and meaningful relationships.
Grade 9 Biology
101
Unit 4: Reproduction
During adolescence, teenagers must achieve economic and moral adulthood; deal with sep-
aration from family,
Human testes reside within a scrotum. They produce sperm and testosterone. Sperm form
continually from germ cells inside the testes' seminiferous tubules. The sperm mature in an
epididymis that opens into a vas deferens.
Secretions from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland join with sperm to form semen.
Semen is expelled from the body through the urethra that runs through the penis.
Human ovaries produce eggs and sex hormones. An oviduct conveys an egg to the uterus.
The cervix of the uterus opens into the vagina, which serves as the organ of intercourse and
the birth canal.
Pituitary release follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).
FSH causes an ovarian follicle to begin maturing. Follicle cells around an egg, which formed
before birth, proliferate and secrete estrogens and progesterone.
LH triggers ovulation of the egg. After ovulation, the corpus luteum secretes progesterone
that primes the uterus for pregnancy. When the corpus luteum breaks down, menstruation
occurs.
The ovarian cycle is coordinated with cyclic changes in the uterus. We refer to the approx-
imately monthly changes in the uterus as the menstrual cycle.
Spermenters the cytoplasm of the egg and the male nucleus of the sperm fuses with the
female nucleus. This is the moment of fertilization.
Human twins may come from one zygote (identical, or monozygotic twins) or two zygotes
(non-identical, dizygotic, or fraternal twins).
Fraternal twins do not resemble each other any more than other children born separately
in the same family, but identical twins are, of course, strikingly alike and always of the same
sex.
Soon after the ball of cells reaches the uterus, some of the cells, instead of forming the
organs of the embryo, grow into a disc-like structure, the placenta. The placenta becomes
closely attached to the lining of the uterus and is attached to the embryo by a tube called
the umbilical cord.
Sexual intercourse can pass protozoan, bacterial and viral pathogens between partners. The
consequences of a STIs range from mild discomfort to sterility and systemic disease.
Protozoan and bacterial STIs can be cured with antibiotics, but there are no drugs to cure
viral STIs.
There are natural and artificial methods birth control methods. Abstaining from sex is the
effective method with added advantage of preventing exposure to sexually transmissible
pathogens.
Artificial methods of family planning barrier methods includes sheath or condom, dia-
phragm, femidom, spermicides, intra-uterine device (IUD), intra-uterine system (IUS),
contraceptive pill, contraceptive implant, contraceptive injection, vasectomy and laparot-
omy.
102
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 4: Reproduction
Review Questions
Part One (Matching Items): Match items under column A with the appropriate item under
column B.
A
B
1
Birth canal
A
FSH and LH
2
Secrete fructose rich fluid
B
Prostate gland
3.
Produces estrogens and Progesterone
C
Testis
4
Thin inner folds
D
Epididymis
5
Pituitary gland
E
Labia majora
6
Secretes semen components
F
Endometrium
7
Conveys sperm out of body
G
Seminal vesicles
8
Produces testosterone
H
Ovary
9
Usual site of fertilization
I
Oviduct
10
Lining of uterus
J
Vagina
11
Fat-padded skin folds
K
Urethra
12
Stores sperm
L
Labia minora
Part Two (Multiple Choice Items): Choose the correct answer among the given alternative
1. Sexual reproduction
A. Requires formation of gametes by meiosis
B. Produces offspring identical in their traits
C. Occurs only in vertebrates
D. All of the above
2. The cervix is the entrance to the
A. Oviducts
B. Vagina
C. Uterus
D. Scrotum
3. Semen contains secretions from the
A. Adrenal gland
B. Prostate gland
C. Pituitary gland
D. Corpus luteum
4. Sperm in an epididymis passes next into the
A. Prostate gland
B. Urethra
C. Seminiferous tubules
D. Vas deferens
5. A male attains an erection when
A. The posterior pituitary releases oxytocin
B. Spongy tissue inside the penis fills with blood
C. Muscles running the length of the penis contract
D. Leydig cells release a surge of testosterone
Grade 9 Biology
103
Unit 4: Reproduction
6. Birth control pills deliver synthetic
A. Estrogens and progesterone
B. Oxytocin and prostaglandins
C. LH and FSH
D. Testosterone
7. Which one of the following is not the advantage of asexual reproduction
A. Little variation created
B. No mate is needed,
C. No gametes are needed,
D. All the good characteristics of the parent are passed on to the offspring
8. Morally, teenagers are adult after they have reached puberty, when they are capable of having
children.
A. True
B. False
Part Three: Critical thinking question
1. State exactly what happens at the moment of fertilization.
2. From the list of changes at puberty in girls, select those that are related to childbearing and
say what part you think they play.
3. How do sperm differ from egg in their structure?
4. Is fertilization likely to occur if mating takes place:
a. 2 days before ovulation
b. 2 days after ovulation
5. Define, and distinguish among, the terms fission, fragmentation, parthenogenesis, bud-
ding and vegetative propagation.
6. Explain the function of the corpus luteum in the menstrual cycle. If fertilization of the ovu-
lated egg happens, what endocrine events occur to support pregnancy?
7. Explain how the female hormones FSH, LH, and estrogen interact during the menstrual
cycle to induce ovulation and, subsequently, formation of the corpus luteum.
8. What are the male sex hormones and what are their functions?
9. One of the first signs of pregnancy is that the menstrual periods stop. Explain why you
would expect this.
10. What are causes and effects of common STIs, and how are they treated?
11. Describe, and distinguish among, the birth control methods - vasectomy, diaphragm, con-
traceptive pill, spermicides and laparotomy.
12. Name the general location and give the function of the following reproductive structures:
seminiferous tubules, vas deferens, urethra, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, bulbourethral
glands, mature follicle, oviducts, uterus, vagina, endometrium.
13. Match each disease with the type of organism that causes it. The choices can be used more
than once.
i
Chlamydial infection
A.
Bacteria
ii
AIDS
B.
Protozoa
iii
Syphilis
C.
Virus
iv
Gonorrhea
V
Trichomoniasis
104
Grade 9 Biology
