Unit 6: Ecology
Sections
Learning competencies
6.1 Ecology
Define ecological terms
6.1.1 Definitions of common
Explain the biotic and abiotic components of an ecosystem
ecological terms
Describe the ecological levels
6.1.2 Biotic and abiotic compo-
Explain the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
nents
Define biome
6.1.3 Ecological levels
Describe the major terrestrial and aquatic biomes
6.1.4 Ecosystems
Mention the fauna and flora of each biome
6.1.5 Biomes
Describe ecological succession
6.1.6 Ecological succession
Express love and respect to fauna and flora and their bi-
6.2 Ecological relationships
omes
Investigate how elder people in their localities care for
plants and wildlife
6.1 Ecology
6.1.1 Definitions of Common Ecological Terms
Objectives
Activity 6.1: Question and
answer
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define ecological terms
What is ecology? When you
hear the word ecology, what
do you think of? Make a list
Every day you share your environment with many organisms. These
of some of the topics you
can be as small as houseflies or mosquitoes. They can be dust mites
think you will learn about as
that you cannot even see. Larger animals include dogs, cows, and
you study about ecology.
hyenas. You need to know about your environment. The reason is
simple: your environment affects you and every other organism in it.
What is Ecology?
The branch of biology that deals with the study of the interactions
among organisms and with their environment is known as ecology.
Scientists who study ecology are called ecologists. Because our planet
has many diverse plants, animals, and environments, ecologists tend
to study smaller areas called ecosystems. An ecosystem consists of
the physical environment (abiotic factors) and all the living things
(biotic factors) within it. Animals are consumers since they cannot
Grade 9 Biology
139
Unit 6: Ecology
make their own food and must obtain their food from producers or
other consumers. Bacteria and fungi are decomposers. They eat dead
plant and animal remains and convert them into substances that can
be reused.
Each type of living thing in an ecosystem has a place in which it lives.
This is known as its habitat. The combination of the job an organism
does and the place in which it lives is called its niche. What are some
jobs that organisms do? Plants and algae trap the energy in sunlight and
produce their own food. Because of this, they are known as producers.
Animals are consumers; bacteria and fungi are decomposers.
Self Assessment 6.1
1. Describe what animals
Ecologists use both qualitative and quantitative research. They
share your surrounding?
gather qualitative information by observing organisms and their
2. What do ecologists
environment. They gather quantitative data by making measurements
study?
and doing experiments. Ecologists study organisms both in the
laboratory and in the field where they live.
6.1.2. Biotic and abiotic components
Activity 6.2: Discussion
Objectives
Discuss the various abiotic
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
and biotic factors that
explain the biotic and abiotic components of an ecosystem
influence the distribution
discuss the effects of biotic and abiotic factors on the
of organisms in their
distributions of species
environment. Enumerate
at list five abiotic and biotic
factors you knew.
Abiotic Factors
Abiotic factors are non-living components of the ecosystem that
influence the distributions of organisms in their environment.
Examples of abiotic factors include: energy, light, temperature, water,
nutrients, salinity, etc.
All organisms require a usable source of energy to live. Solar
energy from sunlight, captured by chlorophyll during the process of
photosynthesis, powers most ecosystems. Lack of sunlight is rarely the
most important factor limiting plant growth for terrestrial ecosystems,
although shading by trees does create intense competition for light
among plants growing on forest floors. In many aquatic environments,
however, light cannot penetrate beyond certain depths. As a result,
most photosynthesis in a body of water occurs near the surface.
Surprisingly, life also thrives in environments that are completely
dark. These ecosystems are powered by bacteria that derive energy
from the oxidation of inorganic chemicals such as hydrogen sulfide.
Bacteria with similar metabolic talents support communities of caved
dwelling organisms.
140
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Temperature is an important abiotic factor because of its effect
on metabolism. Few organisms can maintain a sufficiently active
metabolism at temperatures close to 0°C (32°F), and temperatures
above 45°C (113°F) destroy the enzymes of most organisms (Fig.6.1).
Most organisms function best within a specific range of environmental
temperatures.
Water is essential to all life. Aquatic organisms are surrounded by
water, but they face problems of water balance if their own solute
concentration does not match that of their surroundings. For
terrestrial organisms, the primary threat is drying out in the air. Many
land animals have watertight coverings that reduce water loss, such
as reptilian scales. Most plants have waxy coatings on their leaves and
other aerial parts.
The distribution and abundance of photosynthetic organisms,
including plants, algae, and photosynthetic bacteria, depend on the
availability of inorganic nutrients such as compounds of nitrogen
and phosphorus. Plants obtain these nutrients from the soil. Soil
structure, pH, and nutrient content often play major roles in
determining the distribution of plants. In many aquatic ecosystems,
low levels of nitrogen and phosphorus limit the growth of algae and
photosynthetic bacteria.
Several abiotic factors are important in aquatic, but not terrestrial,
ecosystems. While terrestrial organisms have a plentiful supply of
oxygen from the air, aquatic organisms must depend on oxygen
dissolved in water. This is a critical factor for many species of fish.
Cold, fast-moving water has higher oxygen content than warm or
stagnant water. Salinity (saltiness), currents, and tides also play a
role in many aquatic ecosystems.
Some abiotic factors affect terrestrial, but not aquatic, ecosystems. For
example, wind is often an important factor on land. Wind increases
an organism's rate of water loss by evaporation. The resulting increase
in evaporative cooling can be advantageous on a hot summer day, but
it can cause dangerous wind chill in the winter. In some ecosystems,
frequent occurrences of natural disturbances such as storms or fire
play a role in the distribution of organisms.
Grade 9 Biology
141
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.3: Field
observation
Make a field visit in your
village or school compound
Soil
Water
take note on the various
abiotic factors (e.g.,
temperature, water, pH,
salinity etc.). Materials
Temprature
Atmospher
required include notebook,
pencil, plastic bags, pH
meter, thermometer, pot,
wind
Sunlight
and hygrometer.
Figure 6.1. Common abiotic factors of territorial and aquatic biome
Activity 6.4: Field
Biotic Factors
observation
Biotic factors are the living components of the ecosystem that influence
Make a field visit in your
the distributions of organisms in their environment. Often, the ability
village or school compound
take note on the effects
of a species to survive and reproduce is reduced by its interactions
various biotic factors that
with other species, such as predators (organisms that kill their prey)
affect the distribution of
or herbivores (organisms that eat plants or algae). Herbivores could
organisms (e.g., predators,
affect the distribution of a food species. In addition to predation and
herbivores, parasite,
herbivory, the presence or absence of pollinators, food resources,
decomposers, competing
parasites, pathogens, and competing organisms can act as a biotic
organisms etc.).
limitation on species distribution. Such biotic limitations are common
Alternatively, ask an
in nature (Fig.6.2).
ecologist or a biologist
in your village how the
distribution of herbivores/
predators affect the
Biotic Factors
distribution of food species.
Producers
Consumers
Decomposers
Materials required include
notebook, pencil, binocular
and meter.
Self Assessment 6.2
1. Why is solar energy
K
such an important factor
for most ecosystems?
2. Which abiotic factor
is more important
for aquatic organisms
Figure 6.2 Common biotic factors of territorial and aquatic biomes
compared to terrestrial
ones? Explain.
142
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Ecological levels
Objectives
Activity 6.5: Jigsaw
groups
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
What are ecological levels?
describe the ecological levels
Summarize the properties of
the different ecological levels
and present the results to
Ecologists study individual organisms. They study relationships among
your classmates.
organisms of the same species and connections among organisms
of different species. They also study the effects of abiotic factors on
species that live together. To make it easier to examine all of these
biotic and abiotic interactions, ecologists have organized the living
world into levels. The levels are the organism by itself, populations,
communities, ecosystems and biosphere (Fig.6.3). The traditional
ecological investigation usually starts at the level of the individual.
Individual
Population
Community
Ecosystem
Biome
Biosphere
Activity 6.6: Field
Figure 6.3 Ecological levels
observation
What is a population?
Make a field excursion to
the nearest national park
A population is a group of interbreeding organisms that are members
or sanctuary and study the
of the same species living in the same area at the same time. Members
population of plants or
of the same population may compete with each other for food, water,
animals. Ask an ecologist
mates, or other resources. Some species have adaptations that reduce
or a wildlife biologist in a
park/zoo about properties
competition within a population. For instance, frogs have a life cycle
of population of plants and
in which the young tadpoles and adult frogs look very different and
animals. Materials required
have different diets. Tadpoles eat algae and adult frogs eat insects;
include notebook, pencil,
therefore, they are not competing with each other for food.
binocular, and meter.
Grade 9 Biology
143
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.7: Sharing
observations and
What is a biological community?
reflections
A biological community consists of the different species within an
Make a field excursion to
area, typically a three-dimensional space, and the interactions within
the nearest national park,
and among these species. Examples of interactions include predation,
wildlife reserve, forest or
parasitism, herbivory, competition, and pollination. In a biological
sanctuary and study the
properties of biological
community, changes in one population may cause changes in other
community. Ask an ecologist
populations. For instance, if the number of mouse-eating birds (e.g.,
or a wildlife biologist in the
hawks) in a community increases slightly, the number of mice in that
park/zoo about properties
community will decrease slightly. In a healthy forest community, there
of biological community.
are many populations that depend on each other. These might include
Materials required includes
birds eating insects, mushrooms growing from decaying leaves or
notebook, pencil binocular,
bark. While these populations are connected to each other, they are
meter.
all affected by abiotic factors. These relationships between different
populations and their surroundings create an ecosystem.
Self Assessment 6.3
Attention
A variety of methods can be used to sample populations to determine
1. How do the young
their size and density. For immobile organisms such as plants, or for
tadpoles and adult frogs
very small and slow-moving organisms, a quadrat may be used. A
reduce competition for
quadrat is a way of marking off square areas within a habitat, either
food?
by staking out an area with sticks and string, or by the use of a wood,
2. Write the characteristic
plastic, or metal square placed on the ground. After setting the quadrats,
features of a biological
ecologists then count the number of individuals that lie within their
community
boundaries. The number and size of quadrat samples depends on the
type of organisms under study and other factors, including the density
of the organism. This ensures that enough individuals of the species
are counted to get an accurate sample that correlates with the habitat,
including areas not sampled.
6.1.4. Ecosystems
Activity 6.8: Inquiring and
Objectives
researching
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
What are ecosystems? Make
explain the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
a discussion on the concept
of ecosystem and write the
properties of an ecosystem.
The community of organisms in a habitat, plus the non-living part
of the environment (e.g., air, water, soil, light, etc.) makes up an
ecosystem. A lake is an ecosystem, which consists of the plant and
animal communities mentioned above, and the water, minerals,
dissolved oxygen, soil and sunlight on which they depend. An
ecosystem is self-supporting. In a woodland ecosystem, the plants
absorb light and rainwater for photosynthesis; the animals feed on
the plants and on each other. The dead remains of animals and plants,
acted upon by fungi and bacteria, return nutrients to the soil.
144
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Lakes and ponds are clear examples of ecosystems. Sunlight, water
Activity 6.9: Sharing
and minerals allow the plants to grow and support animal life. The
observations and
recycling of materials from the dead organisms maintains the supply
reflections
of nutrients. So, a population of carp forms part of the animal
Make a field excursion to
community living in a habitat called a lake. The communities in this
the nearest terrestrial and
habitat, together with their watery environment, make up a self-
or aquatic ecosystem and
supporting ecosystem. A carp is a secondary consumer at the top
study the how the different
components of ecosystem
of a food chain, where it is in competition with other species of fish
interact. Ask an ecologist or
for food and with other carp for food and mates. The whole of that
biologist about components
part of the Earth's surface which contains living organisms (called the
of ecosystem. Materials
biosphere) may be regarded as one vast ecosystem. No new material
required includes notebook,
(in significant amounts) enters the Earth's ecosystem from space and
pencil, etc.
there is no significant loss of materials. The whole system depends on
a constant input of energy from the Sun and recycling of the chemical
Self Assessment 6.4
elements.
1. What is a habitat?
Types of ecosystems
2. What is an ecosystem
made of?
An ecosystem is made of all of the different populations in a biological
community and the community's abiotic factors. There are two major
3. An ecosystem is self-
kinds of ecosystems-terrestrial and aquatic. Terrestrial ecosystems
supporting. Explain.
are those located on land. Examples include forests, fields, and a
4. Name four examples of
rotting log. Aquatic ecosystems are found in both freshwater and salt
ecosystems.
water. Freshwater ecosystems include ponds, lakes, and streams.
5. What is the biosphere?
Oceans are a type of salt-water (marine) ecosystem.
6.1.5 Biomes
Objectives
Activity 6.10: Reflective
discussion
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
What are Biomes? Section
define biome
6.1.5 presents how the
describe the major terrestrial and aquatic biomes
abiotic factors you learned
mention the fauna and flora of each biome
about in the previous section
express love and respect to fauna and flora and their biomes
are largely responsible
for the distribution of
life on Earth. Discuss the
A biome is a major terrestrial or aquatic life zone characterized by
characteristic features of the
vegetation type in terrestrial biomes and the physical environment in
typical terrestrial or aquatic
aquatic biomes. In this section, we will briefly survey the terrestrial
biomes in your locality.
biomes, followed by the aquatic biomes.
Terrestrial Biomes
Terrestrial biomes vary greatly. For example, at the North Pole, the
weather is very cold and there are no plants. As you move south,
the weather gets warmer and there is a change in the size, number,
and kinds of plants that cover the ground. As you continue south,
the temperatures rise and you encounter forests. Still farther south
Grade 9 Biology
145
Unit 6: Ecology
are grasslands and deserts, with high summer temperatures and
little rainfall. Near the equator, you find abundant growth and much
rainfall.
What are the tropical rain forests?
Tropical rain forests of evergreen broad-leaf trees form between
latitudes 10° north and south in equatorial Africa, the East Indies,
Southeast Asia, South America, and Central America. Rain that falls
throughout the year sums to an annual total of 130 to 200 centimetres.
Regular rains, combined with an average temperature of 25°C (77°F)
and little variation in day length, allow photosynthesis to continue
year-round.
Plants are vertically layered, and competition for light is intense
(Fig.6.4). Broad-leaf evergreen trees are dominant in tropical rain
forests. Tropical forests are home to millions of animal species. In
fact, animal diversity is higher in tropical forests than in any other
terrestrial biome. The animal species includes amphibians, birds and
reptiles, mammals and arthropods. Deforestation is an ongoing threat
to tropical rain forests. Tropical forests are located in developing
countries with fast-growing human populations who look to the
forest as a source of lumber, fuel, and potential agricultural land.
Deforestation in any region leaves fewer trees to remove carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere.
Figure 6.4 Picture Tropical forest
What is a desert?
Deserts receive an average of less than 10 centimetres of rain per year.
Maximum air temperature in hot deserts may exceed 50°C while
146
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
in cold deserts air temperature may fall below -30°C. They cover
about one-fifth of Earth's land surface and many are located at about
30°north and south latitude. Examples of desert biome include Chile's
Atacama Desert and China's Gobi desert. Lack of rainfall keeps the
humidity in deserts low. With little water vapor to block the sun's rays,
intense sunlight reaches and heats the ground. At night, the lack of
insulating water vapour in the air allows the temperature to fall fast.
The plants include succulents such as cacti or euphorbs, deeply
rooted shrubs, and herbs that grow during the infrequent moist
periods (Fig.6.5). Desert plant adaptations include tolerance of heat
and desiccation, water storage, and reduced leaf surface area. The
desert fauna include snakes and lizards, scorpions, ants, beetles,
migratory and resident birds, and seed-eating rodents. Many species
are nocturnal. Water conservation is a common adaptation with
some species surviving solely on water obtained from breaking down
carbohydrates in seeds. Urbanization and conversion to irrigated
agriculture has reduced the natural biodiversity of some deserts.
Figure 6.5 Desert biome
What are Savannas?
The Savanna biome occurs in equatorial and sub-equatorial regions.
Savannas lie between the tropical forests and hot deserts of Africa,
India, and Australia. Africa's savannas are famous for their abundant
wildlife. The precipitation averages 30-50 cm per year while the dry
season can last up to eight or nine months. The temperature is warm
year-round, averaging 24-29°C.
The biome is characterized by scattered trees found at different
densities. Fires are common in the dry season, and the dominant
Grade 9 Biology
147
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.11: Sharing
plant species are fire-adapted and tolerant of seasonal drought.
observations and
Grasses and small non-woody plants make are common. These plants
reflections
grow rapidly in response to seasonal rains and are tolerant of grazing
Read books and/or search
by large mammals and other herbivores (Fig.6.6) Herbivores include
in the int Make a field
giraffes, zebras, elephants, a variety of antelopes, and immense herds
excursion to the nearest
of wildebeests. Lions and hyenas are carnivores that eat the grazers.
savanna biome and study the
characteristic features. Ask
During seasonal droughts, grazing mammals often migrate to parts
an ecologist or a biologist
of the savanna with more forage and scattered watering holes. The
about the plants and
animal species in savanna
earliest humans may have lived in savannas. Fires set by humans may
biome. Materials required
help maintain this biome, though overly frequent fires reduce tree
include notebook, pencil,
regeneration by killing the seedlings and saplings. Cattle ranching
plastic bags, pH meter, and
and over-hunting have led to declines in large-mammal populations.
thermometer. ernet for
the scientific and the local
names common Ethiopian
plants and animals species.
Present your report to your
classmates.
Figure 6.6. Savanna biome
What are temperate grasslands?
Temperate grasslands are warm in summer, but cold in winter. Annual
rainfall is 25 to100 centimeters, with rains throughout the year. Grass
roots extend profusely through the thick topsoil and help hold it in
place, preventing erosion by the constant winds. North America's
grasslands are shortgrass and tallgrass prairies. During the 1930s,
much of the shortgrass prairie of the American Great Plains was
plowed to grow wheat. Tallgrass prairie has somewhat richer topsoil
and slightly more frequent rainfall than shortgrass prairie. Nearly all
tallgrass prairie has now been converted to cropland. The Tallgrass
Prairie National Preserve was created in 1996 to protect the little that
remains. North America's prairies once supported enormous herds of
elk, pronghorn antelope, and bison that were prey to wolves (Fig.6.7).
Today, these predators and prey are absent from most of their former
range.
148
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Figure 6.7. Grassland biome
What are Boreal Forests?
The boreal forest, also known as taiga or coniferous forest, is found
south of the Arctic Circle and across most of Canada, Alaska, Russia,
and northern Europe. This biome has cold, dry winters and short,
cool, wet summers. The annual precipitation is from 40 cm to 100 cm
and usually takes the form of snow. Little evaporation occurs because
of the cold temperatures.
The long and cold winters in the boreal forest have led to the
predominance of cold-tolerant cone-bearing (coniferous) plants.
These are evergreen coniferous trees like pines and spruce which
retain their needle-shaped leaves year-round (Figure 6.8). This
benefits evergreen trees, which grow faster than deciduous trees in
the boreal forest. In addition, soils in boreal forest regions tend to be
acidic with little available nitrogen. Plant species diversity is less than
that seen in temperate forests and tropical wet forests.
Figure 6.8. Northern Coniferous Forest biome
Grade 9 Biology
149
Unit 6: Ecology
What is the temperate broad-leaf forest?
Temperate broad-leaf forest is found mainly at mid-latitudes in the
Northern Hemisphere, with smaller areas in Chile, South Africa,
Australia, and New Zealand. The precipitation can average from
about 70 to over 200 cm annually. In winter temperatures average 0°C
while in summers, with temperatures up to 35°C, are hot and humid.
The dominant plants are deciduous trees, which drop their leaves
before winter, when low temperatures would reduce photosynthesis
and make water uptake from frozen soil difficult(Fig.6.9).Many
mammals hibernate in winter, while many bird species migrate to
warmer climates.
Temperate broad-leaf forest has been heavily settled on all continents.
Logging and land clearing for agriculture and urban development
cleared virtually all the original deciduous forests in North America.
However, owing to their capacity for recovery, these forests are
returning over much of their former range.
Figure 6.9 Temperate Broad-leaf Forest biome
What are the tundras?
Cover expansive areas of the Arctic, amounting to 20% of Earth's land
surface. The precipitation averages from 20 to 60 cm annually in arctic
tundra but may exceed 100 cm in alpine tundra. Winters are cold,
with averages in some areas below -30°C while summer temperatures
generally average less than 10°C. High winds and low temperatures
produce similar plant communities, called alpine tundra, on very
high mountaintops at all latitudes, including the tropics.
The vegetation of tundra is mostly herbaceous, consisting of a mixture
of mosses, grasses, and forbs, along with some dwarf shrubs and trees
and lichens. A permanently frozen layer of soil called permafrost
150
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
restricts the growth of plant roots (Figure 6.10) Large grazing musk
oxen are resident, while caribou and reindeer are migratory. Predators
include bears, wolves, and foxes. Many bird species migrate to the
tundra for summer nesting. The major human impact are mineral
and oil extraction.
Figure 6.10 Tundra biome
Self Assessment 6.5
Match the terms at column A with description with the most suitable
descriptions a column B.
A
B
1.
African grassland with trees
A.
Desert
2.
North American grassland
B.
Tundra
3.
Low-Growing plants at
C.
Tropical rain forest
high latitudes or elevations
4.
The dominant plants are deciduous trees
D.
Prairie
5.
At latitudes 30° north and south
E.
Savanna
6.
Broadleaf forest near equator
F.
Temperate broad
leaf Forest
7.
Conifers dominate
G.
Boreal Forest
Grade 9 Biology
151
Unit 6: Ecology
Aquatic biomes
Aquatic biomes, which occupy roughly 75% of Earth's surface, are
determined by their salinity and other physical factors. Freshwater
biomes (lakes, streams and rivers, and wetlands) typically have salt
concentrations of less than 1%. The salt concentrations of marine
biomes (oceans, intertidal zones, and coral reefs) are generally
around 3% (Fig.6.11). Aquatic biomes are classified into freshwater
and marine.
Intertidal zone
Neritic
zone
Oceanic zone
Littoral
-0
zone
Limnetic
zone
200 m
Photic
zone
Continental
shelf
Photic
Pelagic
zone
zone
Benthic
Pelagic
zone
Benthic
Aphotic
zone
zone
zone
Aphotic
zone
2000-
6000 m
Abyssal
zone
A
B
Figure. 6.11 Zonations of marine (A) and freshwater (B) biomes
What are the lakes?
Key Terms
Standing bodies of water range from ponds a few square meters in
area to lakes covering thousands of square kilometres. The salinity,
Aphotic zone: There is
oxygen concentration, and nutrient content differ greatly among lakes
little light penetration
and can vary with season (Fig. 6. 12).
Photic zone: zone
Rooted and floating aquatic plants in lakes live close to shore. Here,
of sufficient light for
sunlight penetrates all the way to the lake bottom; aquatic plants and
photosynthesis
algae that attach to the bottom are the primary producers. Also a
Pelagic zone: The photic
variety of phytoplankton, including cyanobacteria and zooplankton
and aphotic zones together
live in the open water zone of a lake. Fishes live in all zones with
sufficient oxygen. Runoff from fertilized land and dumping of wastes
Abyssal zone: the part
lead to nutrient enrichment, which can produce large numbers of
of the ocean 2000-6000
algae (an algal "bloom") oxygen depletion, and fish kills.
m below the surface
152
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Activity 6.12: Sharing
observations and reflec-
tions
Make a field excursion to
the nearest lakes biome
and study the characteristic
features. Ask an ecologist
or a biologist about the
plants and animal species
and the major human
impacts. Materials required
include notebook, pencil,
Figure 6.12 Lakes biome
plastic bags, pH meter, and
thermometer.
What are the wetlands?
Alternatively, you could
make a discussion on the
Wetlands are environments in which the soil is either permanently
spread of invasive species
or periodically saturated with water. Wetlands are different from lakes
such as water hyacinth/
because wetlands are shallow bodies of water. There are several types
Emboch (Eichhornia
of wetlands including marshes, swamps, bogs, mudflats, and salt
crassipes) and the impacts
marshes.
caused on freshwater
ecosystems (e.g., lake
Because of high organic production by plants and decomposition
Tana) and propose possible
by microbes and other organisms, both the water and the soils are
solutions.
periodic low in dissolved oxygen. Wetlands have a high capacity to
filter dissolved nutrients and chemical pollutants (Fig.6.13) Wetlands
are among the most productive biomes on Earth.
Woody plants dominate the vegetation of swamps, while bogs are
dominated by sphagnum mosses. Wetlands are home to a diverse
community of invertebrates, birds, and many other organisms.
Wetlands help purify water and reduce peak flooding. Draining and
filling have destroyed up to 90% of wetlands in Europe.
Figure 6.13 Wetlands biome
What are streams and rivers?
The most prominent physical characteristic of streams and rivers is the
Grade 9 Biology
153
Unit 6: Ecology
speed and volume of their flow. Headwater streams are generally cold,
clear, swift, and turbulent. Farther downstream, where numerous
tributaries may have joined, forming a river, the water is generally
warmer and more turbid because of suspended sediment (Fig.6.14).
The salt and nutrient content of streams and rivers increases from the
headwaters to the mouth. Headwaters are generally rich in oxygen.
A great diversity of fishes and invertebrates inhabit unpolluted rivers
and streams. Municipal, agricultural, and industrial pollution degrade
water quality and kill aquatic organisms. Damming and flood control
impair the natural functioning of stream and river ecosystems and
threaten migratory species such as salmon.
Figure 6. 14 Streams and Rivers biome
Self Assessment 6.6
What are estuaries?
1. What are the major
physical and chemical
An estuary is a transition area between river and sea. Seawater flows
factors that affect the
up the estuary channel during a rising tide and flows back down during
distributions of plants
the falling tide. Often, higher-density seawater occupies the bottom
estuaries ecosystem?
of the channel and mixes little with the lower-density river water at
2. Discuss the major
the surface (Fig.6.15). Salinity varies spatially within estuaries, from
human impacts in
nearly that of fresh water to that of seawater. Nutrients from the river
the estuaries and the
make estuaries, like wetlands, among the most productive biomes.
solutions
Saltmarsh grasses and algae, including phytoplankton, are the major
producers in estuaries. Estuaries support an abundance of worms,
3. Why are planktons
important?
oysters, crabs, and many fish species that humans consume. Many
marine invertebrates and fishes use estuaries as a breeding ground or
4. Discuss the major
migrate through them to freshwater habitats upstream. Estuaries are
human impacts in
also crucial feeding areas for waterfowl and some marine mammals.
Streams and Rivers.
Filling, dredging, and pollution from upstream have disrupted
5. Discuss some of the
estuaries worldwide.
limiting factors for
organisms in lakes.
154
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Figure 6. 15. Estuaries biome
6.1.6 Ecological succession
Objectives
Activity 6.13: Collaborative
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
learning groups
describe ecological succession
This section 6.1.6 presents
the phenomenon of
ecological succession.
What is an ecological succession?
Discuss the concept of
ecological succession. Tell
Changes in the composition of terrestrial communities are most
the difference between
apparent after a severe disturbance, such as a volcanic eruption or
primary and secondary
a glacier, strips away all the existing vegetation. The disturbed area
successions. How might the
early species facilitate the
may be colonized by a variety of species, which are gradually replaced
arrival of other species?
by other species, which are in turn replaced by still other species-a
process called ecological succession. When this process begins in a
virtually lifeless area, such as on a new volcanic island or on the rubble
(moraine) left by a retreating glacier, it is called primary succession
(Fig. 6.16).
PIONEER SPECIES
INTERMEDIATE SPECIES
CLIMAX COMMUNITY
BARE
LICHENS
SMALL ANNUAL
GRASSES AND
GRASSES, SHRUBS AND
SHADE-TOLERANT
ROCK
PLANTS
PERENNIALS
SHADE-INTOLERANT
TREES SUCH AS
AND LICHENS
TREES SUCH AS PINES
OAK AND HICKORY
HUNDREDS OF YEARS
Figure 6.16 Primary successions
Grade 9 Biology
155
Unit 6: Ecology
During primary succession, the only life-forms initially present
Key Terms
are often prokaryotes and protists. Lichens and mosses, which
Climax community: a stable
grow from windblown spores, are commonly the first macroscopic
community that undergoes
photosynthesizers to colonize such areas. Soil develops gradually as
little or no change
rocks weather and organic matter accumulates from the decomposed
Limiting factor: any
remains of the early colonizers. Once soil is present, the lichens
biotic or abiotic factor
and mosses are usually overgrown by grasses, shrubs, and trees
that restricts the existence,
that sprout from seeds blown in from nearby areas or carried in by
numbers, reproduction, or
animals. Eventually, an area is colonized by plants that become the
distribution of organisms
community's dominant form of vegetation (climax community).
Pioneer species: The first
Producing such a community through primary succession may take
organisms to grow on a new
patch of cooled, hardened
hundreds or thousands of years. Early-arriving species and later-
lava
arriving ones may be linked by one of three key processes- facilitating
Primary succession:
inhibiting and tolerating.
colonization of barren land
In contrast to primary succession, secondary succession involves the
by pioneer organisms
re-colonization of an area after a major disturbance has removed most
Secondary succession:
but not all of the organisms in a community (Fig. 6. 17). Following the
sequence of changes that
disturbance, the area may return to something like its original state.
take place after a community
is disrupted by natural
For instance, in a forested area that has been cleared for farming and
disasters or human actions
later abandoned, the earliest plants to recolonize are often herbaceous
Succession: the orderly,
species that grow from windblown or animal-borne seeds. If the area
natural changes that take
has not been burned or heavily grazed, woody shrubs may in time
place in the communities of
replace most of the herbaceous species, and forest trees may eventually
an ecosystem
replace most of the shrubs.
Tolerance: the ability of
an organism to withstand
PIONEER SPECIES
INTERMEDIATE SPECIES
CLIMAX COMMUNITY
changes in biotic and abiotic
environm
GRASSES AND
GRASSES, SHRUBS, PINES
MATURE OAK AND
FIRE
PERENNIALS
YOUNG OAK AND HICKORY
HICKORY FOREST
0 YEARS
1-2YEARS
3-4 YEARS
5-150 YEARS
150+ YEARS
Figure 6.17. Secondary succession
Self Assessment 6.7
1. After a flood destroys everything growing on the land, which
type of succession is most likely?
2. What is succession?
156
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
6.2. Ecological relationships
Objectives
Activity 6.14: Reflective
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discussion
discuss ecological relationships in ecosystems
Interactions between species
can help, harm, or have no
effect on the individuals
involved. Discuss the
Some key relationships in the life of an organism are its interactions
various types of inter-specific
with individuals of other species in the community. These inter-
relationships. Explain how
specific interactions include competition, predation, herbivory,
competition, predation, and
parasitism, mutualism, and commensalism.
mutualism differ in their
effects on members of two
Competition(-/-)
interacting species.
What is a competition?
Competition is interaction that occurs when individuals of
different/same species each use a resource that limits the survival
and reproduction of both individuals (Fig. 6.18). Weeds growing in
a garden compete with garden plants for soil nutrients and water.
Predators compete for prey such as hares. In contrast, some resources,
such as oxygen, are rarely in short supply on land; most terrestrial
species use this resource but do not usually compete for it.
Figure 6. 18 Intra-specific competitions between two lions
Predation (+/-)
What is predation?
Predation is interaction in which an individual of one species,
the predator, kills and eats an individual of the other species, the
prey(Fig.6.19). For example, a rotifer (a tiny aquatic animal that is
smaller than many unicellular protists) that kills a protist by eating it
can also be considered a predator. Because eating and avoiding being
eaten are prerequisites to reproductive success, the adaptations of
both predators and prey tend to be refined through natural selection.
Grade 9 Biology
157
Unit 6: Ecology
Figure 6. 19 Predation
Herbivory (+/-)
What is herbivory?
Herbivory is an exploitative interaction in which an organism-
an herbivore-eats parts of a plant or alga, thereby harming it but
usually not killing it. Examples of herbivores include cattle, sheep,
giraffe and goat. However, most herbivores are invertebrates, such as
grasshoppers, caterpillars, and beetles (Fig. 6.20). Herbivores have
many specialized adaptations. Many herbivorous insects have sensors
on their feet that enable them to distinguish between plants based on
their toxicity or nutritional value. Goats also use their sense of smell
to examine plants, rejecting some and eating others. Other herbivores
also have specialized teeth or digestive systems adapted for processing
vegetation.
Figure 6. 20. Herbivory
158
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Parasitism (+/-)
What is parasitism?
Parasitism is exploitative interaction in which one organism, the
parasite, derives its nourishment from another organism, its host,
which is harmed in the process (Fig.6.21). Endoparasites such as
parasitic roundworms live and feed inside their host. An ectoparasite
such as a tick feeds while attached to a host's external surface. Many
parasites have complex life cycles involving multiple hosts. The
blood fluke, which currently infects approximately 200 million
people around the world, requires two hosts at different times in its
development: humans and freshwater snails.
Figure 6. 21. Parasitism
Mutualism (+/+)
What are the effects of participating in a mutualism?
Mutualism is interaction that benefits individuals of both of the
interacting species. Mutualisms are common in nature, including
cellulose digestion by microorganisms in the digestive systems of
termites and ruminant mammals, animals that pollinate flowers or
disperse seeds, nutrient exchange between fungi and plant roots
in mycorrhizae, and photosynthesis by unicellular algae in corals
(Fig.6.22). In some mutualisms, such as the acacia-ant, each of the
interacting individuals depends on the other for their survival and
reproduction. Both partners in a mutualism incur costs as well
as benefits. In mycorrhizae, for example, the plant often transfers
carbohydrates to the fungus, while the fungus transfers limiting
nutrients, such as phosphorus, to the plant.
Figure 6. 22. Mutualism
Grade 9 Biology
159
Unit 6: Ecology
Commensalism(+/0).
Activity 6.15: Field
observation
What is a commensalism?
Make a field excursion
Commensalism is interaction that neither benefits the individuals
around your village or
of one of the interacting species but neither harms nor helps the
school compound and
individuals of the other species. For instance, cattle egrets feed on
investigate how the various
insects flushed out of the grass by grazing bison, cattle, horses, and
ecological interactions
other herbivores (Fig. 6. 23). Because the birds increase their feeding
influence the distribution
organisms. Describe the
rates when following the herbivores, they clearly benefit from the
type of ecological iteration
association. Much of the time, the herbivores are not affected by the
(e.g., competition, predation,
birds. At times, however, the herbivores too may derive some benefit;
herbivory, parasitism,
for example, the birds may remove and eat ticks and other ectoparasites
mutualism, commensalism
from the herbivores' skin, or they may warn the herbivores of a
etc.). Materials required
predator's approach.
includes notebook, pencil.
Cattle egrets eat insects
Epiphytes get sunkight and
Birds trail army ants to eat
disturbed by grazing
nutrients by living on the
fleeing insects.
livestock.
host plant.
Figure 6. 23. Commensalism
Self Assessment 6.8
Match the following
A
B
1.
Two species interact and both benefit by the interaction
a.
Interspecific competition
2.
Two species interact and one benefits while the other is
b.
Commensalism
neither helped nor harmed
3.
One free-living species feeds on another and usually kills it
c.
Mutualism
4.
Two species access a resource
d.
Predation
5.
One species feeds on another that it lives on or in
e.
Parasitism
160
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Unit review
Ecology is the study of relationships organisms to one another and to their surrounding
environment.
Abiotic factors are the non-living components of the ecosystem that influence the distributions
of organisms in their environment. Examples of abiotic factors includes: energy, light,
temperature, water, nutrients, salinity, etc.
Most organisms are adapted to live within a relatively narrow range of temperatures and will
not thrive if temperatures are colder or warmer. The growing season of plants, for example, is
importantly influenced by temperature.
All organisms require water. On land, water is often scarce, so patterns of rainfall have a major
influence on life.
Almost all ecosystems rely on energy captured by photosynthesis; the availability of sunlight
influences the amount of life an ecosystem can support, particularly below the surface in marine
communities.
The physical consistency, pH, and mineral composition of the soil often severely limit terrestrial
plant growth, particularly the availability of nitrogen and phosphorus.
Biotic factors are the living components (e.g., predators, herbivores, parasite, decomposers,
competing organisms etc.) of the ecosystem that influence the distributions of organisms in
their environment.
A population is a group of organisms that belongs to the same species.
A community is all of the populations of different species in an ecosystem.
An ecosystem is a unit containing the community of organisms and their environment,
interacting together.
The Earth has terrestrial biomes and aquatic biomes.
Biomes located on land are called terrestrial biomes. Biomes located in bodies of water are
known as aquatic biomes.
Major terrestrial biomes are tropical forests, savannas, deserts, temperate grasslands, temperate
forests, boreal forests, and tundra. The same biome can occur in different geographic locations
with similar climates.
Temperature and precipitation, and variations in both, are key abiotic factors that shape the
composition of animal and plant communities in terrestrial biomes.
A biome is a large group of ecosystems that shares the same type of climax community. All the
ecosystems within the biome have similar climates and organisms.
Grade 9 Biology
161
Unit 6: Ecology
Aquatic biomes, which occupy roughly 75% of Earth's surface, are determined by their salinity
and other physical factors. Freshwater biomes (lakes, streams and rivers, and wetlands) typically
have salt concentrations of less than 1%. The salt concentrations of marine biomes (oceans,
intertidal zones, and coral reefs) are generally around 3%.
succession: the orderly, natural changes that take place in the communities.
When this process begins in a virtually lifeless area, such as on a new volcanic island or on the
rubble (moraine) left by a retreating glacier, it is called primary succession.
In contrast to primary succession, secondary succession involves the re-colonization of an
area after a major disturbance has removed most but not all of the organisms in a community.
Some key relationships in the life of an organism are its interactions with individuals of other
species in the community. These inter-specific interactions include competition, predation,
herbivory, parasitism, mutualism, and commensalism.
162
Grade 9 Biology
Unit 6: Ecology
Review Questions
Part One (Matching Items): Match items under column A with the appropriate item under column B.
Column 1
Column 2
1
millipedes, centipedes, insects, slugs, and earthworms
A
Abiotic factor
under a log
2
a tick on a cat
B
Parasitism
3
an owl eating a mouse
C
Biological community
4
rain
D
Habitat
5
a rain forest
E
Predator-prey relationship
6
cold temperatures and high winds that prevent tree
F
Limiting factors
growth in mountain areas
7
the first organisms to grow on a new patch of cooled,
G
Secondary succession
hardened lava
8
ability of mosquitoes to survive in very different condi-
H
Tolerance
tions all over the world
9
an old forest that has not had any fire damage in over
I
Pioneer species
200 years
10
weeds and wildflowers beginning to grow in a field after J
Climax community
a corn crop is harvested
Part Two. Fill in the blanks below with the following words to make correct statements about the
material you read in this section: desert, tundra, plankton, photic zone, rain forest.
1.
The
biome is a home to more types of life than any other biome.
2.
The
is so cold that very little life exists there.
3.
The driest biome is
the biome.
4.
The part of the marine biome that is shallow enough for sunlight to penetrate is called the
5.
The base of the entire marine biome food chain is formed by
Part Three. Critical thinking questions
1.
Explain the difference between intra-specific competition ad inter specific competition.
2.
What are common animal species in savanna biome?
3.
Discuss the major human impact to the savanna biome and the solutions
4.
Desert animals have various adaptive mechanisms to cope up with adverse ecological
conditions. Describe some of the adaptive mechanisms.
5.
Do we have tropical forests in Ethiopia? If we have indicate the locations/places in our country?
Grade 9 Biology
163
Unit 6: Ecology
6. Carefully look at the diagrams given below and answer the questions that follow
i. Which diagram stands for biotic factors of an ecosystem?
ii. Which diagram stands for abiotic factors of an ecosystem?
iii. Which diagram represents: an ecosystem, community, individual, and population levels of
ecology.
B
C
D
E
F
7.
Carefully look at the diagram given below and identify the various ecological levels (individual,
population, community, ecosystem and biosphere levels)
C
B
F
A
D
164
Grade 9 Biology