
Biology
Biology
Student Textbook
Biology
Student Textbook
Grade 10
Grade 10
Student Textbook
Grade 10
ISBN 978-99990-0-009-3
9 789999000093>
+ go uc+
CREAM
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
FDRE
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION HOLE
Ministry of Education
MOE
ISININ EDUCATION CATION ABISINIM
Ministry of Education
Take Good Care of
This Textbook
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
I.
Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic,
old newspapers or magazines.
2.
Always keep the book in a clear dry place.
3.
Be sure your hands are clearn when you use the book.
4.
Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5.
Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6.
Never tear or cut out any picture or pages.
7.
Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8.
Pack the book carefully when you pleace it in your
school bag.
9.
Handle the book with care when passing it to another
person.
10.
When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its
back. Open only a few pages at a time. Press lightly along
the bound edge as you turn the pages. This will keep the
cover in good condition.
Biology
Student Textbook
Grade 10
Writers:
Beyene Dobo, Ph.D.
Girma Tilahun, Ph.D.
Editors:
Kedir Woliy, Ph.D. (Content Editor)
Girma Moti, MA (Curriculum Editor)
Temesgen Daniel, Ph.D. (Language Editor)
Illustrator:
Simachew Ayenew, MSc
Designer:
Tesfamichael Getu, Ph.D.
Evaluators:
Berhanu Tesfaye, MA, MEd
GebreHana Zeleke, MSc
D
UPA
RLOCAT
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
HAWASSA UNIVERSITY
FDRE Ministry of Education
Hawassa University
First Published August 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education, under the General Educa-
tion Quality Improvement Program for Equity (GEQIP-E) supported by the World Bank, UK's Department for International De-
velopment/DFID-now merged with the Foreign, Common wealth and Development Office/FCDO, Finland Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, the Royal Norwegian Embassy, United Nations Children's Fund/UNICEF), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE),
and Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through a Multi Donor Trust Fund.
© 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education. All rights reserved.
The moral rights of the author have been asserted. No part of this textbook reproduced, copied in a retrieval system or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means including electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without
the prior written permission of the Ministry of Education or licensing in accordance with the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia as expressed in the Federal Negarit Gazeta, Proclamation No. 410/2004 - Copyright and Neighboring Rights Protec-
tion.
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the many individuals, groups and other bodies involved - directly or indirectly - in
publishing this Textbook. Special thanks are due to Hawassa University for their huge contribution in the development of this
textbook in collaboration with Addis Ababa University, Bahir Dar University and Jimma University.
Copyrighted materials used by permission of their owners. If you are the owner of copyrighted material not cited or improperly
cited, please contact the Ministry of Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (P.O.Box 1367), Addis Ababa Ethiopia.
Photo credit: cover page, p.1, p.17, p.50, p.81, p.94, p.153 Unsplash, 2022
Printed by:
GRAVITY GROUP IND LLC
13th Industrial Area,
Sharjah, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Under Ministry of Education Contract no. : MOE/GEQIP-E/LICB/G-01/23
ISBN: 978-99990-0-009-3
Table Contents
Unit 1: Sub-fields of Biology
1
1.1 Sub-fields of Biology
1
1.2 Pure and applied fields of biology
5
1.3 Major discoveries that revolutionized biology
6
1.4 The contributions of biological discoveries to society and the
environment
9
1.5 Ethiopian biologists and their contributions
12
Unit 2: Plants
17
2.1. Characteristics of plants
17
2.2 Flowering and non - flowering plants
18
2.3 Structure and function of plant parts
20
2.3.1 The internal structure of a leaf
22
2.3.2 The internal structure of a stem
23
2.3.3 The internal structure of a root
25
2.4 Reproduction in plants
26
2.4.2 Reproductive structure and life cycle of flowering plants
28
2.4.3 Pollination
29
2.5 Seeds
30
2.6 Seed dispersal and germination
31
2.6.1 Seed dispersal
31
2.6.2 Germination of seed
32
2.7 Photosynthesis
34
2.7.1 The photosynthetic apparatus
34
2.7.2 The light absorbing system in chloroplast
35
2.7.3. Mechanism of photosynthesis
36
2.7.4. Testing a leaf for starch
36
2.8 Transport in plant
37
2.8.1 Transporting systems in plants
37
2.8.2 Mechanism of transport in plant
39
2.9 Response in plants
41
2.10 Medicinal plants
45
2.11 Renowned Ethiopian Botanist
46
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
50
3.1. Biochemical Molecules
50
3.1.1 Inorganic molecule: Water
51
3.1.2 Inorganic ions
54
3.1.3. Organic molecules
59
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
81
4.1 Cell cycle
81
4.2 The Cell division
84
4.2.1 Mitosis
85
4.2.2 Meiosis
89
4.3 Renowned Ethiopian Geneticist
91
Unit 5: Human Biology
94
5.1 The Digestive System
95
5.2 The circulatory and lymphatic system
107
5.2.1 Blood Donation
119
5.2.2. Diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
124
5.3 The breathing system
128
5.4 The Human Urinary system
137
5.5 The immune system
142
5.6 Renowned Physicians in Ethiopia
145
Unit 6: Ecological Interaction
153
6.1 Trophic Levels
153
6.1.1 Food chain and food web
153
6.1. 2 Flow of energy and matter through ecosystem
156
6.2 Cycling of Materials in an Ecosystem
159
6.2.2 Carbon cycle
162
6.2.3 Nitrogen cycle
164
6.2.4. Phosphorus cycle
170
Unit 1: Sub-fields of Biology
Contents
Learning competencies
1.1. Sub-fields of biology
list the Sub-fields of biology
1.2. Pure and applied fields of biology
classify the different Sub-fields of Biology into pure
1.3. Major discoveries in Biology
and applied
1.4. The contributions of biological discoveries
discuss at least five major discoveries that revolu-
to society and the environment (e.g. micro-
tionized Biology
scope, penicillin, inheritance, etc.)
appreciate the contribution of biological discover-
1.5. Major discoveries by Ethiopian Biologists
ies to society/environment e.g. microscope, peni-
(e.g. Aklilu Lemma, Gabissa Ejeta)
cillin, inheritance, etc.
appreciate Ethiopian scientists and their discover-
ies
1.1 Sub-fields of Biology
Objectives
Recall
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
You have defined the term
'biology' in grade nine unit
Define the sub-fields of biology
1, and briefly discussed what
List the sub-fields of biology
biology studies about. In
this unit, you will study the
different sub-field of biology.
Which sub-fields of biology do you know?
The scope of biology is so broad that it contains many branches and
sub-disciplines. In this unit, thus, you will study the sub-fields of
biology. Based on the type of organism it studies, biology is subdivided
into three: Zoology, Botany, and Microbiology. In addition to these
Zoology
Botany
Microgy
three sub-fields, there is a huge array of sub-disciplines or fields of
biology. Many have been around for hundreds of years whilst others
are far newer and are often developing very rapidly. The three major
Biology
sub-divisions and their area of concern are described in the next page.
Grade 10 Biology
1
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.1: THINK-PAIR-SHARE
Make a group of three students and write down the names of
organisms you know that would be categorized under the three
major divisions of biology. Share with other groups what you have
written and compare with yours.
Zoology
Animal biology, also known as zoology, is the study of animals and
includes disciplines such as herpetology (reptiles), ichthyology (fish),
mammalogy (mammals), ornithology (birds), and entomology
(insects). Zoology is concerned with all aspects of animal life, such
as embryonic development to mature adulthood; behaviour, such as
interactions with other animals or food finding; and genetics. Figure
1.1 shows one of the endemic wild animals of Ethiopia.
Figure 1.1 Capra walie
(Waliya ibex) (in Simien
Botany
Mountains of Ethiopia)
Botany is a field of biology that studies about plants. It deals with plants'
structure, properties, and biochemical processes. It also studies about
classification and diseases of plants and their interactions with the
environment. The principles and findings of botany have provided
the base for such applied sciences as agriculture, horticulture, and
forestry.
Plants have long been used as a source of food, shelter, clothing,
medicine, ornament, and tools. Green plants are now known to be
essential to all life on earth. In addition to their practical and economic
values, through the process of photosynthesis, plants convert energy
from the Sun into the chemical energy of food, which allows all
Figure 1.2 Ruta chalepensis L.
(Tena Adam)
life to exist. The formation and release of oxygen as a by-product
of photosynthesis is the second unique and important capability of
green plants. Ruta chalepensis L. ("Tena Adam' in Amharic), a known
traditional herbal medicine of Ethiopia, is shown as an example (see
Fig 1.2).
bacteria
Microbiology
viruses
Microbiology is the study of microscopic organisms or microbes
Microor-
that cannot be seen by unaided eye. It includes bacteria, archaea,
fungi
ganism or
protists, viruses, microscopic algae and fungi. This branch of biology
microbes
is further subdivided into sub-disciplines, which are frequently
algae
defined by specific microbes. Bacteriology, for example, is the study
protozoa
of bacteria, whereas mycology is the study of fungi. The majority of
bacteria and other microbial species have yet to be identified due to
archea
the difficulty of isolating a single microscopic species. Microbiology
Figure 1.3. The microorganisms
is a rapidly expanding field of study; however, new technology and
2
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
developments in the field are constantly assisting in the identification
of new species. Activity 1.2 below will help you study the different
types of micro-organisms independently.
Activity 1.2 The Microorganisms
Microorganisms of different types are given in this activity. Work in
a pair and do the following activities:
1. Define bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae, microscopic protozoa
and archaea.
2. Draw typical bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae, microscopic
protozoa and archaea.
Table 1.1 shows how various branches of biology are related to the
structure we are studying. Anatomy, for example, is a branch of
biology that studies the physical structures and parts of organisms,
whereas morphology is a branch of biology that studies the form
Do you know how
and structure (internal and external) of organisms and their specific
different branches of
structural features. Table 1.1 shows the various fields of biology based
biology are related to
on the structure they study.
the structure we study?
Table 1.1 Different fields of biology based on the structure
studied
Sub-branch of
Definition
Example of the structures studied
biology
Morphology
Study of external form and structure
Shape, the texture of leaves,
stem, etc
Anatomy
Study of the bodily structure of animals, and
Stomach, liver, heart, etc
other living organisms, especially as revealed by
dissection and the separation of parts
Histology
Study of the details of tissue structure
Parenchyma, connective tissue
Cytology
Study of cells
A plant cell, a nerve cell
Cell biology
Study of the structure, function, and various
Mitochondrion, ribosome,
aspects of cell and its components
nucleus, etc
Molecular
Study of structure and function of informational
DNA, RNA
Biology
molecules
Many other branches of biology are concerned with the various life
processes, such as how an organism multiplies or forms identical
What other branches of
copies of itself, its evolution over millions of years, and its relationship
biology do you know?
with the environment. Table 1.2 lists some of these fields with the
environment.
Grade 10 Biology
3
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Table 1.2 Subjects studied in various branches of Biology
Branch of
Subject Studies
Examples
biology
Physiology
The normal functions of living organisms
Photosynthesis, digestion, etc
and their parts
Embryology
The embryo, from a single-celled zygote
Structure and development of ova, sperm,
(fertilized ovum) to the formation of form
blastula (an embryo at early stage of
and shape
development consisting of a hollow ball of cells),
gastrula(the stage in embryonic development
after blastula during which the embryo develops
two layers), etc.
Ecology
Interaction of organisms with their living
Food chain, biomass, biosphere, etc
environment
Taxonomy
Identification, nomenclature, and
The biological name of a human is Homo sapiens
classification of organisms
and it was placed in the animal kingdom
Paleontology
Origin, growth, and structure of
Fossils of organisms
organisms of the past
Evolution
The change in the characteristics of a
The beaks of Darwin's finches
species over several generations that relies
on the process of natural selection
Genetics
Heredity and variation
Gene concept, Mendel's laws
Exobiology
The origin, evolution, distribution, and
Life on Moon, life on Mars
future of life in the Universe
Do you have any idea
Biology is related to other sciences that study life as an energy
about the relationship
state of all living things, their interrelationships, and links to their
between biology and
surroundings. Table 1.3 shows some of the interrelationships.
other sciences?
Table1 1.3 Knowledge taken from other subjects that help to explain biological phenomenon
Structure/
Example
Related
Knowledge of other sciences is
mechanism studied
Science
required because
Cell membrane
Structure of lipids and proteins
Chemistry
Living organisms are made of inorganic
and organic compounds
Transportation of
Formation of Oxyhaemoglobin
Chemistry
All metabolic pathways involve chemi-
Oxygen (O₂) in the
(haemoglobin with oxygen)
cal change
body
Excretory system
Absorption and elimination of
Chemistry
Homeostasis involves acid-base equi-
salts
librium to maintain the pH of living
organisms
Absorption of food/
Absorption of sugars, amino
Chemistry
During diffusion and osmosis mole-
water
acids, fatty acids, water, or salts
cules move into and out of the cell
Transportation of
Conduction of water from root
Physics
Liquids have certain properties like
water in plants
to leaves
cohesion and adhesion to result in sur-
face tension and capillary action which
helps in certain processes
Release of energy
Electron transport chain
Chemistry
Energy transfer and transport from
during respiration
(transfer electrons from
electron donor to electron accepter
electron donors to electron
acceptors via redox reactions)
4
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.3: Group Discussion
Which other relationships of biology with other disciplines do you
know?
Discuss the relationships of biology with other disciplines.
1.2 Pure and applied fields of biology
Objectives
Recall
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
The previous section de-
Classify the different sub-fields of Biology into pure and applied
scribed and briefly addressed
various sub-fields of biology.
Define each sub-field of biology
Now, you will learn the cat-
egory of biology as pure and
applied sub-fields.
What do we mean by pure and applied fields of biology?
Pure biology is the study of how life functions in nature (behavior,
internal and external structure, reproduction, etc.) whereas applied
biology refers to using what you have learned in biology for (gardening,
nursery work, agriculture, plant disease, forestry, poultry, etc.).
Therefore, applied biology is the use of your knowledge of biology to
manage life. The relationship is similar to anatomy and surgery.
Activity 1.4: Categorizing pure and applied fields of biology
Select pure and applied fields of biology from the list given in the columns on the left side in the
table below and categorize them in their appropriate column on the right side (columns A & B).
Table 1.4 Pure and Applied fields of Biology
Fields of Biology
Pure Biology (A)
Applied Biology (B)
Agriculture
Biotechnology
Morphology
Molecular Biology
Taxonomy
Evolution
Horticulture Cytology
Pathology
Embryology
Physiology
Histology
Forestry
Poultry
Pharmacognosy
Agroforestry
Pisciculture
Apiculture
Paleontology
Animal Husbandry
Bacteriology
Entomology
Sericulture
Grade 10 Biology
5
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.5: THINK-PAIR-
In some branches of science, biology has become very important
SHARE
in this millennium. With the above idea, let us discuss some of the
In the previous parts of this
biological importance of the branches of biology in other branches
unit, you have studied the
of sciences.
different branches of biology.
Now, in pair, take at least 3
1) Biotechnology: is the use of living organisms or their products for
fields of biology and think
the welfare of humanity. It involves the technical manipulation
of their importance in other
of a living organism's genetic makeup (Genetic Engineering). A
branches of science. Finally,
genetically modified and improved variety of crops and animals
share your ideas with each
have been produced by biotechnology.
other.
2) Bioinformatics: is concerned with the acquisition, storage, analysis,
and dissemination of biological data, most often DNA and amino
acid sequences. Bioinformatics uses computer programs for a
variety of applications, including determining gene and protein
functions, establishing evolutionary relationships, and predicting
the three-dimensional shapes of proteins.
3) Genetic Engineering: is a means of extracting selected genes from
an organism or synthesizing selected genes and these genes are
inserted into another organism; as a result, an organism develops
with a new combination of genes, and this process is called genetic
engineering.
4) Biomedical Engineering: is the application of the principles
and problem-solving techniques of engineering to biology and
medicine. Biomedical engineering focuses on the advances that
improve human health and health care at all levels
5) Environment Management: deals with environmental observation
and finding out the solution to maintain the balance of nature.
6) Forensic Science: is the application of the knowledge of biological
science (DNA fingerprints (unique patterns in DNA molecule),
blood typing) to criminal and civil laws.
1.3 Major discoveries that revolutionized biology
Activity 1.6 Group
discussion
Objectives
In a group of 4 -5 students,
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discuss at least five
Discuss at least five major discoveries that revolutionized
major discoveries that
biology
revolutionized biology.
Let your group's secretary
present your findings to the
Biology is a fascinating and diverse subject area. If you're thinking of
whole class.
studying Biology, here are the twelve famous discoveries to inspire
you.
6
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
1. Aristotle (384-322 BC)
Despite the fact that his name is rarely mentioned when discussing
important biological discoveries, the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle
was responsible for a breakthrough classification system for living things.
Aristotle's classification system was known as the 'Ladder of Life' until the
nineteenth century. For the first time, he established species relationships
and grouped them correctly. He classified organisms based on their
Figure 1.3 Aristotle
ability to move from one place to another and with their characteristics
as herbs, shrubs, and trees.
2. Galen (129-161 AD)
Galen's efforts transformed medical science. Galen had a significant
impact on the advancement of numerous medical specialties, including
Anatomy, Pathology, Physiology, and Neurology. Among his important
findings were the distinctions between veins and arteries, as well as
the recognition that the larynx produces voice. Although many of his
concepts contained scientific mistakes, his contribution to medical
Figure 1.4 Galen
science is undeniable
3. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723)
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek is well renowned for his contributions to
microscopy and how he applied it to the field of biology. He invented a
method for making strong lenses that, according to some, could magnify
up to 500 times. Leeuwenhoek employed microscopes to learn more
about the biological world; among his findings were bacteria and the
Figure 1.5 Antonie van
vacuole of the cell.
Leeuwenhoek
4. Carl Linnaeus (1707-1775)
Carl Linnaeus, a botanist, physician, and naturalist, devised the method
for naming, ordering, and classifying creatures that we still use today.
His extensive collection of plant, animal, and shell specimens inspired
him to devise a system for classifying and naming species. He separated
items into three categories - animals, plants, and minerals - and further
organized living things into classes, orders, genera, and species. In Homo
Figure 1.6 Carl Linnaeus
sapiens, for example - 'homo' is the genus and 'sapiens' is the species.
5. Charles Darwin (1809-1882)
Probably the most famous naturalist of all time, Charles Darwin's
contribution to biology and society is immense. He established that all
species of life descended over time from common ancestors, with species
continuing to exist through the process of natural selection. His theory
of evolution was published in On the Origin of Species in 1859 and
it caused quite the stir - he was disputing the long-held belief that all
species had been created by God at the beginning of the world. Evolution
Figure 1.7 Charles Darwin
by natural selection combined with Mendelian genetics is now accepted
Grade 10 Biology
7
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
as the modern evolutionary synthesis and forms the foundations of
much biological scientific endeavour.
6. Gregor Mendel (1822-1884)
Gregor Mendel's extraordinary contribution didn't get the
recognition it deserved until long after the friar's death. He used peas
to discover and demonstrate the laws of genetic inheritance, coining
the terms 'dominant' and 'recessive' genes in the process. The laws
were rediscovered at the turn of the 20th century and provided the
mechanism for Darwin's theory of natural selection to occur. The
two theories combine to form our current understanding of the
Figure 1.8 Gregor Mendel
evolutionary process.
7. Louis Pasteur (1822-1895)
Louis Pasteur is regarded as the father of medical microbiology.
His contributions to science, technology, and medicine are nearly
unparalleled in history. He pioneered molecular asymmetry
research, demonstrated that bacteria cause fermentation and disease,
introduced pasteurization, rescued France's beer, wine, and silk
Figure 1.9. Louis Pasteur
industries, and developed anthrax and rabies vaccines.
8. Robert Koch (1843-1910)
Robert Koch was a well-known German physician who pioneered
microbiology. As the father of modern bacteriology, he is credited
with pinpointing the precise causal agents of tuberculosis, cholera,
and anthrax, as well as providing experimental support for the
Figure 1.10 Robert Koch
concept of infectious disease.
9. Jane Goodall (1934)
Our knowledge of wildlife and conservation has been transformed
by Jane Goodall, the UK ethologist. Best known for her career-long
studies of chimpanzees, she discovered the animals are omnivores
and tool users. She's a global leader in animal rights and was awarded
a Ph.D. degree from the University of Cambridge without holding a
Figure 1.11 Jane Goodall
bachelor's degree.
10) Barbara McClintock (1902-1992)
American geneticist Barbara McClintock spent her career analyzing
maize, where she developed a technique for identifying and examining
chromosomes individually. Despite it not being immediately
recognized, her work made it possible for us to map human genomes.
She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1983 for her discovery of
transposition and how genes could turn their physical characteristics
on and off.
Figure 1.12 Barbara McClintock
8
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
11. Watson (1928-) and Crick (1916-2004)
James Watson and Francis Crick were shot to fame in 1962 for their
discovery of the structure of DNA, winning the medical Nobel Prize
in the process. Their model of DNA (double helix) explains how
DNA replicates, and hereditary information is coded and passed
on to descendants. The discovery of DNA structure has led to a
Figure 1.13 Watson and Crick
much more developed understanding of function - used in disease
diagnosis and treatment, forensics, and more.
12. Wilmut (1944) and Campbell (1954-2012)
In 1996 Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell cloned a mammal, famously
named Dolly the Sheep. The pair cloned Dolly using a single adult
sheep cell and a process of nuclear transfer. Dolly died after six years
but cloning continues, although still not perfect, and certainly not
ready for human application.
Figure 1.14 Wilmut and
Campbell
Activity 1.7 Group and individual work
1. Mention at least ten more biological findings and explore their
central issues in pairs. Finally, present them to the entire class.
2. What do you feel about biological discoveries? Do you have
any possible issue in mind that can be discovered? Share with
your friends.
1.4 The contributions of biological discoveries
to society and the environment
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Appreciate the contribution of biological discoveries to society/
environment
The invention of devices such as microscopes and curative medications
such as penicillin has transformed human life. The biological
discoveries aided humans in developing abilities required for the
use of living systems or influencing natural processes to produce
products, systems, or settings that aid in human development. Some
biological discoveries and their impact on human society and the
natural environment are described further in this sub-section.
1. The Microscope
The microscope is a device that magnifies objects or organisms
that are too small to be seen with the naked eye. A milestone in the
science world, the microscope has had an enormous influence on
Figure 1.15 The Microscope
Grade 10 Biology
9
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Recall
the development of modern medical, forensics, and environmental
sciences. The invention of the microscope has revolutionized the
Mention and discuss types of
science industry while developing other fields.
microscopes with the highest
magnification and resolution
Medical field
power (refer back to grade
The use of microscopes in medicine began in the 1860s when
9 textbook on the micro-
Louis Pasteur reported that the microscopic organisms he saw
scopes).
in the microscope caused certain diseases. Until that time, people
thought diseases came from evil spirits or God. Pasteur's germ theory
revolutionized the process of identifying, treating, and preventing
infectious diseases. Today, hospital laboratories use microscopes to
identify which microbe is causing an infection so physicians can
prescribe the proper medicine. They are also used to diagnose cancer
and other diseases.
Ecosystem study
The microscope is used to study the health of an ecosystem. Field
biologists utilize microscopes to observe a specific habitat, such
as a marine environment, by identifying the types and numbers
of microscopic organisms found in ecosystem samples. This
helps scientists in defining the ecosystem, detecting threats to an
ecosystem, and determining the relationship of the organisms with
their environments.
Forensic Science
The microscope has greatly affected the field of forensic science.
Forensics is a field of science used to gather and analyze evidence
to establish facts that are used in a legal scenario. The microscope
is used to examine pieces of evidence collected at a crime scene that
may have information not visible to the human eye, For example,
striations in bullets can be examined under a microscope to see if
they match bullets shot from a particular gun.
Atomic Study
The invention of the powerful atomic force (electron) microscope
Activity 1.8 Answer to the
question
has enabled scientists to study cells at an atomic level. This enables
scientists to scrutinize viruses at their atomic level and influence them
In your previous classes,
for the delivery of innovative treatments. The electron microscope
you may have studied about
discoveries in medicine. Can
also enables scientists to study and understand the types of viruses
you mention some of them?
and understand how they infect the body.
Tell at least two of such dis-
coveries and their importance
Genetic Study
to human wellbeing and
The microscope has had a significant impact on genetics research.
proceed working on the next
A microscope is used by scientists to examine certain genetic
activity.
makeup. This also allows scientists to evaluate genetic abnormalities,
regeneration, and tissue death. The science of genetics is used to
10
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
examine infected tissue. Histologists will be able to explore future
therapies and preventive drugs as a result of this research.
Tissue Analysis
It is common for histologists to study cells and tissues using a
microscope. For example, if a section of tissue is taken for analysis,
histologists can use a microscope in combination with other tools to
determine if the sample is cancerous.
2. Discoveries in Medicine
Science has never moved at such a rapid rate as it is happening now.
As each discovery brings with it countless more developments,
it stands to reason that our scientific understanding has upgraded
with time. So great are many of these developments in fact, and they
have impacted our daily life styles so much; it's sometimes almost
impossible to imagine a world before many of these breakthroughs.
This is particularly true of medical discoveries, and while we might
complain of long hospital waiting lists or the poor bedside manner
of some of the nurses, we shouldn't forget that only a few generations
ago, how "irritating it was' to amputate a limb without anaesthesia.
Activity 1.9: Fill in the space with benefits of the discoveries
Discoveries in medicine and their relevance: To honour these advances and put things into perspective,
let us take a look at the eleven most important medical discoveries, as well as how they have impacted
us today. This activity in table 1.5 outlines the type of discovery and the person who made it. You are
required to explain its benefits to people.
Table 1.5 Types of discoveries
Type of discovery
Who discovered and year of discovery
Benefits
The Circulatory
1242 by the physician Ibn al-Nafis, and first brought to
System
prominence in 1628 by William Harvey
Vaccination
Jenner' France, 1799
Cell theory
Theodor Schwann and Matthias schleiden, 1838
Germ Theory
Louis Pasteur, 1861
X-Ray
Conrad Rontgen, 1895
Vitamins
Frederick Hopkins, 1900s
Insulin
Frederick Banting, 1920
Penicillin
Alexander Fleming, 1928
DNA
Swiss chemist Friedrich Miescher, 1860/70s
Anesthetics
Sigmund Freud and Karl Koller 1st clinical use in 1884;
Albert Niemann extracted from leaves of Coca in 1860
HIV
Robert Gallo and Luc Montagnier, 1980s
Grade 10 Biology
11
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
3. Inheritance (Application of Genetics)
Activity 1.10: Application of
Genetics
Before 1900, the history of genetics was related to cytology. This owes
Write about the application
to "Robert Hooke", who elaborated various smaller things in a thinly
of genetic discoveries in:
sliced cork section from a mature tree. In 1831, Brown discovered
a consistent structure present in a regular way, called "nucleus".
1. agriculture
Then Schleiden and Schwann presented "cell theory" (1836-1840)
2. medicine
to depict various structures present in the cell and their nature. It
3. biological diversity
was a great contribution to understanding cell structure. After other
4. immunity
contributions, in 1884-1885, four scientists (Hertwig, Kolliker,
5. inheritance
Weismann (all zoologists), and Strasburger (botanist) derived that
heredity matter existed in the nucleus in that material which makes
up chromosomes.
After the discovery of Mendel's work and his laws, Genetics took a
progressive turn and revolutionized. Working on this subject is still
moving. Genetics is providing numerous services to humanity in
almost every field of life. Thus, its prominent role never is neglected
in the welfare and betterment of human lives, in one way or the other.
To study more about the role of genetics for a human, do activity
1.10.
1.5 Ethiopian biologists and their contributions
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
appreciate major discoveries contributed by Ethiopian Scientists
discuss the importance of discoveries contributed by Ethiopian
scientists to human beings
Do you know some of the major discoveries of Ethiopian
biologists? Mention at least 3 of them and explain their
contributions.
Three of the Ethiopian scientists and their discoveries are given
below.
1. Professor Yalemtsehay Mekonnen
Prof. Yalemtsehay is a biologist and an academic member of staff at the
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Addis Ababa University.
She has worked in this department for the last 30 years. She received
her Ph.D., specializing in human physiology, from the University of
Heidelberg in Germany. One of her research areas is the assessment
of the impact of chemical pesticide hazards on humans.
12
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
This research covers almost all government farms including the
Upper Awash agricultural farms and some private horticultural farms
in the Rift Valley region. The other area of her research is in the use of
plants as medicine against human and animal diseases.
Professor Yalemtsehay has published over 100 scientific papers in
reputable journals in the areas of plants of medicinal and nutritional
value in vivo and in vitro physiological tests of useful plant
extracts, assessment of health hazards to humans, animals and the
environment, advocacy and collaborative work for the promotion of
safe and sustainable use of natural resources, to name but few. She
has done notable research on medicinal plants especially on Moringa
Figure 1.16 Prof. Yalemtsehay
Stenopetala (shiferaw/Alekko Shekatta).
Mekonnen
2. Dr. Aklilu Lemma
Schistosomiasis(Bilharzia) is a common parasitic disease. It affects
200-300 million people in Africa (including Ethiopia), South
America, Asia, and parts of the Caribbean. It is caused by parasitic
flatworms which spend part of their lifecycle in freshwater snails and
part in humans. Anyone washing, working, or playing in shallow
freshwater is at risk.
Once inside a person, the parasites mature and produce eggs which
are passed out in the urine and feces. They also infest the blood
vessels, liver, kidneys, bladder, and other organs. The body sets up
an immune reaction and an infected person can become weakened
and ill for many years. Some of the most important work in finding
a way of controlling this parasite, which is effective but does not cost
too much, was carried out by Dr. Aklilu Lemma, one of Ethiopia's
Figure 1.17 Dr. Aklilu
most renowned biologists.
Lemma
Dr. Aklilu began his work in 1964 when he was investigating the
freshwater snails that carry the Schistosomiasis parasite around
Adwa in northern Ethiopia. He saw women washing clothes in the
water and he noticed that downstream of the washing party there
were more dead snails than anywhere else he had collected. The
women were using the soapberry, 'Endod' in Amharic (Phytolacca
dodecane Dr.a), to make washing suds. Dr. Aklilu collected some live
snails from above the washing party and asked one of the women to
give him some of her Endod suds. Not long after the suds were put
in the snail container, all the snails died. This was the start of years
of work for Dr. Aklilu. Back in the laboratory, he showed that if the
Endod berries were dried, crushed, and diluted in water they would
kill snails at very low concentrations.
Other scientists carried out similar investigations and got the
Grade 10 Biology
13
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
same results. If the freshwater snails can be controlled, the spread of
schistosomiasis can be greatly reduced. The World Health Organization
recommended a chemical molluscicide (i.e. a compound that kills
mollusks including snails) but it was extremely expensive. Endod
works well, it is cheap and well known by local people who are likely to
use it and it is environment friendly as it breaks down naturally within
about two days. Dr. Aklilu Lemma worked for many years to convince
scientists all around the world that his ideas would work. Trials using
locally collected Endod showed that using the molluscicide worked.
Before the water was treated, 50% of children 1-6 years old were
infected. After treatment, only 7% were infected by the flatworm.
Dr. Aklilu's results were published in journals around the world. He
found the best species of the soapberry plant and developed programs
for local communities to treat their water. Eventually, people were
convinced and the use of Endod-based molluscicides is spreading
throughout Africa and beyond. He has been honored and recognized
in many different ways both in Ethiopia and around the world for his
work.
3. Professor Gebissa Ejeta
When Prof. Gebissa Ejeta was born in a small rural village his mother
was determined her son would receive a good education. He walked 20
miles to school every sun day evening, returning home on Friday after
a week of studying. It all paid off as he joined Jimma Agricultural and
Technical School and then Alemaya College.
He specializes in plant breeding and genetics. Prof. Gebissa Ejeta did
his research on sorghum He got his Ph.D. from Purdue University in
the USA where he still holds a professorship. He has helped to develop
Africa's first commercial hybrid strain of sorghum. This sorghum
variety not only needs less water and so is resistant to drought, but it
also yields more grain than traditional varieties.
Figure 1.18 Prof. Gebissa
Ejeta
Prof. Gebissa Ejeta developed other varieties of sorghum that are also
resistant to the parasitic Striga weed, which can destroy a big percentage
of a crop. Prof. Gebissa's work has made a very big difference to the food
availability in many areas of Ethiopia and other African countries. His
varieties yield up to ten times more than others. In 2009, Prof. Gebissa
Ejeta was awarded the World Food Prize, which is the most prestigious
agricultural prize in the world. He has also been awarded the National
Hero award of Ethiopia for his work in science and technology. These
are just some of the many renowned Ethiopian biologists who have
carried out work of great value both in Ethiopia and across the world.
You will have the opportunity to find out more about some of the other
scientists with your teacher in activity 1.11.
14
Grade 10 Biology
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Activity 1.11 Fill in the column with contributions
In section 1.5 of this unit, you have learned about the contributions of three Ethiopian scientists. In the
table below, you are given the names of other known biologists who have contributed to the development
of Ethiopian biological science and scientific research. Write the date and type of their contributions in
the right hand column of the table below.
Ethiopian Biologist
Contribution to the development of biological education and re-
search
Prof. Beyene Petros
Dr. Brihane Asfaw
Prof. Ensermu Kelbesa
Prof. Legesse Negash
Dr. Melaku Wolde
Prof. Mogessoe Ashenafi
Dr. Tewoldebrihan G/Egziabiher
Prof. Tilahun Yilma
Dr. Tsehaynesh Asfaw
Dr. Zeresenay Alemseged
Unit Summary
Zoology, Botany, and Microbiology are the three major branches of biology.
Some sub-fields of biology have existed for hundreds of years, while others are much newer and
often developing rapidly.
Anatomy, physiology, bacteriology, mycology, genetics, cytology, histology, embryology, taxono-
my and evolution, are some of the subfields of biology.
Every scientific discovery is remarkable, and some are truly life-changing.
There have been numerous great discoveries throughout the lengthy history of biology.
Almost all scientific discoveries help us learn a little bit more about this magnificent world we live
in, and some discoveries help us discover more.
Some scientific breakthroughs allowed biologists to see even deeper into life, the world, and ev-
erything: the microscope (Antonie van Leeuwenhoek), the law of inheritance (Gregor Mendel),
are some examples.
The biological discoveries aided people in developing abilities required for using living systems
or influencing natural processes to produce products, systems, or environments that aid in hu-
man development.
Some biological discoveries that have had an impact on human civilization and the natural envi-
ronment include: microscopes, medications, and laws of heredity, germ theory, blood circulation
in human, etc.
Discoveries of Ethiopian biologists have made significant contributions to society and develop-
ment.
Dr. Aklilu Lemma's discovery of soapberry 'Endod' against bilharzia (Schistosomiasis), a preva-
lent parasitic ailment, and Prof. Gebissa Ejeta's series of study findings on Sorghum varieties and
productivity are only a few examples of contributions of Ethiopian biologists.
Grade 10 Biology
15
Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology
Review Questions
I. True False
Write "True" for correct statements and "False" for the incorrect once on the space provided.
1. X-ray was discovered by Frederick Bating in 1895.
2. Biochemistry deals with the chemical reactions that take place in living organisms.
3. Microscope was discovered by Theodor Schwann in 1838.
4. Genetics is the study of heredity and variation.
5. The scientific contribution of Prof. Gebissa Ejeta is on the application of Endod to control
Bilharzia.
II. Matching
Match the description of field of study given under Column A with the field of study given under
column B, and write the letter of your answer on the space provided.
Column "A"
Column "B"
1 The study of insects
A. Cytology
2 Embryological development of the fetus
B. Agroforestry
3 The study of tissue
C. Histology
4 The study of mixed agriculture
D. Entomology
5 The study of cells
E. Embryology
III. Multiple Choice
Choose the best answer from the given alternatives (A, B, C & D).
1. The evolutionary history of an organism is known as
A. Anatomy
B. Ancestry
C. Palaeontology
D. Phylogeny
2. Who discovered the circulation of blood?
A. Ibn al-Nafis
B. McCollum
C. Scottish Naval
D. Edward Mellanby
3. The study of the internal structure of an organism is
A. Morphology
B. Anatomy
C. Histology
D. Systematic
4. Anatomy is the study of
A. Life
B. Body structure
C. Animals
D. Ocean
5. Who is regarded as the father of genetics?
A. Gregor Mendel
B. Gebissa Ejeta
C. Aristotle
D. Edward Mellanby
6. Who first discovered the germ theory of disease?
A. Louis Pasteur B. Alexander Flaming
C. Frederick Banting D. August Weismann
7. Who discovered vitamins?
A. Anton Van Leeuwenhoek
B. Frederick Hopkins C. James Watt D. All of the above
8. Bilharzia is caused by
A. Snails
B. Bacteria
C. Parasitic flatworms
D. Viruses
IV. Short answer
1. How biology and chemistry are interrelated in biochemistry?
2. Discuss the role of genetic discoveries in agricultural development.
3. How biological studies help human to keep healthy life?
4. What are the major discoveries of Louis Pasteur?
16
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 2: Plants
Contents
Learning competencies
2.1. Characteristics of plants
explain the characteristics of plants
2.2. Non-flowering and flowering
differentiate between flowering and non-flowering plants
plants
draw and label the internal and external structure of
2.3. Structure and function of plant
angiosperms
parts
draw and label the floral parts
2.4. Reproduction in plants
list different types of agents of pollination
2.4.1. Non-flowering
draw and label the reproductive cycles of flowering and non-
2.4.2. Flowering
flowering plants using typical examples
2.4.3. Pollination
infer seed dispersal mechanisms by looking at the nature of
2.5. Seeds (monocots, dicots)
seeds
2.6. Seed Dispersal and Germination
discuss the process and mechanisms of photosynthesis
2.7. Photosynthesis
conduct experiment on germination of dicot and monocot
2.8. Transport in plants
seeds
2.9. Response in plants
discuss the mechanism of water, mineral, and organic
2.10. Medicinal plants
molecules transport in plants and its implication on
2.11. Renowned Botanists in Ethiopia
agricultural productivity
conduct experiments to demonstrate plant responses
(geotropism, hydrotropism, phototropism)
investigate medicinal plants used by the local people to treat
different ailments
appreciate the works of Ethiopian Botanists
2.1. Characteristics of plants
Objectives
Recall
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
list the characteristics of plants
Revise what you learned
distinguish unique features of plants
in Grade 9: Unit 2 about
Definition of life
Characteristics of
What are the common characteristics of all living things?
living things
What are the characteristics of plants?
The word plant includes a range of living organism which share many
characteristics in common. Some of their characteristics are common
with other living things, while they have unique characteristics that
belong to plants. You are expected to distinguish characteristics plants
share with other living things from those features which are unique
Grade 10 Biology
17
Unit Two: Plants
to plants as listed hereunder.
ACTIVITY 2.1 THINK- PAIR-
SHARE
Plants are living things. Like other living things plants grow,
Direction:
reproduce and respond to changes in the environment.
Pair with a friend sitting next
Plants are multicellular. They are made up of many eukaryotic
to you and share what you
cells. These cells have well-defined nuclei and membrane-bound
think of the following key
organelles. In addition to the cell membrane, plant cells have a
issues. Write down points
rigid cell wall made primarily of cellulose.
you discussed to share to
your classmate.
Plants are autotrophic (self-feeding). Plant cells contain the green
Would there be life in the
pigment chlorophyll which enables them to absorb sunlight and
absence of plants? Give
produce their own food. Thus, they are also named Producers.
justification to your answer.
What is your reaction to a
Plants are sessile. They cannot move by themselves. They remain
person who is using nail
fixed at one place, firmly anchored to the soil by their root. However,
to fix notice board or
the leaves of plants can turn towards light and some respond to
plate on a tree or firmly
touch. The roots of plants can also orient towards water or moist
tying metal wire or plastic
soil.
wire around the stem of
growing plants to hang wet
Plants practice asexual and sexual reproduction patterns. In
clothes for sun drying ?
lower plants such as mosses and liverworts, asexual reproduction
List down your reasons to
through spores is the dominant form. On the other hand, in higher
convince the person.
and seed-bearing plants such as gymnosperms and angiosperms,
sexual reproduction which involves the union of gametes or sex
cells is the dominant and visible form.
2.2 Flowering and non - flowering plants
Recall
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Revise what you learned in
Grade 9: Unit 2 about
differentiate between flowering and non - flowering plants,
The five kingdom
use plant reproductive structure for classifying plants and
classification
realize floral structure as a strong marker for classification
Indeed, the concept "plant" is widely associated with those that have
What do you know about
flowers, root, stem and leaves having transporting vessels (vascular
flowers and flowering
bundles). However, as shown in Figure 2.1 there is a huge number of
plants?
lower plants, such as mosses and liverworts which are non - vascular,
How do plants reproduce
i.e., do not have transporting system or conducting vessels, essential
without flowers?
to transport water, nutrient and food needed for the plant. The non -
vascular plants, are generally small with limited height and restricted
What comes to your mind
to moist and shaded areas. These lower plants are seedless and do
when you think about
not have flowers and fruits.
plants?
There are still large numbers of plants known as gymnosperms with
well-developed root stem and leaves but have no flowers. Their
18
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
reproductive organ is cone, instead of flowers. Moreover, the seeds
produced in their cone are without cover (naked seeds).
Flowering plants, commonly known as Angiosperms, are also vascular
with well-developed root, stem and leaves. But unlike gymnosperms,
they have flowers and produce seeds within a fruit.
Plants
Non vascular
Vascular
(Bryophytes)
Non Seed
Bearing
Seed Bearing
Mosses
(pteridophytes)
Naked Seed
Covered Seed
Liverworts
(Gymnosperms)
(Angiosperms)
Ferns
Pine tree with Cone
Flowering plant
Figure 2.1 Major groups of plants
ACTIVITY 2.2 COOPERATIVE LEARNING
Direction:
Form a group of four students (two neighboring pairs). Critically
look at Figure 2.1 and answer the following questions. Then
compare your answers with other groups of your classmates
Which plant groups would be included under non - flowering
plants?
Why is flower important marker of classification? (This may
need library work or browsing on the Internet to collect more
information.)
Construct a table that shows similarities and differences
between gymnosperms and angiosperms?
Grade 10 Biology
19
Unit Two: Plants
2.3 Structure and function of plant parts
Think of flowering
Objectives
plant, which is found
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
around your home or
school campus. List
draw the external and internal structure of angiosperms,
major structures and
label the external and internal structure of angiosperms and
describe their functions
relate the structure of plants with the function they perform
before you learn about
structures of a plant in
class.
Like any organism, plants have different structures which perform
a vital function essential for the plant life. In this sub-topic, we will
focus on the external and internal structure of a flowering plant
(angiosperm).
As illustrated in Figure 2. 2, the external structure of a typical
angiosperm has two major systems.
The shoot system: This is the plant part usually found above the
ground and includes the organs such as stem, branches, leaves, buds,
flowers and fruits. The last two organs may be missing depending on
the reproductive stage of the plant.
ACTIVITY 2.3 FIELD
WORK
The root system: This is the part of the plant that usually grows
downward into the ground. It includes the primary or tap root, lateral
Material needed: A typical
or branch roots, root hairs and root cap. Roots are distinguished from
plant having complete
organs of a flowering plant
an underground stem in that, they don't bear either leaves or buds.
as illustrated in Figure 2.2
Direction
Reproductive shoot (flower)
Apical bud
Form a group of three to
four students and
Node
Internode
Collect a plant from your
school campus or locality
Apical
that resembles Figure 2.2
bud
Shoot
Look at the plant collected
system
Vegetative
and identify the shoot
shoot
system, buds (apical
Blade
Leaf
Petiole
and axillary bud), leaves,
Axillary
flower and root system
bud
(tap root and lateral root)
Stem
Prepare a properly labeled
Taproot
diagram of your life
specimen (Real plant)
Lateral
Root
showing all the parts that
(branch)
system
you have identified
roots
Discuss how you
differentiate underground
stems from root.
Figure 2.2 External structure of a typical angiosperm (flowering plant)
20
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Figure 2.3 shows the external structure of leaf and the types of root.
The external structure of a typical leaf consists of the petiole (leaf
How do you relate the
stalk), lamina (blade - broadest part), midrib, margin, base and tips
structures of leaf and
(Figure 2.3 a). The lamina is the broadest part, which is flat, wide
roots to their function?
and commonly thin. It provides large surface area, which enables leaf
to collect light. Its thinness creates short distance for gas exchange
through the stomata (tiny pores). The midrib is harder and contains
the vein (transporting vessels) of the leaf as well as supportive tissues
with hard cell wall. Leaves of different plants show difference in
absence or presence of petiole, leaf shape (variation in leaf margin,
base and tips) and arrangement of veins.
With regard to root, there are basically two types of roots (Figure
2.3b), namely tap-roots and fibrous roots
A tap-root consists of one large, primary vertical root. It has very
few lateral roots that develop and grow from this main root. By
penetrating deep into the soil, tap roots provide stability (anchorage)
and absorb water located deep in the ground. Tap root system is a
feature of dicot plants.
A fibrous root is usually formed by thin, moderately branching
roots growing from stems. They are more or less similar size and
length. In grasses they develop as consists of fine hair - like root that.
Spread out from the base of the stem. Fibrous root is very efficient for
absorbing water and minerals close to soil surface. It creates a thick
network of roots that are good at holding soil together and protect
soil from erosion. Fibrous roots are features of monocot plants.
Apex
Tap root
Fibrous root
Margin
Midrib
Leaf
Blade
Veins
Base
Petiole
A
B
Figure 2.3 External structure of a typical leaf (A) and Types of roots
(B)
Grade 10 Biology
21
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.4 PEER DISCUSSION
Material needed: A typical leaf and roots as shown in Figure 2.3
Direction: Form a group of four students (two neighboring pairs) and
Collect a leaf and roots from your school campus or locality that resembles Figure 2.3.
Identify the different parts of a leaf (petiole, leaf base, margin, apex and midrib). Draw and prepare
a properly labeled diagram of the leaf in your exercise book.
Describe and show how leaves of different plants differ in their morphology.
Use a hand lens and examine the leaf veins and distributions of tiny pores. What is the function of
these structures?
Use the real root you collected and label the different parts of the tap root of Figure 2.3B.
Examine the root hairs with a hand lens and note why root hairs are best suited for absorption.
2.3.1 The internal structure of a leaf
In this section, you will explore the internal structure or tissues of a
green leaf that made it best suited for food synthesis. Figure 2.4 shows
components of the two internal layers of a leaf, namely; Outer layer
and middle (inner) layer.
A) Outer layer
This is also known as the epidermis, a single layer of tightly packed
cells that covers the upper and lower surface of the leaf. The upper
epidermis is usually covered by a waxy cuticle, which transmits
sunlight for photosynthesis but restricts water loss by evaporation
from the leaf tissue. The lower epidermis usually contains bean-
shaped guard cells that leave open spaces known as stomata (singular
stoma). Stomata are "little mouths" or " little noses", which regulate
O₂ release, CO₂ intake and water loss. In most leaves, stomata are
more abundant in the lower epidermis, reducing water loss due to
direct sunlight.
B) Middle layer
This is known as the mesophyll ("middle leaf") layer. It lies between
the upper and lower epidermis. It includes tissues that are directly or
indirectly involved in photosynthesis. There are two regions in the
mesophyll layer.
The palisade layer is composed of regularly arranged and closely
packed columnar (vertically elongated) cells. The cells contain the
largest number of chloroplasts per cell. As the layer is immediately
beneath the upper epidermis, it is in the best position to capture
most of the sunlight and this enables it to carry out most of the
photosynthesis. The slight but precise separation of the columnar
cells maximizes the diffusion of CO₂ and capillary movement of
H₂0.
22
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
The spongy layer lies below the palisade cells. Spongy cells are
irregularly shaped with fewer chloroplasts. They are very loosely
arranged with numerous airspaces. These air spaces, which are very
close to the stomata allow the diffusion of O₂, water vapour and CO2.
cuticle
upper epidermis
chloroplast
vacuole
nucleus
palisade
cell wall
cytoplasm
mesophyll
spongy
lower epidermis
cuticle
guard cell
stoma
Figure 2.4 Internal structure of a leaf
2.3.2 The internal structure of a stem
Figure 2.5 shows the internal structure of a typical dicot stem of a
flowering plant. Accordingly, the detailed internal structure includes
the following fundamental tissue systems.
The epidermis is the outermost layer of the stem. The outer walls
are greatly thickened with cuticles, which minimizes the rate of
transpiration. Moreover, the cells are compactly arranged, which
in turn protect the underlying tissues from mechanical injury and
prevent the entry of harmful organisms.
Epidermal Hair
Cuticle
Epidermis
Collenchyma
Epidermal Hair
Chlorenchyma
Epidermis
Parenchyma
Hypodermis
Cortex
Endodermis
Endodermis
phloem
Combium
Vascular Bundle
Xylem
Pith
Pith
Figure 2.5 Internal structure of a typical dicot stem (A = Ground plan; B = Transverse section)
Grade 10 Biology
23
Unit Two: Plants
Hypodermis lies below the epidermis. It is mainly composed of
collencyma cells that are specially thickened at the corners due to the
deposition of thick cellulose. This enables the layer to give mechanical
strength to the stem.
Cortex consists of few layers of thin-walled, large, round, or oval
cells, having intercellular space and serving for storage of food.
Endodermis is the innermost layer of the cortex that separates the
cortex from the vascular bundles. The cells are compactly arranged
and usually contain starch grains. Thus, the endodermis serves as a
food reserve and may be termed as a starch sheath.
Vascular bundles are longitudinal strands of conducting tissues or
transporting vessels, consisting essentially of xylem and phloem
arranged in a ring around the central pith. Each bundle has a
patch of xylem towards the pith and a patch of phloem towards the
endodermis and a strip of actively dividing young cells (cambium) in
between them. Xylem transports water and dissolved minerals to the
photosynthetic tissues, mainly to the leaf while phloem transports
https://pediaa.com/
synthesized food to different tissues, either for utilization or storage.
what-is-the-difference-
between-monocot-stem-
Pith - occupies the central portion of the stem, composed of thin-
and-dicot-stem
walled cells, which are rounded or polygonal, with or without
intercellular space. It stores food and helps in the internal translocation
of water.
ACTIVITY 2.5 LIBRARY WORK
Note: Angiosperms have their seeds enclosed inside fruits. They can be classified as "Monocots" and
"Dicots", having one and two cotyledon (s) respectively. Typical examples include maize (a monocot)
and bean (a dicot).
Direction:
Using illustration (Figure 2.5), you can learn the internal structure of a dicot stem. For a contrast,
you need to know the internal structure of a monocot stem.
Refer to biology books available in your library or download pictures showing the internal structure
of monocot stem from the Internet. Then draw and label the picture in your exercise book.
Complete the following table of comparison to show the differences between the internal structure
of the dicot and monocot stem. The column under dicot is filled to you for references.
Dicot stem
Monocot stem
Contains distinct regions known as cortex, vascular bundles and pith
( stele)
Has few number (4 to 8) of set of vascular bundles
Vascular bundles are arranged regularly in the form of one or two rings
Pith is present and well developed
24
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.3.3 The internal structure of a root
As illustrated in Figure 2.6 below, the transverse section of the dicot
Root Hair
root shows the following plan of arrangement of tissues from the
Piliferous layer
periphery to the centre.
Cortex
Peliferous layer is the outermost layer made up of single-layer cells.
The cuticle is absent. It consists the single-celled root hairs.
Endodermis
Phloem
Cortex is a multi-layered large zone made of thin-walled oval or
Pericycle
rounded loosely arranged cells with intercellular spaces. It stores
Xylem
food and water.
Casparina strip
Endodermis is the innermost layer of the cortex, made of barrel-
shaped closely packed cells. The layer helps the movement of water
and dissolved nutrients from the cortex into the xylem.
Pericycle is a single layer inner to endodermis. It is the site of origin
Root Hair
Piliferous layer
of lateral roots.
Cortex
Phloem
Vascular bundles consist of xylem and phloem with meristematic
Xylem
(cambium) or actively dividing cells between them
Pith is present in young roots while absent in old roots.
Figure 2.6 Internal structure of
a typical dicot root
ACTIVITY 2.6: COMPARATIVE TABLE
Self Test
Direction:
In Grade 9, you have
learned that one of the
Follow the direction stated in activity 2.6, but this time you will
unifying principles in
draw and label the internal structure of monocot root in your
Biology is complimentary
exercise book.
of structure and function i.
e, a particular structure is
Complete the following table of comparison to show the
best suited for a particular
differences between the internal structure of dicot and monocot
function. Explain how leaf
root. The column under dicot is filled to you for reference
and root of a plant can be
described with this unifying
Dicot root
Monocot
principle.
root
The cortex area is narrow
Vascular bundles limited in number between
2 6
www
Pith is either extremely small or absent
https://www.visiblebody.
Show secondary growth due to the presence of
com/learn/biology/
cambium
monocot-dicot/roots
Grade 10 Biology
25
Unit Two: Plants
2.4 Reproduction in plants
Objectives
How do non - flowering
and flowering plants
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
reproduce?
draw and label floral parts,
outline the reproductive cycle /pattern of non - flowering and
Think of a fruit bearing
flowering plants,
plants like "Avocado"
or "Papaya". Collect
list different types of pollinating agents and
information about these
appreciate the diversity in floral colour to attract pollinators
fruits and point out
the stages of their life
cycle starting from the
2.4.1 Reproductive structure and life cycle of non-flowering
matured plant.
plants
In this section, you will learn the reproductive structure and life cycle
of higher seed-bearing non-flowering plants known as gymnosperms.
Figure 2.7 shows common gymnosperm trees in Ethiopia and
reproductive structure, male and female cones, of pine tree. These
higher plants belong to a group of gymnosperms known as conifers.
Figure 2.7 Common gymnosperms and reproductive cones
ACTIVITY 2.7 : FIELD VISIT
Arrange a field visit with small groups (3 to 4 students) to a park or recreational places or street gardens
during your weekend. Look for gymnosperm trees, particularly indigenous trees such as Podocarpus
falcatus ("Zigba ") and Juniperus procera ("Tid"). You can also look for gymnosperm shrub, which is
used as a hedge grown in a row and used for partition in gardens.
If you have a smart phone, take picture of the gymnosperm tree to share with your classmates.
Take note on the external structure of the gymnosperm tree you encountered with special attention on
the nature of leaf and the cones (if there are any). Collect some leaf and the cones and bring them to class
as specimen for class discussion.
Ask your elders or parents about the reproduction and economic importance of gymnosperm trees and
prepare a report to submit to your teacher for whole class discussion.
After the field visit and preparation of the field report, you are now
able to distinguish and describe gymnosperms. In this lesson, you
will learn the life cycle of gymnosperm, using the pine tree as a
typical representative of conifers as well as gymnosperms in general.
26
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
As shown in Figure 2.8 the pine tree has male and female cones on one
ACTIVITY 2.8
plant. Initially, pollen is transferred from the male cone to the female
COOPERATIVE
cone. The process is called pollination and occurs with the help of
LEARNING
wind. Following pollination, the pollen will undergo germination
Carefully read the
with the formation of pollen tube The pollen tube develops slowly
description on the
and the generative cell of the pollen grain divides into two sperm
reproductive cycle of a
cells as it approaches the female cone.
pine tree. Share ideas
with a friend sitting next
The female cone contains two ovules per scale. Each ovule undergoes
to you and list distinct
meiosis ( gamete or sex cells formation by cell division) and
developmental stages in pine
produces four cells. Three of the four cells breakdown leaving only
tree to show major stages of
a single surviving cell, , which develops into a gametophyte having
gymnosperms' life cycle in
archogonium. An archegonium is a reproductive structure that
general.
contains a single large egg. It is this large egg that fuses (unites)
with one of the sperm cells and form a zygote. This process is known
as fertilization.
A zygote develops into a seed embryo inside the female cone. After
the seed is matured, it is liberated upon drying and opening of the
female cone. Then the seed will be dispersed or scattered away from
Have you ever thought
the parent plant and germinates into a seedling (young pine plant)
that removing a
flower is depriving its
upon getting favourable conditions. Finally, the young plant grows
opportunity to reproduce
and develops in to mature plant with female and male cones and the
or substitute itself? What
reproductive cycle of the pine tree is complete.
does this mean for plants
with solitary (single
flower)?.
Female cones grow in the
upper branches where they
may be fertilized by pollen
blown on the wind
from the male cones.
Attention
Male cones grow in the
lower branches.
Most conifers have narrow,
needle shaped leaves with
Sporophyte (2n)
thick cuticle, which enable
(mature tree)
them to live in extremely
cold and hot environments.
Pollen
Pollen
Ovule
They are evergreen and
Seeds (2n)
grain
tube
do not shade their leaves
both in winter and summer,
Scale
a feature which makes
Megaspore
them to be ornamental
(1n)
Generative (sperm)
Tube
plants decorating parks,
nuclei (1n)
nucleus
recreational areas and streets
in town and big cities.
Figure 2.8 Life cycle of a pine tree representing gymnosperms
Grade 10 Biology
27
Unit Two: Plants
What is flower? What
2.4.2 Reproductive structure and life cycle of flowering plants
are the major floral
A flower is the reproductive organ of angiosperms, plants with seeds
parts and their role in
covered by or contained in a fruit. Figure 2.9 illustrates a typical
reproduction ?
flower has four floral parts, namely Sepals, Petals, Stamen, and Pisti.
Sepals (calyx) - usually green leaf-like structure protecting the
Self Test
lower part of female and male parts
An imperfect flower is
Petals (corolla) - mostly brightly coloured and attract pollinating
incomplete flower, but an
agents like insects
incomplete flower may or
may not be an imperfect
Stamen (Androecium) - is the male part, consisting of the filament
flower. Explain how this is
and bilobed anther
so?
Pistil (Gynoecium or carpel) - is the female part, consisting of the
ovary with ovules, style and stigma.
Attention
Petals (all petals = corolla)
A complete flower has the
four floral parts. It is called
incomplete flower if it does
not have any one of the
floral parts.
A perfect flower has both
Female parts
Male parts
stamen and pistil. If a flower
Anther
Stigma
(covered with pollen)
does not have either stamen
Pistil
Style
Filament
or pistil, it is known as
(carpel)
Ovary
Ovule
imperfect flower. It is either
Egg
pistilated (has pisitil and no
stamen), or staminated (has
Receptacle
Sepals (all sepals = calyx)
stamen but no pistil) flower.
Peduncle
Figure 2.9: Structure of typical flower
ACTIVITY 2.9 COOPERATIVE LEARNING
Let one group of five students from each class bring one complete flower and another group of five
students incomplete flower, without harming the plant from your school campus or your locality. Put
your flowers in a plastic bag and bring them to your class for your group work
In the class room students should carefully examine the complete flower. They should identify the
different floral parts by comparing the real flowers to Figure 2.9. Then students draw and label the
parts, focus in on the male part (stamen) and female part (pistil) in your exercise book.
Let students look at the incomplete flower and identify the part (s) missed. Ask students if the flower
is incomplete and imperfect? Why did they say so?
During collection, students will observe that some flowers are bright in colour while the others are
not. Which floral part is so bright with colour and how does this be related to pollinating agents?
28
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.4.3 Pollination
This is the transfer of pollen grains from the anther of a stamen to
What is pollination ?
the stigma of the pistil. The transfer can be between stamen and pistil
on one flower or between flowers on one plant (Self Pollination)
or between two flowers on different plants (cross-pollination).
Pollination requires pollinating agents such as insects or wind. There
is a strong relationship between the nature of the flower and the
ACTIVITY 2.10 LIBRARY
pollinating agents. Following pollination, a flowering plant passes
SEARCH
through distinct stages described as follows and illustrated in Figure
Refer to books or browse
2.10.
on the Internet and
prepare a table of summary
Pollen tube formation: Pollen grains landing on the stigma will form
that shows the difference
pollen tubes that grow down in the style and form the male gamete as
between insect-pollinated
it approaches the ovule.
flowers and wind-
pollinated flowers.
Fertilization: This is the union of the male gamete and the female
Show your table of
gamete, occurring in the ovule within the ovary. As a result, a zygote
summary to your teacher
that develops into a seed embryo will be formed. In flowering plants,
for comment.
there is second fertilization, which forms the endosperm (reserve food
storing structure). Thus, angiosperms exhibit double fertilization.
Seed and fruit formation: Following fertilization and formation of seed embryo, the ovule matures
into seed while the ovary matures into a fruit. Thus seed is a matured ovule while the fruit is a matured
ovary.
Seed dispersal: This is a mechanism of scattering seeds around or away from the parent plant. Seed
dispersal like pollination requires agents such as animals or wind.
Seed dormancy /Seed germination: The fate of a seed landing at a certain place will be either
dormancy or germination. A dormant seed is inactive and waiting for the favourable condition to start
germination. If there is enough water and nutrients the seed will break dormancy and the seed embryo
starts to develop into a seedling (Young and new plant). This process is called seed germination.
Germinated pollen grain on
Figure 2.10 Life cycle of typical
stigma of carpel
flowering plant (angiosperm)
Anther at tip of stamen
Mature sporophyte
Pollentube
plant with flowers
Ovary
Ovule
Fertilization
Embryo sac
Zygote
Egg
Sperm
Sporophyte seedling
Seed
Embryo
(Sporophyte)
Simple fruit (Develops
Germinating seed
Seed(Develops from
ovule)
from ovary)
Grade 10 Biology
29
Unit Two: Plants
2.5 Seeds
Objectives
What makes seeds of
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
flowering plants to be
different from those of
describe the structure of seed and embryo and
gymnosperms ?
list down the difference between dicot and monocot seed
The seed (fertilized ovule) contains three parts: the seed embryo,
cotyledon/endosperm (reserve food) and seed coat. In Angiosperms,
the seed is additionally covered by the fruit. Thus it is called covered
seed as opposed to the naked seed of gymnosperm. A naked seed has
nothing on except its own seed coat.
The seed embryo, in turn, consists of the radicle (future root), epicotyl,
hypocotyl and the plumule (future shoot) (Fig. 2.11). Cotyledon and
endosperm are food storing tissues, essential for the seed embryo
(future plant) until it forms leaf and starts manufacturing its own
food. A seed of angiosperm may have one cotyledon (monocot) or
two cotyledons (dicot).
Endosperm
Epicotyl
Hypocotyl
Radicle
Embryo
Embryo
Cotyledons
Seed Coat
Figure 2.11 Section of a dicot (Bean) and monocot (Corn/Maize) seed
and the associated structures.
Table 2.1 Differences between dicot and monocot seeds
Dicot seed
Monocot seed
Two cotyledons are present in the
Only one cotyledon present
embryo
Cotyledons are fleshy and store
Cotyledon is very thin and lacks
food materials
food materials
Endosperm is absent
Endosperm is large and well
developed
Primary root produced from the
Primary root formed from
radicle bears many lateral roots.
radicle is replaced by
adventitious fibrous roots
30
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.6 Seed dispersal and germination
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Is seed alive or dead?
-
How can you know this?
relate nature of seeds with the mechanism of dispersal,
explain the process of seed germination and
What is the importance
of seed dispersal ?
conduct experiment that demonstrates the germination of seed
2.6.1 Seed dispersal
At the beginning of unit 2, under section 2.1, you have learned that
plants are sessile or fixed at one place. However, plants at their seed
stage display long-distance mobility and they do so with the help
of seed dispersal agents. Seed dispersal is an adaptive mechanism
of plants that ensures seed will be separated from the parent plants
distributed over a large area to safeguard the germination and survival
of the seeds to adult plants, thereby minimizing overcrowding at one
place.
Seeds can be dispersed by animals, wind or water. For instance,
fleshy fruits that have seeds in them can be ingested by birds and due
to hard seed coats, the seeds escape digestion and are dropped at a
distance upon defecation. Seeds that have additional hairy or winged
structures can be dispersed by wind or float in water and taken away
to a new habitat.
ACTIVITY 2.10 LIBRARY WORK
Attempt the following activity with a friend sitting next to you.
Carefully read the description on the nature of the seed or look at the picture of seeds included in
the next table and infer the mechanism of dispersal.
Finally, write the conclusion that you can arrive with regard to the nature of seed and mechanism of
dispersal
Nature of seed
Mechanism of dispersal
Seeds that stick or cling to fur or clothes
Seeds within fruits act as kites or propellers
Grade 10 Biology
31
Unit Two: Plants
2.6.2 Germination of seed
The life of a flowering plant starts with a tiny seed embryo that stays
What are the essential
dormant until the essential conditions for active growth are fulfilled.
conditions for seed
The resumption of active growth of the embryo after a period
germination?
of dormancy is known as germination. There are three essential
conditions for seed germination.
Water (moisture)
Water is important for the germinating seed because the hydration
of the seed coat increases its permeability to O2. Water is essential
for the enzymatic hydrolysis of organic food and acts as an agent of
transport in the translocation of soluble substances.
Oxygen ( Aeration)
Oxygen is necessary for aerobic respiration by which the seeds get
energy for the growth of the embryo.
Temperature (warmth)
Seeds require optimum temperature for germination.
How do we demonstrate that moisture, air and warmth are required
for seed germination? The following experimental activity will
answer this question.
ACTIVITY 2.12: GROUP ACTIVITY
Materials required: dicot seed (e.g., Bean) or monocot seed (e.g., Maize), oil, cotton, water, beakers,
short wooden bar, glue ( to fix seeds on the wooden bar)
Direction:
Carefully look at the experiment designed to show what is required for seed germination. You may do
the experiment individually at home to confirm the results indicated
Note that the beakers should be placed where they get sunlight (light and heat). The seeds are allowed
to germinate, waiting up to 2-3 days.
Discuss the results with your
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
small group and answer the
Beaker A
Beaker B
Beaker A
Beaker B
following questions.
Germinated
Oil layer
Germinated!
Identify the experiment that
Non
seeds
seeds
germinate
Non
shows the need for optimum
seeds
germinated
Dry cotton
Wet cotton
seeds
Boil Water
Wet cotton
moisture (water), temperature
wool
wool
wool
(warmth) and air (oxygen)
respectively.
Experiment 3
Three Bean seeds Experiment
What is the importance of the
Beaker A
Beaker B
cotton wool, oil layer, and ice cube
-
seed above
Germinated
the water
in experiment 1, 2, 3 respectively?
Non
seeds
seed partially
germinated
in the water
seeds
What does the three-bean seeds
Ice cube
Wet cotton
Seed in the
wool
water
experiment demonstrate?
32
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
As depicted in Figure 2.12, seed germination covers all the processes
Attention
that occur from the time that seed embryo starts growth up to the
formation of young independent plant with photosynthetic leaves.
It is the position and
Optimum moisture, air and warmth activate the embryo to start
fate of cotyledon which
growth. With more and more nourishment from the food stored
differentiate hypogeal
in cotyledon and endosperm, the tiny embryo grows more. The
germination from epi-
outward sign of growth is a radicle that develops from the hypocotyl.
geal germination
It is the first to come out of the seed and grow down to the soil as the
primary root. The root is essential for anchorage and access to water
In epigeal germina-
and nutrients from the soil. Meanwhile, the shoot that develops from
tion, the cotyledon is
the plumule grows upward towards sunlight. Soon, a young plant
pushed up to become
(seedling) with photosynthetic leaf start manufacturing its own food
the photosynthetic sur-
face of the seedling by
the elongation of a re-
Epigeal
gion of the embryo.
Eplcotyl
In hypogeal germina-
Cotyledon
tion, the cotyledon re-
Hypocotyl
mains under the soil
Hypocotyl
Hypogeal
Cotyledon
Eplcotyl
Hypocotyl
Figure 2.12. Epigeal and Hypogeal germination
Self Test
Which type of germination commonly occurs in a dicot seed and
monocot seed?
Grade 10 Biology
33
Unit Two: Plants
2.7 Photosynthesis
Objectives
It is amazing that plants
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
that are fixed at one
place make their own
identify inputs and outputs of photosynthesis,
food, while animals
outline the process or mechanism by which food is synthesized
that move from place to
in green plants,
place cannot synthesize
recognize the importance of photosynthesis to life and
food and depend on
appreciate leaves of green plants in their function as food
plants. Why is this so?
factories
What do plants provide
Do you know that the leaves of green plants are the largest food factories
to animals other than
food?
on Earth? The product of leaves together with the photosynthetic
productivity of algae provides food that supports nearly all life on
What do animals give to
earth. Plants can prepare their own food by photosynthesis. Thus
plants?
they are called producers or autotrophs (self-feeding). The food
plants produce is more than what they need, and the excess food
they produce is used by the vast consumers known as heterotrophs
(feeding on plants and on one another).
The basic source of energy that sustains life begins with sunlight.
In turn, sunlight is absorbed by a green pigment known as
chlorophyll. Thus, it occurs in organisms bearing chlorophyll
such as green algae and higher plants, which enables them to trap
solar energy and transform it into chemical energy. This process is
known as photosynthesis. In this section, you will learn more about
photosynthetic apparatus - Chloroplast
2.7.1 The photosynthetic apparatus
You have learned, in sub-topic 2.3.1 of this unit, that the mesophyll
Where does
layer of the leaf contains the largest number of chloroplasts and is
photosynthesis take
place?
in the best position to trap the maximum amount of solar energy.
Figure 2.13 illustrates the internal structure of the chloroplast, which
is termed as photosynthetic apparatus.
Accordingly, there are two distinct parts in chloroplasts: Granum
and Stroma.
i) Granum: consists of stacks of flattened sacks, each of which is called
thylakoid. The granum contains the chlorophyll, enzymes and co-
factors that participate in the light trapping phase of photosynthesis.
It is here that the light reaction takes place.
ii) Stroma: is a gel-like colourless matrix, which is a site for sugar
(carbohydrate) synthesis through carbon fixation. It is from the sugar
produced in the stroma that is directly or indirectly converted to all
organic compounds (including amino acids, proteins and lipids)
virtually found in all organisms.
34
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Intermembrane
Inner
membrane
Outer
space
Stroma
How is the structure of
membrane
(aqueous fluid)
chloroplast best suited
for its function?
Granum
(stack of thylakoids)
Lumen
(inside of thylakoid)
Thylakoid
Lamella
Figure 2.13: Chloroplast - the photosynthetic apparatus
2.7.2 The light absorbing system in chloroplast
In this sub section you will learn the role of light absorbing
pigments, mainly chlorophyll and sunlight absorbed serves as agent
of photochemical reaction in food synthesis (photosynthesis).
The chloroplast contains chlorophyll (particularly chlorophyll a and
b) and other light absorbing accessory pigments capable of absorbing
light at different wavelengths. As shown in Figure 2.14, the light
absorbing pigments of chloroplasts absorb most of the visible light,
ranging from 400 - 700 nm. Maximum light absorption occurs at
wavelengths from 400 - 500 nm and 600 - 700 nm, blue and red light
respectively. Light ranging from 500 to 600nm that includes green
light is not absorbed, it is rather reflected. This is the reason why
leaves look green.
Chlorophyll a
Amount of light absorbed by pigments
Chlorophyll b
Carotenoids
400
500
600
700
Wave length of light (nm)
Figure 2.14 The action spectrum for different wavelengths
Grade 10 Biology
35
Unit Two: Plants
2.7.3. Mechanism of photosynthesis
ACTIVITY 2.13: PEER DIS-
CUSSION
Photosynthesis consists of a number of photochemical and enzymatic
reaction. It is the sum total of the following two sub reaction
Direction:
Discuss on the sub reactions
1. Light reaction this is also known as the light dependent stage, It
and over all equation of
takes place in the granum, where the light absorbing system - mainly
photosynthesis with a
chlorophyll occurs. Here, the granum is organized as Photosystems
friend sitting next to you.
and Electron Transporting System. The photosystem consists of
Then, answer the questions
chlorophyll that absorbs sunlight maximally at blue and red range of
written hereunder. Compare
light spectrum. The light absorbed by the chlorophyll will
your answers to your
classmates' answer
split of water molecules (H₂O) into H+ and O₂. This is known
What is the source of
as photolysis. The O₂ is released to the atmosphere through leaf
oxygen?
stomata.
What are the inputs
(reactants) and
excite some electrons in the chlorophyll molecule to higher
outputs (products) of
energy level which pass down the ETS and generate high energy
photosynthesis?
ATP molecule. The ATP and H+ harvested during light reaction
Point out the importance
will be used as an input in the Stroma where conversion of CO2
of water with regard to
to carbohydrate takes place.
food that we eat and air
we breathe
2. Dark reaction this is also known as light - independent stage,
because it can occur in the absence of light as long as there is sufficient
amount of H+ and ATP supplied from the light reaction. The dark
reaction and enzymatic reaction H+ indirectly combines with CO2, in
the stroma of chloroplast. The process is known as carbon fixation.
Glucose (carbohydrate) is the immediate result of the dark reaction.
The overall chemical reaction of photosynthesis can be summed up
in the following equation
Chlorophyll
6CO₂ + 6H₂0
C₆H₁₂O₆ + 60₂
Sunlight
2.7.4. Testing a leaf for starch
A simple way of demonstrating food synthesis in leaves is testing a
leaf for starch. You can easily see the effect of iodine on starch, if
you put iodine solution on powdered starch, piece of bread or potato
slice a blue-black colour will develop confirming the presence of
starch. However, the cuticle of the leaf is impermeable to iodine.
Moreover, the leaf has green pigment chlorophyll that interferes with
the colouring effect of iodine. The next experiment will enable what
you should do to solve these two problems before testing the leaf for
starch.
36
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.14: TESTING LEAF FOR STARCH
Materials required: fresh green leaf, beaker, heat source ( Bunsen burner or electric stove), test tube,
alcohol, iodine solution
Procedure
Depending on the availability of the materials required, you can perform the experiment in a group
or follow your teacher when the experiment is demonstrated in class.
Follow the experimental design illustrated hereunder and write the purpose of each step (Steps 1 - 4).
For the sake of safety use forceps to put the leaf into or take it out from beakers with boiling water
and hot alcohol.
What is the danger that can possibly happen in step 2 if you do not first turn off the Bunsen burner?
Leaf in boiling
Leaf in alcohol
Leaf in Cold
Leaf in iodine
water
(Turn off
water
solution
(Turn on
bunsen burner)
bunsen burner)
Why is the leaf boiled in water? Why is it treated with alcohol? Why did you put it in beaker
containing cold water.
2.8 Transport in plant
Objectives
How are different
materials, such as
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
water, mineral and food
identify routes of water, mineral, and organic matter transport
transported to and from
in plants,
different parts of the
discuss the mechanism of transport in plants,
plant such as root, stem
tell the importance of transport in plants and
and leaf?
demonstrate water transport in plants using simple experiments
What are the routes of
material transport in
2.8.1 Transporting systems in plants
plants?
You know that higher plants have a green leaf that is capable of
photosynthesis. But, do you know the route through which the raw
materials, water and minerals, move from roots to leaves and how
food manufactured from the leaves reach the rest of the plant? This
will be clear after you learn about the transporting vessels of higher
plants commonly called vascular bundles.
Figure 2.15 illustrates the arrangement of the two transporting
vessels, xylem and phloem in the root. They are collectively known
as vascular bundles. Water and minerals are transported from the
Grade 10 Biology
37
Unit Two: Plants
root to the leaf via the stem through conducting vessel known as
xylem, which consists of elongated dead cells, joined end to end to
form continuous vessels. On the other hand, organic matter (food)
manufactured in the leaf is transported to the rest of the plant parts by
conducting vessels known as phloem. As opposed to xylem, phloem
consists of living cells arranged end to end and allows transport of
food (sucrose and amino acids) up and down the plant. This is called
translocation. In general, it happens between where these substances
are made (Sources) and where they are used or stored (the sinks).
phloem
xylem
Figure 2.15 Root vascular bundles
Do you know why the stem of sugar cane or stem tuber of sweet
potato is so sweet? Sugars synthesized in the leaf is converted to
starch and accumulated in the storage organs of plants, such as root
and stem tubers, leaves, seeds and fruits of a plant. We, human beings
take advantage of food in these storage organs. Starch from plants is
a good source of energy that we need in our diet.
ACTIVITY 2.15: GROUP WORK
Hint
Water is a raw material for photosynthesis. Water is badly required at
the seedling stage as it gives strength to the plant. A young seedling
is delicate and easily wilts if there is a scarcity of water or loss of
water by evaporation.
Direction
Discuss with your small group how drought affects agricultural
productivity or food production.
Why are rainy months the best time for agriculture? Why is
irrigation needed, particularly during drought or in dry areas?
38
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.8.2 Mechanism of transport in plant
i. Uptake of water and minerals
Water from the soil first enters the root through root hairs. These
are elongated single cells that provide a large surface area allowing
more water to enter into the root. Minerals also enter the root
together with the water. This process is known as absorption. Water
entering the root passes from cell to cell either by osmosis across
the cell membrane and cytoplasm or freely flow by diffusion along
the porous cell wall. Thus, water passes passively (without spending
additional energy from the cell) across the root cells and reaches the
root xylem (Figure 2.16).
Water in the root xylem is pulled upward passively by transpiration
pull. This is pulling force caused by transpiration ; it is the main
force responsible for the water passing all the way from the root to
the leaves through the xylem vessel. During transpiration water that
evaporates from the leaves serve as a mechanism to pull or drag water
from the root.
H2O
Evaporation from leaves pulls
water upwardfrom the roots
H2O
through water conducting cells.
H2O
Adhesion of water to the cell wal
by hydrogen bonds help resist
the downward pull of gravity.
Two types of water
conducting cells
Direction
of water
movement
Cohesion due to hydrogen
bonds between water molecules
helps hold together the column
of water within the cells.
H2O
H2O
Figure 2.16 Transport of water and minerals from root to the leaf via
the stem
Minerals enter the root in the ionic (charged) form either passively
or actively. They are taken actively (cell spends energy) when
concentration is higher in plant cell than outside the cell and,
therefore accumulation of salts or their ions occur as a result of active
transport against a concentration gradient.
Grade 10 Biology
39
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.16: COLOURED CELERY EXPERIMENT
Have you ever wondered how water rises upward in the stem towards the leaf? You can see how this
happens in the following home experiment. You can do it alone or with your pair in class.
All you should do is to repeat the classic dyed celery experiment that shows water rises up in the
stem and how transpiration helps to suck up water. The celery plant is a leafy small plant with a
transparent stalk or stem. You can use any other plant with a similar feature as long as it is available
in your locality.
Cut your celery stem diagonally to provide a large surface area for the colored water to pass
through (like as it is done to put the fresh flower into a vase).
Take photographs or make observational drawings of the celery appearance initially.
Put Beaker "A" in dark place (fully sheltered), Beaker "B" in partially sheltered place and Beaker "C"
where there is a bright sunlight. Leave the beakers for some time (4 to 6 hours).
Again take photographs or make observational drawings and compare the initial and final result
Write a short report on dyed celery experiment and what has been demonstrated. Prepare yourself
for class presentation as you may be randomly invited by your teacher for class presentation.
A
B
c
ii. Translocation of organic matter (food)
How can we demonstrate
Translocation in plants is a shift or transport of food from the site
that food transport
of synthesis (source), which is the leaf, to the site of utilization or
occurs through phloem ?
storage (sink), which can be either the stem or the root. Translocation
occurs through the phloem, which is made up of living cells. It is an
active transport, where the living phloem cells use energy obtained
by metabolic process.
The ringing or girdling experiment as designed in Figure 2.17 helps
to identify the food conducting vessels. The experiment involves
removing the ring of bark with the phloem and the plant is placed in
a beaker of water. Xylem will be the only vessel in the girdled area,
Ring of bark
Swollen
removed
which connects the upper and lower part of the plant. After few days,
tissue
Xylem
a swelling will be observed in the upper girdle. This is due to the
accumulation of food materials, mainly sugar which was translocated
Water
from the photosynthesizing leaf towards the root. The sugar can be
sucked with syringe or using aphids and can be confirmed with food
Figure 2.17 Ringing /Girdling
test. Aphids are soft - bodied insects that use piercing and sucking
experiment
mouth parts to feed on phloem sap.
40
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Ringing will ultimately kill the plant, because of disruption of food
transport through the phloem. The root dies first, because supply of
food to the root will be discontinued. As the root dies, the upper part
and finally the whole plant, which depends on root for water and
minerals, will die.
2.9 Response in plants
Objectives
If you have potted plant
placed near the window
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
of your room, to which
recognize that plants are capable of giving response
direction does the plant
explain some common responses in plant
turn its shoot? Why is
this so?
tell the importance response in plants and
demonstrate response in plants using simple experiments
If you add water to one
side of your potted plant,
what do you think will
2.9.1 Tropism as growth response
happen to the root?
In section 2.1 of this unit, you learned that plants like other living things
share basic characteristics. One of their important characteristics is
to respond to stimuli, that is, changes in the environment. In this
section, you will learn mainly tropism, how plants respond to light
(phototropism), water (hydrotropism) and gravity (geotropism).
Thus, we will deal with these three common and useful tropisms.
Tropism is bending towards (positive response) or opposite (negative
response) to the direction of the stimulus. The cause of the response
is a unilateral stimulus (coming from one side only), which causes
unequal production or distribution of growth hormone resulting
in unequal growth. This means one side grows more or less than
the other side and these results in bending towards or away from
the stimulus. Tropism is exhibited by the shoot and root of a plant
due to unequal concentration of growth hormone, commonly auxin,
resulting in unequal growth.
Auxin, particularly Indole Acetic Acid (IAA), is plant growth
hormone. It is produced at the tips of shoot and root. It is transported
to the region of active growth and affects cell elongation, Shoot and
roots respond differently to different auxin concentration. Figure
2.18 helps to know how shoots and roots respond differently to
unilateral ( one sided) stimulus The graph ( Figure 2.18) shows that
auxin concentration that promotes shoot growth ( 10 -2 to 10¹ ppm)
inhibits root growth It also shows that root requires minimum auxin
How does auxin affect
shoot and root growth?
concentration, which is about 10 -4 ppm and such concentration has
no effect on the shoot growth.
Grade 10 Biology
41
Unit Two: Plants
200
What is the response of
the shoot to unilateral
Stimulation
percentage
50
(one - sided) light ?
00
Growth response
50
Roots
0
Shoots
Figure 2.18 Effects of auxin
Inhibition
percentage
50
100
concentrations on the growth
10⁻⁶
10-⁴
10⁻²
1
10²
10⁴
of shoots and roots
Concentration of auxins (ppm, parts per million)
How shoot and root respond to unilateral light is well demonstrated
by Figure 2.19. As a result of unilateral light, auxin move from
illuminated side to shaded side of shoot and root. In shoot higher
auxin concentration on the shaded side causes more growth by cell
elongation than the illuminated side. As a result, the shoot bends
towards light. In the mean time, more auxin on the shaded part of
the root inhibits cell elongation as compared to the illuminated side.
Thus, root bends away from light.
Shoot
unilateral light
cells on the
cells on the
shaded side
illuminated side
cells on the
cells on the
Figure 2.19 How unilateral light
shaded side
illuminated side
affects shoot and root response
shaded side
illuminated side
Root
Phototropism
Plants need sunlight for photosynthesis. Phototropism is a plant
response to light, mainly exhibited by the shoot. The tips of the plant
shoot bend towards the side where there is sunlight. Thus shoot is
positively phototropic. The earliest experiment on phototropism was
conducted by Charles Darwin, "father of evolution", (Figure 2.20). He
noticed that if the light is shone on a coleoptile (shoot tip of young
seedling) from one side, the shoot bends or curves (grows) toward
the light (Seedling '1' and partially seedling '4'). The bending did not
occur in the tip itself but in the elongating part just below.
When the tip is removed (Seedling '2') or covered with opaque foil
42
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
(Seedling '3'), the shoot could no longer bend toward the light.
Moreover, covering the lower shoot part (Seedling '5') did not
ACTIVITY 2.17: Experiment
on phototropism
affect the response to light at all. Based on his experiment, Darwin
concluded that "some influence is transmitted from the tip to the
Materials required
more basal regions of the shoot thereby regulating growth and
Two pots, soil, bean seeds,
inducing curvature or bending". At present, it is well known that it is
dark cloth, hard paper box
a growth hormone known as auxin that will be distributed more on
(cartoon)
the tip side opposite to light. This causes more growth on the shaded
Procedure
side and curving will occur toward the light.
Germinate some bean
seeds in two different pots
Prepare a hard box and
Sun Light
cover it with light proof
Tip Covered by
Tip Covered by
dark cloth and make a
opaque cap
Transparent cap
Control
Base Covered
small round hole on one
by opaque cap
Tip Removed
side
When the shoots are about
6cm, put one pot in the
1
2
3
4
5
dark box, and the other
pot open (without the
box).
Leave both pots in a well
illuminated (with light)
place
Figure 2.20 Darwin's experiment on phototropism
After 2-3 days observe
what has happened to the
Hydrotropism
seedlings in the two pots
The survival of terrestrial plants depends upon the capacity of roots
Write your conclusion and
to obtain water and nutrients from the soil. Roots search for and grow
prepare a short report on
toward water because it is needed for photosynthesis and to support
the experiment
cell structure (make them turgid and strong). Thus, hydrotropism
exhibited by root is biologically important and vital for the survival
What is the effect of
of plants.
water on root growth ?
ACTIVITY 2.18: Demonstration of hydrotropism
Procedure
A
Take two beakers - "A" and "B". Follow the picture below and add moist soil
and SOW the seed in Beaker "A". In beaker "B" add dry soil in half part and
Root Grows
moist soil in another part and SOW the seeds. Keep both beakers for 2-3 days
Straight
for germination to take place.
Moist Soil
Moist Soil
Questions
1. How do you explain what you observed in Beaker "A" and "B"?
B
2. If you had filled the whole beaker with dry soil and put wet cotton or wet
sponge on the top of the soil at one side, how would the root have grown?
Root Grows to
ward water
Downward (toward gravity) or upward (against gravity)? Is the root
response stronger, for water or gravity? [ You need to do the experiment in
Dry Soil
Moist Soil
order to answer these questions ]
Grade 10 Biology
43
Unit Two: Plants
Shoot
Geotropism
What is the effect of gravity on shoot and root growth at
seedling stage?
Root
You have learned that the seed embryo that develops into a seedling
will form root from the radicle and shoot from the plumule. The
Figure 2.21 Seed embryo
developing into a seedling in an
most fascinating phenomena are how the seedling (young plant)
upright position
stands erect (Figure 2.21). This is the result of a response to gravity,
known as geotropism. The root progressively bends downward while
the shoot bends upward until root-shoot system orient itself in an
upright (standing position), when there is a uniform effect of gravity.
As shown in Figure 2.22, a horizontally placed seedling responds
Shoot Negatively
to gravity in that its root is positively geotropic (grow downward or
Geotropic
towards gravity) and shoot is negatively geotropic (grow upward or
against gravity).
ACTIVITY 2.19: GROUP WORK
Root Positively
Materials required
Geotropic
Bean seeds, Blotting /soft paper, Petridish
Figure 2.22 Plant responses to
Procedure
gravity
Germinate some bean seeds placed on wet blotting paper in a
petridish.
When the radicles and plumules emerged, arrange the seedling
in to two different position. Place some seedlings in a horizontal
position and others vertically with the radicle facing upwards.
Leave the set up for 2 to 3 days in the dark to eliminate the effect
of light.
Observe what happens to the direction of growth of the radicles
and plumules.
Make careful drawing. Note what the experiment verified as to the
effect of gravity on shoot and root growth.
Figure 2.23 Effect of clinostat on
How can we overcome the effect of gravity on root and shoot
gravity (geotropism)
growth of a seedling?
Self Test
The effect of gravity in a horizontally placed seedling can be
overcome by a clinostat, which is a rotating instrument. A seedling
What will happen to a
fixed horizontally in a rotating clinostat grows straight (Figure 2.23),
plant if it does not exhibit
because the rotation overcome (gravity acts equally for all sides) the
phototropism, hydrotropism
effect of gravity. You can see the effect of rotation by using another
and geotropism?
seedling fixed to the clinostat but not rotated as a control.
44
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
2.10 Medicinal plants
Objectives
What are medicinal
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
plants? What is their
tell the importance of medicinal plants and
importance to local
list down locally available medicinal plants
people?
From sub-topic 2.7 of this unit, you learned that plants synthesize
a variety of organic products that have food value. But, plants also
produce other organic products that have ornamental, commercial
Self Test
and medicinal values. Here, we will focus on the medicinal plants
that play a vital role in treating diseases and fighting infections.
What is the contribution
Globally, more than 60 % of the total world population depends on
of medicinal plants
and traditional healers
traditional or locally available plant medicines for their health care.
(herbalists) to modern
(According to World Health Organization (WHO), nearly 3.5 billion
medicine?
people in developing countries including Ethiopia believe in the
efficiency of plant medicines and widely use them to overcome their
health problems. The list of some Ethiopian medicinal plants, parts
used, mode of administration and some examples of human diseases
treated are presented in table 2.3.
Table 2.2 List of medicinal plants and disease treated
No.
Scientific name
Local name
Habit
Plant part used
Route of ad-
Disease treated
( Amharic)
ministration
1.
Ruta chalepensis
Teenadem
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Abdominal pain
2.
Zingiber officinalis
Jinjibil
Herb
Rhizome (under-
Oral
Tonsilitis , abdominal pain,
ground stem)
cough
3.
Hagenia abysinica
Ye-kosso Zaf
Tree
Female flower
Oral
Tapeworm
(Seed)
4.
Artemesia absin-
Aritii
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Unexplained stomach ache
thium
(Megagna)
5.
Niglella sativa
Tikur Azmud
Herb
Seed
Oral
Intestinal parasites
6.
Ocimum lamifolium
Damakesse
Shrub
Leaf
Nasal
Headache, General body
illness ( Mich)
7.
Rosmarinus offici-
Rosmery
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Bronchial asthma.
nalis
Prostate disorder
inflammatory diseases
8.
Cymbopogen ciratus
Tejsar
Herb/
Leaf
Oral
Used for stomach complaint
Grass
9.
Alium sativum
Nechshinkurt
Herb
bulb
Oral
Abdominal pain, toothache,
tonsillitis, common cold
10.
Eucalyptus golbulus
Nech-Bahir-
Tree
Leaf
Nasal
Common cold, fever with
zaf
headache
11.
Curcurbita pepo
Dubba
Herb
Seed
Oral
Tapeworm
12.
Trigonella
Abish
Herb
Seed
Oral
Mixed with garlic to treat
foenumgraecum
asthma, used to treat gas-
tritis
13.
Ocimum basilicum
Besobilla
Herb
Leaf
Oral
Abdominal pain
14.
Lepidium sativum
Feto
Herb
Seed
Oral
Treatment of diarrhea
Grade 10 Biology
45
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.20: Group work
Procedure
Divide the following local medicinal plants among your small group.
Lippia adoensis ("Kosseret")
Thymus schimperi ("Tossign")
Echinos kebericho ("Kebericho")
Taverniera abyssinica ("Dingetegna")
Moringa stenopetala ("Shiferaw" or "Aleko")
Ask your parents or elders in your locality about parts of the medicinal plant used, mode of
administration and some examples of human diseases treated.
Prepare summary as it is done for the 14 medicinal plants indicated in the previous table.
Submit your summary table to your teacher for comment and presentation to your classmates.
Remark :
While collecting medicinal plants student need to use hand gloves (some students can be allergic to
the plants), not taste and ingest them or inhale if they have volatile substance. It will be safe to wash
hands after handling the plants.
Students in the pastoralist areas can form a group to collect key information and the medicinal plants
used for livestock. They should ask their teacher for guidance and finally present their result in class
as summarized in table 2.2.
2.11 Renowned Ethiopian Botanist
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
appreciate the work of a renowned botanist and
look for more Ethiopian Botanists who contributed a lot to plant
science
Sebsebe Demissew is a professor of Plant systematics and
Biodiversity at Addis Ababa University and Executive Director of
the Gullele Botanic Garden in Addis Ababa. He was awarded the
Kew international medal in 2016. Professor Sebsebe Demissew, a
leading Ethiopian botanical scientist, has been elected as a Foreign
Member of the Royal Society in London in 2018 for his lifelong work
on promoting Ethiopian biodiversity. He is the first Sub - Saharan
African scientist to be elected in the Society's 357 - year history.
In 2021, Professor Sebsebe was awarded the "Cuatrcases Medal" for
Excellence in Tropical Botany by the Smitheonian National Museum
of Natural History ", USA, for his lifetime works in conserving and
recording the very diverse Ethiopian flora with many endemic species
and leadership of the Ethiopian flora project and the Ethiopian
National Herbarium at Addis Ababa University.
46
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
ACTIVITY 2.21 LIBRARY SEARCH
Direction: Carefully read the work of Prof. Sebsebe and share your impression to a friend sitting with
you.
Form a group of four students and perform team work to look for more renowned Ethiopian Botanists
from books and /or internet. Organize a report to share to your classmates.
Unit Summary
Plants are living things that are multicellular, autotrophic, and sessile and exhibit both asexual and
sexual reproduction pattern.
Higher plants are vascular with well - developed root, stem and leaf, Based on their reproductive
system, they can be categorized as non- flowering and flowering plants
The non - flowering, known as gymnosperms have no flowers. Instead, their reproductive organ is
cone. Moreover, the seeds produced in their cone are without cover (naked seeds).
Flowering plants, commonly known as Angiosperms, are also vascular with well-developed root,
stem and leaves. But unlike gymnosperms, they have flowers and produce seeds within a fruit.
A typical angiosperm has shoot and root system in its external structure. The shoot system grows
above the ground and includes the organs such as stem, branches, leaves, buds and flower
The root system usually grows down ward into the ground. It includes the primary or tap root, lateral
or branch roots and root hairs.
The internal structure of a leaf consists two layers, namely the outer layer (upper and lower epider-
mis) and the inner or middle layer. The epidermis contains cuticle and stomata, to minimize water
loss and allow gas exchange respectively.
The middle layer consists of the palisade and mesophyll cells that are contain chlorophyll to absorb
sunlight. They also contain vascular bundles to transport water, minerals and food.
The internal structure of a stem consists of different layers including epidermis, hypodermis, cortex,
endodermis and pith.
A cross-section of a root shows different layers, namely epiblema, cortex, endodermis, pericycle,
vascular bundles and pith.
The sexual reproduction of an angiosperm starts with pollination, followed by the fusion of gametes,
which results in a zygote. The zygote develops into a seed embryo within a seed (matured ovule).
Then seed will be dispersed away from the parent plant by animals, wind and water.
Seed undergoes germination if it gets optimum moisture, warmth and nutrients.
The ultimate source of energy that sustains life comes from the sun. Chlorophyll bearing algae and
higher plants trap solar energy and transform it into chemical energy.
The process of photosynthesis is the result of light absorbed by chlorophyll and other accessory
pigments resulting in the release of oxygen from water and in the formation of reduced carbon com-
pounds (e.g carbohydrates) from carbon dioxide.
Transport in plants occurs through vascular bundles, xylem and phloem. Water and minerals are
transported through the xylem while food (organic matter) is translocated through the phloem.
Passive transport of water occurs as a result of diffusion, osmosis and transpiration pull, while miner-
als are transported as ions passively or actively. Food transport in phloem occurs by the expenditure
of energy (actively).
Tropism is a common response displayed by plants. It is response unidirectional or unilateral (one-sided)
stimulus by bending towards (positive tropism) or away (negative tropism).
Phototropism, hydrotropism and geotropism are a response to light, water and gravity respectively.
The root is positively hydrotropic and geotropic, while the shoot is positively phototropic but negatively
hydrotropic.
Medicinal plants play a vital role in treating diseases and fighting infections.
Grade 10 Biology
47
Unit Two: Plants
Review Questions
True - False items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise book.
1. Cone is reproductive structure of fruit bearing plants.
2. CO2 is used in the stroma of the chloroplast.
3. A root hair is single cell.
4. Self pollination is possible in imperfect flower.
Multiple choice items: Choose the correct answer from A- D and write on your exercise book.
1. Which structure transports water to the leaf of a plant?
A) Guard cell
B) Phloem
C) Stomata
D) Xylem
2. Clinostat is used in the study of
A) Osmosis
B) Growth movements
C) Leaf transpiration
D) Photosynthesis
3. Which leaf part or layer contains the largest number of chloroplasts?
A) Epidermis B) Palisade
C) Cortex
D) Spongy
4. One of the following is not major characteristics of plants
A) Plants are composed of many eukaryotic cells
B) Plants are sessile or do not show mobility
C) Plants are hetrotrophic in their feeding habit
D) Plants show both sexual and asexual reproduction
5. The two products of photosynthesis include
A) Carbondioxide and Oxygen
C) Carbon dioxide and water
B) Water and carbohydrate
D) Oxygen and Carbohydrate
6. Given the following
1= Pollination;
2 = Seed dispersal;
3 = Pollen grains germination;
4 = Flowering;
5 = Seed germination
The correct order of steps in the reproduction of a mature plant is
A) 1, 3, 2, 4, 5
c) 4, 2, 5, 1, 3
B) 2, 5, 4, 1,3
d) 4, 1, 3, 2,5
48
Grade 10 Biology
Unit Two: Plants
Matching Items I: Match the description under "Column A" with the terms under "Column B".
Column A
Column B
1. May be termed as starch sheath
A) Cone
2. Cells that leave an open space in leaf epidermis
B) Endodermis
3. Give mechanical strength to the stem
C) Flower
4. Single cells best suited for absorption +
D) Guard cells
5. Is the site of origin of lateral roots
E) Hypodermis
6. Reproductive structure of angiopserms
F) Pericycle
G) Root hair
H) Stomata
Short Answer Items
1. How do you distinguish a root from an underground stem?
2. What is the difference between an incomplete flower and an imperfect flower?
3. What is the importance of rainfall to agriculture?
4. Write the type of tropism illustrated by the pictures below.
5. Carefully look at a flower diagram given below and label parts of the flower denoted by letters
A-E.
A
B
H
C
F
G
D
Grade 10 Biology
49
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Content
Learning competencies
3.1. Biochemical molecules
Identify inorganic and organic biochemical molecules
3.1.1. Inorganic molecules:
Explain the properties of water and its importance for life
water
Discuss different inorganic ions and their contribution to the
3.1.2. Inorganic ions
cell
3.1.3. Organic molecules
Classify organic molecules based on their constituent elements
Carbohydrates
and the monomers from which they are constructed
Lipids
Discuss the role of biological molecules in the cell structure
Proteins
Elaborate the functions of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and
Nucleic acids
Nucleic acids to the body
Conduct experiments to identify nutrients in different foodstuff
Appreciate why Ethiopians use malting seeds to make local
drinks (Tella, Areke)
3.1. Biochemical Molecules
Recall
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Grade 9 Unit 5
identify inorganic and organic biochemical molecules,
nutrients balanced diet as a
discuss different inorganic ions and their contribution to the
source of energy and health
cell,
explain the properties of water and its importance for life.
What are biological molecules, and how would you define them?
Make a list of all the biological molecules you are familiar with and
divide them into two categories: inorganic and organic. Finally,
talk about how they affect cell structure and function. After that, do
activity 3.1 given below.
Inorganic
Organic
compounds
compounds
Salt, NaCl
Both
Must contain carbon
May or may
Contained
Formaldehyde,
contain carbon
in living
CH₂O and
organisms
Sometimes
Contain carbon and
contains sodium,
hydrogen
Sometimes contains
oxygen or
nitrogen, oxygen,
calcium, but
sulfur, or
without carbon
phosphorus with
carbon
50
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Attention
Activity 3.1 Write the bio-
molecules
Our body is made up of two types of biochemical molecules:
Based on the knowledge you
organic and inorganic molecules.
have and referring to books
Biochemical molecules that do not contain both carbon and
and internet, write about
hydrogen are known as inorganic biochemical molecules. Many
1) Inorganic compounds 2)
inorganic compounds, such as water (H₂O) and the hydrochloric
Organic compounds and 3)
acid (HCl) generated by your stomach, include hydrogen atoms.
both inorganic and organic
Only a few inorganic compounds, on the other hand, contain
molecules contained in
carbon atoms. One of such examples is carbon dioxide (CO₂).
living organisms as shown
in the chart at the left hand
Organic biological molecules are made up of both carbon and
hydrogen atoms. Covalent bonds are used to make organic
corner. Finally, your teacher
biochemical compounds in living creatures, including the human
will provide you with
body. Carbon and hydrogen, respectively, are the second and third
possible list of molecules.
most abundant elements in your body. You will soon figure out how
these two elements interact in the meals you eat, the compounds
that make up your bodily structure, and the chemicals that keep you
running.
3.1.1 Inorganic molecule: Water
Objectives
Why water is considered
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
as a biochemical
mention properties of water,
molecule?
discuss the importance of water for the living organisms.
Inorganic molecules, as previously stated, do not contain carbon and
were not created through biological means except oxides of carbon
and carbonate ions. Certain inorganic molecules play critical roles in
the survival of living organisms. Water is an example of an inorganic
molecule. Section 3.1.1.1 below discusses the properties of water and
its importance in the living system. Before reading this section, please
answer the following question and complete activity 3.2.
3.1.1.1. The properties of water
Water is an inorganic molecule composed of two elements: hydrogen
and oxygen. H₂O is its chemical formula. Each water molecule is
composed of two hydrogen atoms linked to a single oxygen atom. Life
would not exist on our planet if it did not have access to water. It is
significant for two reasons: it is a key component of cells, accounting
for 70 to 95 percent of the cells mass. You are around 60% water.
Activity 3.2 Group work
Water, although being a simple molecule, has some surprising
Form a group of 3-4 students
qualities. In a water molecule, each hydrogen atom shares an electron
and list down the properties
of water and how these are
pair with the oxygen atom. In the O-H bonds in water, oxygen is
related to its importance to
more electronegative than hydrogen. Thus, the sharing of electrons
life.
Grade 10 Biology
51
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
between H and O is unequal; the electrons are more often in the
vicinity of the oxygen atom than hydrogen. This unequal electron
sharing creates two electric dipoles in the water molecule with
oxygen-bearing a partial negative charge and hydrogen bearing a
partial positive charge. This makes water a polar molecule (see Figure
3.1). The polarity of water has important chemical implications
conferring its typical properties. Another important consequence
of the polarity of the water molecule is that water molecules attract
one another. The partially positively charged hydrogen atom of one
What typical properties of
water molecule can interact with the partially negatively charged
water do you know?
oxygen atoms of another molecule of water. This interaction is called
a hydrogen bond. The hydrogen bond network of water molecules
confers several unique properties on water that are important for
sustaining life.
Some typical properties of water are:
1. Water as a solvent
H+
Water is an effective solvent for ions and polar molecules (molecules
H2O = +
with an unequal charge distribution, such as sugars and glycerol)
H+
because the water molecules (Figure 3.1) are attracted to the ions and
polar molecules, causing them to congregate and separate (Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.1 Structure of
water molecule
Figure 3.2 shows what happens when a chemical dissolves in water.
Once a chemical is in solution, it is free to move about and react with
other chemicals.
positively charged
negatively charged
ion(cation e.g. Na+)
ion(anion e.g. Cl-)
H
H
H
H
O
H
-
+
H
water
H
H
molecule
H
H
oxygen (28-)
hydrogen (δ+)
H
faces the ion
faces the ion
H
Figure 3.2 Distribution of water molecules around ions in a solution
However, non-polar molecules such as lipids are insoluble in water
and, if surrounded by water, tend to be pushed together by the water,
since the water molecules are attracted to each other.
2. High specific heat capacity
A substance's heat capacity is the amount of heat required to raise
its temperature by a particular amount. The specific heat capacity of
water is the amount of heat energy necessary to raise the temperature
of one gram of water by one degree Celsius. The heat capacity of water
52
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
is rather high. To raise the temperature of a liquid, the molecules
must obtain energy and so move more quickly. The hydrogen bonds
that cause water molecules to adhere together make it difficult for
the molecules to move freely; the ties must be broken to allow free
mobility. This explains why more energy is required to raise the
temperature of water than would be required if hydrogen bonds did
not exist. In effect, hydrogen bonding permits water to store more
energy than would otherwise be feasible for a given temperature
increase. Water's high heat capacity has crucial biological results
since it makes the water more resistant to temperature changes.
3. High latent heat of vaporization
The latent heat of vaporization is a measure of the thermal energy
required to vaporize a liquid, converting it from a liquid to a gas.
In the case of water, it entails the transformation of liquid water
into water vapour. Water has a comparatively high latent heat of
vaporization. This is due to its high heat capacity. Because water
molecules tend to stick together via hydrogen bonds, very significant
quantities of energy are required for vaporization to occur because
hydrogen bonds must be broken before molecules can escape as gas.
4. Density and freezing properties
Water is a unique molecule in that its solid form, ice, is less dense
than its liquid form. Water density begins to fall below 4°C. As
a result, ice floats on liquid water and insulates the water beneath
it. This minimizes the likelihood of big amounts of water freezing
entirely and increases the likelihood of life surviving under cold
temperatures. Changes in water density as a result of temperature
generate currents, which aid in the circulation of nutrients in the
oceans.
5. High surface tension and cohesion
Water molecules have very high cohesion; in other words, they tend
to stick to each other. These cohesive forces are connected to water's
adhesion property, or the attraction of water molecules to other
Adhesion
molecules. This attraction can be stronger than water's cohesive
Capilary
activity
forces, especially when the water is exposed to charged surfaces like
those found on the interior of thin glass tubes known as capillary
tubes (Figure 3.3). Water "climbs" up the tube placed in a glass of
water, causing the water to look higher on the sides of the tube than
in the middle. This is due to the fact that water molecules are more
attracted to the charged glass walls of the capillary than to each other
and hence adhere to it. Capillary action is the name given to this
sort of adhesion. As described in unit 2, figure 2.16, cohesive and
Figure 3.3 Cohesion and
adhesive forces are crucial for the transport of water from the roots
adhesion (H20)
to the leaves in plants.
Grade 10 Biology
53
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
High cohesion also results in high surface tension at the surface of
the water. This allows certain small organisms, such as raft spiders,
to exploit the surface of the water as a habitat, allowing them to settle
on or skate over its surface (Figure 3.4).
6. Boiling and Freezing Points
The ability of water molecules to form hydrogen bonds, as shown
Figure 3.4 Surface tension
in figure 3.5, is responsible for many of water's unique properties.
allowing Raft spider to walk
on the water surface
Despite its low molecular weight, it has a very high boiling point
(100°C). This is due to the fact that water requires more energy
to break its hydrogen bonds before it can begin to boil. The same
Activity 3.3 Answer to the
concept is used to calculate the freezing point. The boiling and
question
freezing points of water is important for aquatic ecosystems. If water
Explain the importance of
is easily frozen or boiled, drastic changes in the environment would
properties of water in:
affect bodies of water such as oceans or lakes, killing all organisms
a. transpiration
that live in water. This is also why sweat can keep our bodies cool.
b. the movement of
Consider how water differs from most other compounds in terms of
organisms on water
its boiling and freezing points (Table 3.1).
surface
c. during temperature
Table 3.1 Boiling and freezing points of water
fluctuations in water
Compound
Boiling Point
Freezing Point
bodies
Ethanol
78.4°C
-114.6°C
d. prevention of water born
Acetic acid
117.9°C
16.6°C
diseases
Hydrogen Sulfide
-62°C
-84°C
Water
100°C
0°C
3.1.2 Inorganic ions
What are inorganic ions?
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
mention important inorganic ions that are necessary for life,
mention diets that contain inorganic ions,
discuss the effect of deficiency of nutrient elements in our body,
explain the importance of each nutrient element to the human
body.
Inorganic ions are charged entities because they are atoms with
unshared electrons in their outer shell. They are either positively
Activity 3.4 Group
or negatively charged. They are virtually usually coupled with an
discussion
oppositely charged ion. Inorganic ions are found in living bodies in
Form a group of 2-3
two forms: free and dissolved in the cytoplasm and associated with
students and discuss what
complex organic substances. They participate in a variety of critical
inorganic ions are and their
functions in living things. Although they are only found in trace
contribution to our body.
amounts in our bodies, their significance cannot be overstated. Any
Then present your findings
to your classmates.
variations in their concentrations inside the human body can have
catastrophic implications.
54
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
When discussing inorganic ions in the context of the human body,
they are frequently referred to as minerals. In this section, you will
What is the difference
go over some of the most important inorganic ions in the human
between inorganic ions
body, including their occurrence, sources, and role in homeostasis
and minerals?
maintenance. You will also investigate the clinical conditions caused
by alterations in their usual concentrations as part of your tasks.
Classification of inorganic ions
Based on their requirement in the daily diet of a normal individual,
inorganic ions or minerals in the human body are divided into two
categories; Macro-nutrients & Micro-nutrients.
Table 3.2 Macro and micro-nutrients in living systems
Macro-nutrients: required in
Micro-nutrients/trace
bigger quantities in the daily
elements: required in small
diet
amounts
Sodium, Phosphorus,
Iron, Copper,
Magnesium, Potassium, Sulfur,
Iodine,
Chloride
Manganese, etc
a. Hydrogen ions
These are the most important ions to maintain balance and
Why macronutrients
equilibrium in living systems. They are released in the cells during
are required more than
various metabolic processes. They are found in the cytoplasm of cells
micronutrients in our
as well as in the inter-cellular fluid, blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
diet?
and other body fluids.
What is the importance of the hydrogen ion?
The concentration of hydrogen ions is expressed as pH. The pH scale
ranges from 1 to 14. The pH value has an inverse relationship with
the concentration of hydrogen ions; that is, the higher the pH, the
lower and the concentration of hydrogen ions.
b. Sodium ions
The sodium ion is the body's second most important positively
charged ion. The concentration of sodium ions in extracellular fluids
How much is the body
is higher than in cell cytoplasm. It is a critical nutrient that must be
requirement of sodium
consumed in order for the human body to function normally.
ions for a human being?
The average person's salt need is between 3 and 6 grams per day. It is
What is the impact of
commonly consumed in the form of common salt found in our foods.
high sodium intake?
The average daily sodium intake exceeds the body's requirements.
The urines of the body eliminate excess salt. To maintain normal
blood pressure in patients with high blood pressure, lesser salt intakes
are required.
Grade 10 Biology
55
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
It is an extracellular cation that is common in body fluids but is
What is the other
present in lower concentrations within cells.
importance of Sodium
ions?
c. Potassium ions
These are also positively charged ions abundantly present in our
bodies. Contrary to sodium ions, potassium ions are the major
intracellular cations, being in higher concentration within the
cytoplasm of the cells.
How much is the body requirement of potassium and where do
we get it from?
Potassium ions must be taken in daily diet. An average human being
must intake 3 to 4 grams of potassium daily. It is abundantly present
in fruits like bananas, oranges, vegetables like potatoes, and meat like
that of chicken and liver.
Potassium is one of the body's electrolytes that carry an electric
charge when dissolved in body fluids such as blood. Most of the
What is the importance of
body's potassium is located inside the cells. Potassium is necessary
Potassium ions?
for the normal functioning of cells, nerves, and muscles. The body
can use the large reservoir of potassium stored within cells to help
maintain a constant level of potassium in blood. Its concentration in
plasma is much raised during hemolysis (destruction) of red blood
cells.
d. Calcium ion
Calcium is the most abundant inorganic ion present in our body
having great importance. It is a positively charged ion mainly present
in the cytoplasm of cells. Bones and teeth are the major organs having
a lot of calcium.
How much is the body requirement of calcium and where do we
get it from?
The calcium requirements of a healthy human are around 800 mg/
day. Milk and milk products are the ideal sources of calcium in our
diet. Besides, leafy vegetables, egg yolk, fish, and beans, etc. also
contain a lot of calcium.
Calcium makes around 1 to 1.5 kg of our body weight. Although 99%
What is the importance of
of calcium is present in bones and teeth, around 1% of calcium is in
Calcium ions?
the cytoplasm of other cells and extracellular fluid performs several
important functions in our body. Calcium concentration in the
plasma is around 9-11 mg/dl.
56
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
e. Phosphate ions
These are the negatively charged inorganic ions abundantly present
in our bodies. The body of an average man contains around 1 Kg of
phosphate ions. Most of the phosphate ions are presently combined
with calcium in bones and teeth.
Its requirements are equivalent to calcium. An adult male needs to
take 800 mg of phosphate ions daily in his diet. Milk, cereals, meat,
How much is the body
and eggs are rich sources of phosphate ions. The plasma concentration
requirement and
of phosphate ions is around 3-4 mg/dl. It is more abundantly present
from where do we get
in the cells.
Phosphate ions?
f. Chloride ions
These are the negatively charged inorganic ions present in
extracellular fluids. Its concentration in the body is almost similar to
that of sodium ions, the major extracellular cations.
What are the sources and body requirements of Chloride ions?
Its average daily requirement is 5 to 10 grams. It is usually taken along
with sodium in the form of NaCl present in cooked food.
Chloride ions perform their role in combination with sodium ions.
They are involved in maintaining the osmotic pressure, fluid balance,
What is the importance
and acid-base balance in our body, just like sodium. They are required
of Chloride ions to
to make Hydrochloric acid (HCl) present in gastric juice, which is
human beings?
necessary to digest proteins in the stomach. Hydrochloric acid (HCl)
in return kills bacteria and other pathogens in food when it enters
the stomach. Salivary amylase is an enzyme to digest starch that is
activated by chloride ions.
g. Iron ions
These are the positively charged ions present in or body. Around 70%
of iron ions in our body are present in haemoglobin within the red
blood cells. Source of iron: legumes such as beans, red meat, liver,
spinach, pumpkin seeds, fish, etc.
What is the importance of Iron ions to human beings?
As a component of haemoglobin and myoglobin, iron is needed for
the transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide in our bodies. It is an
essential component of cytochromes that are a component of the
What could be
electron transport chain. Iron is a component of the peroxidase
the consequence
enzyme, a lysosomal enzyme necessary for bacteria and other
of abnormal Iron
phagocytosed particles in the white blood cells.
metabolism in our body?
Grade 10 Biology
57
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Three clinical conditions associated with the abnormal iron
metabolism in our body are:
Iron-deficiency Anemia: a common condition in individuals with an
iron-deficient diet,
Hemosiderosis: characterized by excess iron in the body, and
Hemochromatosis: a condition which abnormal iron deposits are
formed in the liver, spleen, skin, and pancreas.
h. Copper ions
What are Copper ions?
Copper ions are the positively charged inorganic ions that are present
in our bodies. Source of copper ions include: shellfish, seeds and nuts,
organ meats, wheat, whole-grain, chocolate, etc. It is an essential
component of several important proteins and enzymes. They are
needed for the synthesis of haemoglobin, collagen, and elastin. Also,
What happens during
it is required for the normal development of the nervous system.
abnormal copper
metabolism?
Wilson disease is a rare clinical condition caused by abnormal copper
metabolism in our body. It is characterized by abnormal copper
deposition in the liver and brain causing hepatic cirrhosis and brain
damage. The copper deposition in kidneys can cause renal failure.
i. Iodine ions
What are the sources and body requirements of iodide ions?
Iodine is a type of mineral found naturally in the earth's soil and
ocean waters. Many salt water and plant-based foods contain iodine,
and this mineral is most-widely available in iodized salt. Iodine plays
a vital role in the thyroid health. Thyroid gland, which is located at
the base of the front of the neck, helps regulate hormone production.
These hormones control metabolism, heart health, etc.
To make thyroid hormones, thyroid gland takes up iodine in small
What is the impact of
amounts. Without iodine, thyroid hormone production can decrease.
iodine deficiency for
A "low" or under active thyroid gland can lead to a condition
brain development?
called hypothyroidism. You can get enough iodine from your diet by
eating dairy products, fortified foods, and salty water fish. Iodine is
also available in plant foods that grow in naturally iodine-rich soil.
You can also get the mineral by adding iodized salt in your food.
Goiter is an enlarged thyroid gland. Your thyroid may become
enlarged as a result from either hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
58
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Hyperthyroidism is an over-active thyroid gland. Amount of iodine
ions required for the normal body function in adolescents and adults
is 150 µg/day.
In order to summarize what you have studied in this section (3.1.2)
fill-in the blank spaces given in activity 3.5 below.
Activity 3.5 Fill in the blank spaces in the table
Fill in the blank spaces in the table with appropriate answers
Type of Inor-
Source of in-
Amount
Importance
Type of deficien-
Excess intake
ganic Ions
organic ions
required
cy disease
results in
Hydrogen ions
Sodium ions
Potassium ions
Calcium ions
Phosphate ions
Chlorine ions
Chloride ions
Iron ion
Copper ions
Iodine ions
3.1.3. Organic molecules
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discuss the role of biological molecules in the cell structure,
Classify organic molecules based on their constituent elements and the monomers from which they
are constructed.
elaborate the functions of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and Nucleic acids to the body,
conduct experiments to identify nutrients in different foodstuffs,
appreciate why Ethiopians use malting seeds to make local drinks (Tella, Areke), and
appreciate the significance of local drinks prepared from malting seeds in Ethiopia.
An organic molecule is a compound that contains carbon and is
found in living things. Carbon forms the basis of organic life due to
What are organic
its ability to form large and complex molecules via covalent bonding.
molecules?
Four principal groups of organic compounds contribute to much of
the structure and function of living things. These are carbohydrates,
lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids.
Grade 10 Biology
59
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
After your work on activity 3.6 above your teacher will introduce you
Activity 3.6 Group work
to the major organic molecules. The type of food items from which
After defining what the
we get the major organic molecules, the elements that form each
organic molecules are
organic molecule, the monomers and the results of polymerization
(above), in group of 3-4
of the monomers will be slightly introduced. Finally, you will do
students, explore the
laboratory activities (food tests) for each of the food item you study.
different kinds of organic
molecules, for instance, food
items you know, and sort
What monomers do make up organic molecules?
them into different types of
organic molecules. Then let
one of your members reflect
Organic molecules including carbohydrates, lipids, proteins,
on your classification. Let
him/she explain the basis for
and nucleic acids are made up of small, single molecular units
classification of e.g. the type
(monomers). Monomers are connected by strong covalent bonds to
of elements that constitute
create polymers. Polymers are long chains of molecules formed of
the organic molecule.
many single units bonded one after the other. Table 3.3 lists the basic
monomers that combine to produce organic molecules.
Table 3.3 Elements and monomers forming organic molecules
Organic molecules
Elements forming
Monomer
the molecule
Proteins
C, H, O and N
Amino acids
Lipids
C, H, O
Glycerol and fatty acid
Carbohydrates
C, H, O
Monosaccharides
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Nucleic acids
C, H, O, N and P
Nucleotides
Carbohydrates
Objectives
What are carbohydrates?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
name the different types of carbohydrates,
discuss the importance of monosaccharides, and disaccharides,
explain which food items are sources of carbohydrates, and
tell the types and importance of polysaccharides
Carbohydrates are macromolecules with which most consumers
are somewhat familiar. To lose weight, some individuals adhere
to "low-carbohydrate" diets. Athletes, in contrast, often use more
carbohydrates before important competitions to ensure that they have
sufficient energy to compete at a high level. Carbohydrates are, in
fact, an essential part of our diet; grains, fruits, and vegetables are all-
natural sources of carbohydrates. Carbohydrates provide energy to
60
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
the body, particularly through glucose, a simple sugar. Carbohydrates
also have other important functions in humans, animals, and plants.
Some carbohydrates rich food items are given in figure 3.5 below.
Figure 3.5 Food items rich in carbohydrate
Carbohydrates are made of three major elements; carbon, hydrogen,
and oxygen. In carbohydrates, the ratio of hydrogen to oxygen is 2:1.
There are three main groups of carbohydrates; monosaccharides,
disaccharides, and polysaccharides.
a. Monosaccharides
Monosaccharides are molecules that contain only one sugar unit.
Sugars dissolve quickly in water, forming sweet-tasting solutions.
Which types of
Monosaccharides have the general formula (CH₂O)n (CnH₂nOn)
monosaccharide do
where 'n' refers to the number of carbon. In monosaccharides, the
you know? Mention
and discuss the roles
ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen is 1:2:1. Monosaccharides
of commonly known
are made up of a single sugar molecule (the term "mono" refers to
monosaccharide for cells.
one). When categorizing monosaccharides based on the number of
carbon atoms in each molecule, the following are the most common:
1) trioses (3C), 2) pentoses (5C), and 3) hexoses (6C).
H
o
H
o
H
C
C
C₆H₁₂O₆ is the chemical formula for hexose sugar. This is referred
H
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
OH
to as the molecular formula. It is also useful to show how the atoms
C
HO
C
H
HO
C
H
are arranged, which can be done with a diagram known as the
Ho
C
I
structural formula. The structural formula of the most common
H
C
OH
HO
C
H
H
C
OH
monosacchirdes; glucose, galactose and fructose are shown in
H
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
C
OH
Figure 3.6. Despite having the identical chemical formula (C₆H₁₂O₆),
H
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
C
OH
glucose, galactose, and fructose differ structurally and chemically
H
H
H
(and are known as isomers) due to different atom positions in the
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
carbon chain.
Figure 3.6 Structural formula of
glucose, Galactose and Fructose
Grade 10 Biology
61
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Activity 3.7 Write the
Roles of monosaccharides in living organisms
formulas
Monosaccharides are the simplest forms of sugar and the most basic
The formula for a hexose
units (monomers) from which all carbohydrates are built. They also
sugar is C₆H₁₂O₆ or
play very important roles in living organisms. Major functions of
(CH₂O)₆.
monosaccharide in include:
1. What is the formula of a:
1. as a source of energy in respiration: this is due to a large number
a. triose sugar?
of carbon-hydrogen bonds. These bonds can be broken to release
b. tetrose sugar?
a lot of energy, which is transferred to help make ATP (Adenosine
c. pentose sugar?
triphosphate) from ADP (Adenosine diphosphate) and phosphate.
The most important monosaccharide in energy metabolism is
glucose.
2. as building blocks for larger molecules: for example, glucose is
used to make the polysaccharides starch, glycogen, and cellulose.
Ribose (a pentose sugar) is one of the molecules used to make RNA
(ribonucleic acid) and ATP. Deoxyribose (also a pentose sugar) is
one of the molecules used to make DNA.
b. Disaccharides (C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁)
Disaccharides are formed of two monosaccharides. The three most
common disaccharides are:
1) Maltose, which is composed of glucose + glucose,
2) Lactose, which is composed of glucose + galactose and
3) Sucrose, which is composed of glucose + fructose
Maltose or malt sugar is the product of breakdown of starch catalyzed
by the enzyme amylase. Sucrose is the transport sugar in plants and
the sugar that is commonly purchased in stores. Lactose is a sugar
found in milk and is thus an important dietary component.
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
O
H
H
H
OH
H
H
OH
H
OH
H
HO
H
O
H
OH
H
OH
A
62
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
H
O
OH
0
0
OH
H
CH2OH
OH
O
OH
OH
H
H
HO
CH2OH
OH
OH
O
OH
H
OH
OH
H
B
C
OH
Figure 3.7 Disaccharides a) Maltose b) Lactose c) Sucrose
c. Polysaccharides -(C₆H₁₀O₅)-n
Activity 3.8 Group work
The most important polysaccharides are starch, glycogen, and
Form a group of 2-3 students
cellulose. Polysaccharides are made of polymers of monomer glucose.
and using diagrams/models,
Because glucose is the primary source of energy for cells, living
explore the contribution
organisms must store it in the proper form. If glucose accumulated in
of carbohydrates
cells, it would dissolve and cause the cell's contents to become overly
(monosaccharide,
concentrated, compromising the cell's osmotic properties. Glucose
disaccharides and
is a reactive molecule that would disrupt normal cell chemistry.
polysaccharides) as structural
Condensation reactions convert glucose to a storage polysaccharide,
components of cells and their
functions for cells and the
which is a convenient, compact, inert (un-reactive), and insoluble
human body as a whole.
molecule, avoiding these issues. The storage polysaccharide formed
is starch in plants and glycogen in animals. Glucose can be made
available again quickly by an enzyme-controlled reaction.
Laboratory Activity 3.9 Test for reducing sugars
Background
All monosaccharides, such as glucose, and some disaccharides, such as maltose, are considered
reducing sugars. Sucrose is the only common non-reducing sugar. Reducing sugars get their name from
the fact that they can carry out a reduction reaction. The Benedict's test, which uses Benedict's reagent,
makes use of this. Benedict's reagent is a blue-coloured copper (II) sulphate solution in an alkaline
solution. Sugars are used to convert soluble blue copper sulphate, which contains copper(II) ions, to
insoluble brick red copper oxide, which contains copper (I). A brick-red precipitate of copper oxide can
be seen.
Reducing sugar + Cu²+
oxidized sugar + Cu+ blue red-brown
Procedure_
Add a 10% glucose solution in a test tube
Add Benedict's reagent to the solution
Heat in a water bath.
Observe the colour change
Answer the following questions
1. How does the colour of your solution change as you continue heating?
2. Why do we heat in a water bath?
3. What is the reason for the colour change?
Grade 10 Biology
63
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Laboratory Activity 3.10: Study of traditional beverages of Ethiopia
In Ethiopia traditional beverages are so delicious with mild alcoholic contents. There are typical
procedures to prepare each of these traditional beverages. Being in groups of 3-4, study methods of
preparation of one of the traditional beverages: Borde, Shameta, Tej or Tela.
Methods of study:
BORDE
TEJ
Interview local producers
Observation
Using internet, books, or articles
Gesho
Malt
a) What is the purpose of malting?
Barely
Honey
b) Do they use Gesho? If so why?
c) Discuss the content of the traditional beverage
and the process of their preparation.
Shameta
Areke
Starch [-(C₆H₁₀₅)-n]
Starch is the plant's stored form of sugar. Plants can produce glucose,
and the surplus glucose is stored as starch in various plant components
such as roots and seeds. Animals ingest starch, which is broken down
into smaller molecules such as glucose. The glucose can subsequently
be absorbed by the cells.
Glycogen [-(C₆H₁₀O₅)-n]
Glycogen, which is made up of monomers of glucose, is the storage
form of glucose in humans and other animals. Glycogen, the animal
analogue of starch, is a highly branched polymer that is often stored
in liver and muscle cells. Glycogen is broken down to release glucose
if glucose levels fall.
Cellulose [-(C₆H₁₀₅)-n]
Cellulose is a naturally occurring biopolymer that is abundant. Plant
What is the impact
cell walls are mostly made of cellulose, which provides structural
of imbalance in
support to the cell. Wood and paper are examples of cellulosic
carbohydrate intake?
materials. Cellulose is made up of glucose monomers that are linked
together in the glucose molecule by carbon atom bonds.
Every other glucose monomer in cellulose is densely packed as long
extended chains. This is what gives cellulose its rigidity and high
strength, which are critical for plant cells. Dietary fibre is cellulose
that passes through our digestive system. While animal digestive
enzymes cannot break down the glucose-glucose linkages in cellulose,
herbivores such as cows, buffaloes, and horses can digest cellulose-
rich grass and use it as a food source. Certain bacteria live in these
animals' rumens (part of herbivores' digestive systems) and secrete
the enzyme cellulase. Cellulases may degrade cellulose into glucose
64
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
monomers, which the animal can utilize as an energy source.
What do you think about
A cell wall often comprises numerous layers of fibres that run in
the structure of plant cell
wall? Which biochemical
different directions to boost strength. Other molecules aid in the
molecules form a cell wall?
cross-linking of the cellulose fibres, and some form a glue-like matrix
around the fibres, which improves strength even further. The strength
of cellulose fibres is roughly similar to that of steel. This implies that
when pulled at both ends, they are extremely difficult to stretch or
break, allowing a cell to endure the tremendous pressures that build
within it due to osmosis.
Without a wall, the cell would explode in a dilute fluid. These
pressures help the plant grow by hardening tissues and stimulating
cell expansion. The shape of the cell as it grows is determined by
the arrangement of fibres around it. Despite their strength, cellulose
fibres are porous, allowing water and solutes to pass between the cell
surface membrane and the surrounding environment.
Laboratory activity 3.11: Test for polysaccharides-starch and glycogen
This test is specific for polysaccharides. It is used to differentiate polysaccharides from the rest of
carbohydrates. This test can be used to differentiate between glycogen, and starch.
Procedure
1. Take 2 ml of the given solution (starch, dextrin, or glycogen) in a test tube
2. Add 2-3 drops of iodine reagent in the above test tube
3. Wait for some time
4. Observe for the colour change
When the iodine reagent is added to the solution, the colour of the solution may change to Blue,
Reddish-purple.
Answer the following questions
i. What colour change is observed in the food item that contains starch?
ii. What colour change is observed in the food item that contains dextrin?
iii. What colour change is observed in the food item that contains glycogen?
Major functions of carbohydrates
1. They serve as the primary source of energy for most organisms.
Glucose in fruit juice, lactose in milk, starch in wheat, potato, rice
etc. is different forms of carbohydrate that we harvest energy from.
2. They act as a storage form of energy in the body (e.g. Starch and
Glycogen).
Starch stores energy for plants. In animals, it is catalysed by the
enzyme amylase (found in saliva) to fulfil the energy requirement.
Glycogen is a polysaccharide food reserve of animals, bacteria,
and fungi.
Grade 10 Biology
65
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
In mammals, glycogen is stored in the liver and muscle as
granules or particles (Up to 10% of liver mass and 1-2% muscle
mass). Muscle glycogen supplies energy for muscle contraction
during exercise.
3. They serve as cell membrane components that mediate some forms
of inter-cellular communication.
4. They form the structural component of many organisms, including
the cell walls of bacteria, fungi, and the exoskeleton of many insects.
Chitin is involved in the formation of a fungal cell wall, whereas
cellulose is an important component of ruminant diets.
Lipids
Objectives
What are lipids?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discuss what lipids are,
tell the importance of lipids for our cells,
describe the structure of glycerol and fatty acids, and
explain the importance of phospholipids in the cell
membrane.
Lipids are diverse groups of biomolecules that are insoluble in water
Activity 3.12 Group work
but soluble in non-polar solvents such as ether, chloroform, and
After your study on saturated
acetone. Lipids are made of elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
and unsaturated fatty acids,
It includes fats and oils and cholesterols. Fats are solid at room
do the following activity.
temperature and oils are liquid at room temperature. Chemically,
Why are unsaturated
they are very similar. We could say those true lipids are organic
fatty acids healthier than
compounds formed by fatty acids combining with alcohol. The
saturated fatty acids? Make
butter, cooking oil, and the meat we eat are good examples of lipids.
a group of 5 students and
Lipids are polymers of fatty acids and glycerol molecules.
collect full information
about it from health officers
Fatty acids [CH₃(CH₂)nCOOH]
in your area and present
the report to the whole
Fatty acids are a series of acids, some of which are found in fats (lipids).
classmates.
CH₃(CH₂)nCOOH is the general formula for fatty acids. The contain
the acidic group -COOH, known as a carboxyl group. The larger
molecules in the series have long hydrocarbon tails attached to the
acid 'head' of the molecule. As the name suggests, the hydrocarbon
tails consist of a chain of carbon atoms combined with hydrogen.
The chain is often 15 or 17 carbon atoms long.
Based on the presence or absence of double bonds (-C=C-) in their
structure, there are two types of fatty acids:
Unsaturated fatty acids consist of one or more double bonds in their
structure so that they do not contain the maximum possible amount
of hydrogen. Double bonds make fatty acids and lipids melt more
easily - for example, most oils are unsaturated. If there is more than
66
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
one double bond in their structure, the fatty acids or lipids can be
described as polyunsaturated; if there is only one double bond, they
are called mono-unsaturated. Plant lipids are often unsaturated and
occur as oils, e.g. olive oil and sunflower oil.
Saturated fatty acids have no double bonds in their carbon-carbon
chain. All saturated fatty acids are solid at room temperature. Animal
lipids are often saturated and occur as animal fat.
Where in our body do we
Fat is stored in several places in the human body, particularly just
encounter fats?
below the dermis of the skin and around the kidneys. Below the skin,
it also acts as an insulator against loss of heat.
Phospholipids
Phospholipids are a subset of lipids. Each molecule has the unusual
property of having one water-soluble end. This is because one of the
three fatty acid molecules is replaced by a phosphate group, which is
polar and thus dissolves in water.
P
Phosphate
The phosphate group is hydrophilic (water-loving) and makes the
Hydrophilic head
CH2
CH
CH2
Glycerol
head of a phospholipid molecule hydrophilic, although the two
C
remaining tails are still hydrophobic (water-hating). This allows the
Saturated
molecules to form a membrane around a cell, where the hydrophilic
fatty acid
heads lie in the watery solutions on the outside of the membrane, and
Hydrophobic tails
Unsaturated
fatty acid
the hydrophobic tails form a layer that is impermeable to hydrophilic
substances.
Major of functions of lipids
Figure 3.8 A phospholipid
1. Fatty acids serve as the foundation for other types of lipids and
molecule
serve as stored energy.
2. Serve as major fuel store and major dietary lipid in plants (oil) and
animals (Fat). Fats are stored in specialized cells called adipose cells
(fat cells), serve as poor conductors of heat and provide insulation
Extracellular
at low temperatures.
3. They serve as structural components in cell membranes (e.g.,
Phospholipid
phospholipids); precursors for the synthesis of Vitamin D, Bile
bilayer
acids, hormones of adrenal cortex such as cortisol, and aldosterone;
Intracellular
Hydrophobic tail
female sex hormones such as progesterone and estrogen and male
Hydrophilic head
sex hormones such as testosterone (Cholesterol).
Figure 3.9 Phospholipid
4. Some serve as protective coatings on skin, fur and feathers of
bilayer
animals, birds and fruit and leaves of plants (Example, Wax). The
shiny appearance of fruits and leaves is due to waxes. Waxes also
serve as a water barrier for animals, birds and insects; and also
protects against cold.
Grade 10 Biology
67
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Proteins
Activity 3.13 THINK-PAIR-
Objectives
SHARE
In a group, discuss what
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
you know about the
mention the importance of proteins to cells and the body of
structure and function of
living things,
proteins. Before starting
elaborate formation of proteins by amino acids,
the discussion, write
differentiate proteins according to their structure,
individually what you know
difine what are amino acides, and
about proteins. Finally, share
group proteins according to their function.
what you know to your
group members, discuss to
consolidate and present your
What are proteins?
findings to the whole class.
Proteins are biological molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, and nitrogen and sometimes contain phosphorus and
sulphur. Although amino acids may have other formulas, those in
protein invariably have the general formula RCH(NH₂)COOH,
where C is carbon, H is hydrogen, N is nitrogen, O is oxygen, and R
is a group, varying in composition and structure, called a side chain.
Proteins are biological molecules made up of amino acids monomers.
They are one of the most abundant organic molecules in living
systems and have the widest range of functions of any macromolecule.
In your locality, what are
Proteins can be structural, regulatory, contractile, or protective. They
animal and plant food
could be toxins or enzymes, or they could be used in transportation,
items containing protein?
storage, or membranes. Each cell in a living system may contain
thousands of proteins, each with a distinct function. Their structures,
like their functions, vary greatly. They are all, however, amino
acid polymers arranged in a linear sequence (also referred to as a
"peptide"). They are an extremely important class of macromolecule
in living organisms. More than 50% of the dry mass of most cells
is protein. Protein rich food items include; meat, cheese, milk, fish,
beans, vegetables, etc.
Amino acids
What are amino acids?
Amino acids are the monomers that make up proteins. Amino acids
have:
a central carbon atom which is bonded to an amine group, -NH₂,
a carboxylic acid group, -COOH and
a hydrogen atom
68
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
The only way in which amino acids differ from each other is in the
remaining, fourth, group of atoms bonded to the central carbon.
This is called the R group (Figure 3.10). 20 different amino acids
occur in the proteins of living organisms, all with a different R group.
Examples of some amino acids (Alanine, valine, lysine, and asparatic
acid) are given in figure 3.11 below. In the process of protein synthesis
amino acids join by covalent linkage forming a peptide bond that
elongates further and form a polypeptide bond.
a,
R
This group varies in
H
different amino acids.
N
c
c
It is known as the R group
H
OH
or side-chain.
H
amine group
carboxylic
acid group
b,
H
H
o
N
c
c
H
OH
H
glycine
Figure 3.10 General formula of amino acids
COO
COO
H3
+Z
H
+
+
CH₂
H3N
C
H
+
H₃N-C-H
H₃N-C-H
CH₂
CH₂
CH₂
CH
CH₃
CH₂
CH₃ CH₃
⁺NH₃
Valine
Aspartate
Lysine
Alanine
Figure 3.11 Examples of amino acids
The peptide bond
Each amino acid is attached to another amino acid by a covalent
bond. One loses a hydroxyl (-OH) group from its carboxylic acid
Do you have any idea
group, while the other loses a hydrogen atom from its amine group.
about the structure of
This leaves a carbon atom of the first amino acid-free to bond with
proteins?
the nitrogen atom of the second. The link is called a peptide bond.
The oxygen and two hydrogen atoms removed from the amino acids
form a water molecule.
amino acid
amino acid
dipeptide
R
R
R
0
R
H
0
H
0
-H2O (condensation)
H
0
N
C
C
N
C
C
N
C
C
N
C
C
H
OH H
OH
+H2O (hydrolysis)
H
OH
H
H
H
H
H
H2O
peptide bond
Figure 3.12 Amino acids link together by the loss of a molecule of water to form a peptide bond.
Grade 10 Biology
69
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
The new molecule which has been formed is made up of two linked
Activity 3.14 Group work
amino acids, and is called a dipeptide. Any number of extra amino
acids could be added to the chain in a series of condensation reactions.
Form a group of 2-3 students
and using diagrams/models,
A molecule made up of many amino acids linked together by peptide
explore the contribution
bonds is called a polypeptide. A complete protein molecule may
of proteins (globular and
contain just one polypeptide chain, or it may have two or more chains
fibrous/functional and
that interact with each other.
structural) as structural
components of cells, and
In living cells, ribosomes are the sites where amino acids are joined
their functions for cells and
together to form polypeptides. The reaction is controlled by enzymes.
the human body as a whole.
Polypeptides can be broken down into amino acids by breaking the
peptide bonds. This is a hydrolysis reaction, involving the addition
of water, and happens naturally in the stomach and small intestine
during digestion. Here, protein molecules in food are hydrolyzed
into amino acids before being absorbed into the blood.
According to their shape, proteins can also be classified into:
Globular proteins area protein whose molecules curl up into a 'ball'
shape, such as myoglobin or haemoglobin. In a living organism,
proteins may be found in cells and other aqueous environments such
as blood, tissue fluid, and in the phloem of plants. Globular proteins
usually curl up so that their non-polar, hydrophobic R groups point
into the centre of the molecule, away from their watery surroundings.
Water molecules are excluded from the centre of the folded protein
molecule. Many globular proteins have roles in metabolic reactions.
Their precise shape is the key to their functioning. Enzymes,
haemoglobin, antibodies are examples of globular proteins.
Fibrous proteins are protein molecules that do not coil up into a
ball but form long strands. Fibrous proteins are not usually soluble
in water and most have structural roles. For example, keratin forms
hair, nails, and the outer layers of the skin making these structures
waterproof. Another example of a fibrous protein is collagen which is
found in skin, tendons, cartilage, bones, teeth, and the walls of blood
vessels.
Major functions of proteins
1. Structural proteins: are fibrous and tough, as well as insoluble in
water. They are structural elements of connective tissues, bones,
tendons, cartilages, nails, hair, and horns. Collagen, elastin, and
keratin are examples of structural proteins.
2. Enzymes: are globular proteins that serve as biological catalysts.
They catalyse metabolic reactions by lowering the activation
energy, which increases the reaction rate. Protein enzymes include
DNA polymerase, lysozyme, nitrogenase, and lipase.
70
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
3. Hormones: are polypeptides that are made up of long chains of
linked amino acids. They play critical roles in the regulation of
the body>s physiological processes, which include reproduction,
growth and development, electrolyte balance, sleep, and so on.
Growth hormone (GH) and follicle-stimulating hormone are two
examples of these hormones (FSH).
4. Respiratory pigments: are globular protein pigments that are
typically water-soluble. Myoglobin, which provides oxygen to
working muscles; and haemoglobin, which transports blood to all
tissues and organs via the blood, is the two examples.
5. Transport proteins: are cell membrane structural components.
They create channels in the plasma membrane to transport specific
molecules within the cells. Some of them are also found in animal
blood and lymph. Serum albumin (which transports hemin and
fatty acids), channel proteins, and carrier proteins are examples of
transport proteins.
6. Motor proteins: are involved in muscle contraction and relaxation
(muscle movement). Actin, myosin, kinesin, and dynein are all
components.
7. Storage proteins: In cells, these proteins serve as a storage reserve
for amino acids and metal ions. They can be found in eggs, seeds,
and pulses. Ferritin, ovalbumin, and casein are examples of storage
proteins.
8. Toxins: Bacteria are the most common producers of these
proteins. Diphtheria toxin, Pseudomonas exotoxin, and ribosome-
inactivating proteins are among them. By causing cytotoxicity,
they aid bacteria in attacking and killing their host organism.
Laboratory Activity 3.15 The Biuret test for proteins
Background
Method 2
In this test, a protein in an alkaline solution reacts
Procedure
with copper ions to produce a mauve/purple colour.
1. Mix the food or 2 cm3 of the test solution
There are two ways of carrying out the test:
with Biuret solution (which contains copper
Method 1
ions in an alkaline solution).
Procedure
2. Allow the mixture to stand for a few
Mix the food or 2 cm3 of the test solution with
Answer the following questions
Sodium hydroxide solution in a test tube.
1. Which food items can be tested for proteins?
Add a few drops of 1% copper (II) sulphate solution.
2. What is the reason for the colour change?
Allow the mixture to stand for a few minutes (to
3. Why do you add a copper (II) sulphate
allow the colour to develop fully).
solution?
Grade 10 Biology
71
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Laboratory Activity 3.16 Xanthoproteic Test
Background: Proteins are polymers of amino acids. They are complex organic compounds containing
nitrogen, hydrogen, carbon and oxygen. Proteins are abundant in our everyday food e.g. egg, soya
bean, pulses, fish, milk etc. The presence of proteins can be confirmed qualitatively by using several
tests, Xanthoproteic test is one of them. Xanthoproteic test is a biochemical method, which is used for
the identification of amino acids containing phenolic or indolic groups like phenylalanine, tyrosine,
and tryptophan (aromatic amino acids).
Procedures
Answer the following questions
1. Take a clean test tube and add 1 ml of the sample
1. What colour change do you observe after
solution within it.
adding nitric acid and cooling at room
2. After that add 1 ml of concentrated nitric acid to it.
temperature?
3. Keep the test tube at room temperature and allow it
2. Why do we add sodium hydroxide?
to cool down.
3. What is the colour observed at the end of the
4. After that add 1 ml of 40% NaOH solution to the test
experiment?
tube.
Nucleic acids
Objectives
What are nucleic acids?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
describe the structures of nucleotides and nucleic acids,
differentiate between DNA and RNA, and
explain the importance of DNA and RNA.
Nucleic acids are chemical molecules made up of phosphoric acid,
sugars, and organic bases that exist naturally. Nucleic acids are the
cell's principal information-carrying molecules, and they determine
every living thing's inherited features by directing the process of
protein synthesis. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic
acid (RNA) are the two main types of nucleic acids (RNA).
The structure of DNA and RNA
DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid and RNA for ribonucleic
If you were asked to
acid. Nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA, like proteins and
design a molecule that
could act as a genetic
polysaccharides, are macromolecules. They are also polymers, made
material in living things,
up of many similar, smaller molecules joined into a long chain. The
where would you start?
smaller molecules that form DNA and RNA are called nucleotides.
DNA and RNA are therefore polynucleotides. They are often referred
as nucleic acids.
Most organisms carry their genetic information in the nucleotide
sequences of DNA, but a few viruses carry it in RNA. Along the
length of the DNA is a series of chemical structures called genes.
Genes are stretches of DNA that code for RNA and amino acids and,
therefore, proteins.
72
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Nucleotides
Figure 3.8 shows the structure of nucleotides. Nucleotides are made
up of three smaller components. These are:
a nitrogen-containing base
a pentose sugar
a phosphate group
There are five different nitrogen containing bases in DNA and RNA.
The four nitrogenous bases in the DNA molecule are adenine,
thymine, guanine, and cytosine. An RNA molecule also contains
four bases, but have Uracil instead of thymine. These bases are
often denoted by their first letters: A, T, C, G, and U. The order and
composition of the different nucleotides sequences determines the
hereditary function of the nucleic acids.
H.
H
N
N
Z
H
N
H
N
P
O
CH₂
O
Nitrogenous
base
H
H
H
H
phosphate
group
OH
H
pentose sugar
Figure 3.13 The components of nucleotides.
The pentose (5-carbon) sugar can be either ribose (C₅H₁₀O₅) (in
RNA) or deoxyribose (C₅H₁₀O₄) (in DNA) Figure 3.9. As their names
suggest, deoxyribose is almost the same as ribose, except that it has
no oxygen atom on its second carbon atom.
5'
5'
O
O
HOCH₂
OH
HOCH₂
OH
4' C
H
H
C 1'
4'C
H
H
C 1'
3'
2'
3'
2'
H
C
C
H
H
C
C
H
OH
H
OH
OH
Figure 3.14 Structures of deoxyribose and ribose sugars
Grade 10 Biology
73
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
DNA is a large molecule made up of two strands (made of two chains)
of nucleotides wounded into a double helix. RNA is much smaller
and is single-stranded (made of a single chain). There are three types
of RNA: mRNA (messenger RNA), rRNA(ribosomal RNA), and
tRNA(transfer RNA).
DNA
RNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
Ribonucleic acid
Cytosine
C
Cytosine
C
NH₂
Nucleobases
NH₂
N
N
ZI
N
O
ZI
O
Guanine
G
Guanine
G
O
NH
NH
N
N
NH₂
NH₂
N
N
ZI
N
ZI
N
Base pair
Adenine
A
Adenine
A
H2N
H2N
N
N
N
N
N
N
ZI
N
ZI
Thymine
T
Uracil
H3C
NH
NH
helix of
O
IZ
sugar-phosphates
ZI
N
O
Nucleobases
Nucleobases
of DNA
of RNA
Figure 3.15 The structure of nucleic acids
Table 3.4 Similarities and differences in function and structure of the nucleic acids
Features
DNA
RNA
Nitrogenous
Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine, Thy-
Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine, Uracil
bases
mine
Pentose sugar
Deoxyribose sugar
Ribose sugar
Phosphate
Phosphate group
Phosphate group
Size
Huge-allows the molecule to carry
Much smaller-need code for only one
the code for many different proteins
protein; small size allows RNA to move
in the genes
out of the nucleus
Stability
Very stable - ensures that the genes
Less stable- is degraded quite quickly so
remain the same over the generation
does not carry on coding for a protein
Number of
Two strands- allow coding of genes
Single-stranded- does not replicate
strands
and replication during cell division.
74
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Major functions of Nucleic Acids: DNA and RNA
Deoxyribonucleic acids (DNA)
It is the genetic material that stores all the information required to be
Why do you say nucleic
transferred to the next generation. The genetic information is stored
acids are polymers of
in its nucleotide sequences. DNA has a unique property of replication
nucleotides?
or production of its copy that can be transferred to a daughter cell
Mention the nitrogenous
during cell reproduction.
bases that form the
nucleic acids.
It specifies the biological development of all living organisms and
viruses. It carries the genetic code (instructions for protein synthesis).
Information coded in the nucleotide sequence of DNA for a particular
protein is first copied to mRNA (by the process of transcription). The
code in the mRNA is then translated into amino acid sequences of
protein. Proteins are required to build an organism and catalyze all
of its biochemical reactions thereby controlling all of the functions of
the cell or organism.
Ribonucleic acids (RNA)
RNA has different roles to play in different organisms.
It acts as genetic material in some viruses and has enzymatic activity
in other organisms
(where it is called ribozyme).
Three types of RNA are present among organisms: mRNA, tRNA
and rRNA. All three have essential roles in the development and
maintenance of life.
mRNA moves the genetic code (information for protein synthesis)
from DNA to ribosomes (protein-synthesizing machinery in the cell).
tRNA helps the proteins synthesis by providing a source of amino
acids (the building blocks of proteins).
rRNA form a complex with proteins making the structure the
ribosome.
Activity 3.216 Group work
In a group of 3-4 students and using diagrams/models, explore the
contribution of Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) as components of
cells and their functions (inheritance) for cells and the human body
as a whole.
Grade 10 Biology
75
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Unit Review
Water is made of hydrogen and oxygen atoms and is important for plants and animals,
where it forms a large part of the mass of each cell.
Extensive hydrogen bonding gives water unusual properties.
Water is liquid at most temperatures on the Earth's surface. It has a high specific heat capacity,
which makes liquid water relatively resistant to changes in temperature.
Water acts as a solvent for ions and polar molecules, and causes non-polar molecules to
group together.
Water has a relatively high latent heat of vaporization, meaning that evaporation has a
strong cooling effect. It also has high cohesion and surface tension which affects the way it
moves through narrow tubes such as xylem and allows it to form a surface on which some
organisms can live.
Cells of any living organism are composed of organic and inorganic molecules, and each of
these molecules is composed of atoms
In living organisms, inorganic molecules such as water and salts frequently lack carbon
atoms
Organic molecules such as carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids are large
molecules containing carbon and hydrogen and are referred to as biological macromolecules.
Polymers are the most common type of biological macromolecule. Polymers are formed
by combining smaller molecules known as monomers through a process known as
polymerization.
carbohydrates are biological macromolecules made of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms
and that are composed of smaller molecules known as monomers.
Glucose is one of the monomers.
Monomers are regarded as the simplest and quickest source of energy.
carbohydrates are used to store energy in the bodies of living organisms until it is needed;
as starch in plants and glycogen in human and animal liver and muscles.
carbohydrates are a basic component of some cell parts, such as plant cell wall. They are
also be found in cell membranes and protoplasm.
lipids are biochemical macromolecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms.
lipids are made up of a diverse range of compounds such as fats, oils, waxes, phospholipids,
and derived lipids such as steroids.
lipids are compounds are insoluble in water but soluble in non-polar solvents such as
benzene and carbon tetrachloride.
76
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
energy obtained from lipids is greater than the energy obtained from the same amount of
carbohydrates.
lipids account for approximately 5% of the organic materials found in the composition of a
living cell. Lipids are also important in the structure of cell membranes.
lipids act as a thermal insulator in animals and humans, allowing organisms to keep their
body temperatures stable in cold and harsh environments.
lipids serve as a protective coating for the surfaces of many plants and animals, and some of
them can act like hormones.
proteins are the structural building blocks of all living organisms. They are made up of
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen atoms. There are also proteins that contain sulfur.
proteins make up the majority of all living organisms, from the largest animals to the smallest
microscopic organisms.
proteins play a role in the biochemical processes that keep life alive.
proteins play an important role in the structure and function of living cells.
proteins from muscles, ligaments, tendons, organs, glands, nails, hair, and many of the
body's vital fluids, such as blood and lymph, are required for bone growth.
proteins also include enzymes and hormones, which stimulate and regulate all vital processes
in the body.
nucleic acids are biological macromolecules that contain the elements oxygen, hydrogen,
carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus.
nucleic acids are classified into two types: ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) (DNA).
nucleic acids are composed of basic units known as nucleotides that bind together via
covalent bonds to form a polynucleotide or nucleic acid.
nucleic acids are in charge of passing on genetic traits from one generation to the next
during cell division.
DNA carries the genetic information responsible for a living organism's distinct characteristics
and organizes all of the cell's vital activities.
RNA is transcribed from the DNA. It then translated into the proteins responsible for genetic
traits, and those responsible for organizing the vital activities.
Grade 10 Biology
77
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
Review Questions
I. True false Items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise book.
1. A deficiency disease caused by lack of iron in our food is called goiter.
2. DNA is termed as a genetic material.
3. All proteins are made up of fatty acids and glycerol molecules.
4. Phospholids are molecules that are used for a dipeptide bond. Formation.
5. Maltose is a disaccharide made of two glucose units.
6. DNA is made of 5- Carbon sugar ribose, phosphate and a nitrogenous base
7. Calcium is one of the inorganic ions that are used for bone and teeth formation.
8. Water is a universal solvent.
9. Proteins are made up of beta glucose molecules.
10. Glycogen is a storage form of polysaccharide in animals.
II. Multiple-choice Items
Choose the correct answer from A - D and write your answer on your exercise book.
1. Disaccharides consist of:-
A. Two molecules of monosaccharides C. Four molecules of monosaccharides
B. Three molecules of monosaccharides D. Five molecules of monosaccharides
2. The basic unit of a protein molecule is
A. Peptides B. Amino acid C. Allanylglycine D. Albumins
3. Which of the following is not a macromolecule?
A. RNA
B. DNA
C. Salt
D. Protein
4. The bonds that form between the atoms of polymeric macromolecules are
bonds.
A. hydrogen
B. peptide
C. disulfide
D. covalent
5. Which of the following does not represent a correct monomer/polymer pairing?
A. Monosaccharide/polysaccharide
C. Triglyceride/cellulose
B. Amino acid/protein
D. Nucleotide/nucleic acid
6. Polymerization reactions in which polysaccharides are synthesized from monosaccharides
A. require the formation of phosphodiester bonds between the amino acids.
B. are hydrolysis reactions.
C. depends upon van der Waals forces to hold the amino acids together.
D. result in the formation of water
78
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
7. During the formation of a peptide linkage, a (n)
is formed.
A. molecule of water
C. hydrophobic bond
B. disulfide bridge
D. hydrophilic bond
8. Which of the following is responsible for making every amino acid unique?
A. Amino group
C. Carboxyl group
B. Hydrogen
D."R" group
9. Enzymes are:
A. DNA
B. Lipids
C. carbohydrates
D. proteins
10. A protein molecule is made of
A. amino acids
C. Glucose monomers
B. Glycerol and fatty acids monomers
D. only fatty acids
11. The monomers that make up polymeric carbohydrates like starch are called
A. nucleotides
B. trisaccharides
C. monosaccharides
D. nucleosides
12. A simple sugar with the formula C5H10O5 can be classified as a
A. hexose
B. polysaccharide
C. disaccharide
D. pentose
13. DNA and RNA both include
A. pentoses
B. hexoses
C. fructoses
D. maltoses
14. Lactose, or milk sugar, which is composed of one glucose unit and one galactose unit, can be
classified as a
A. disaccharide
B. hexose
C. pentose
D. polysaccharide
15. Which of the following is a function of calcium?
A. formation of Bone and teeth
C. development of muscle cells
B. formation of ligaments
D. all of them are not functions
16. Which property of water allows the insect called Raft Spider to walk on the surface of water?
A. surface tension
C. Liquidity
B. High specific heat
D. changing state
Grade 10 Biology
79
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules
III. Fill-in the blank Items
Copy and complete the following table. Place a cross mark (X) in each box as appropriate.
Globular protein
e.g. Hemoglobin
Fibrous protein
e.g. Collagen
Monosaccharide
Disaccharide
glycogen
Starch
Cellulose
Lipid
Monomer
Polymer
Macromolecule
Polysaccharide
Contain subunits that form branched chain
Contains amino acids
Made from organic acids and glycerol
Contain glycosidic bonds
Contain peptide bond
One of its main functions is to act as an ener-
gy store
Usually insoluble in water
Usually has a structural function
Contain the elements Carbon, Hydrogen and
Oxygen only
Short Answer Items
1. Why are biological macromolecules considered as organic?
2. Describe the similarities and differences between glycogen and starch.
3. Explain at least three functions that lipids serve in plants and/or animals.
4. Mention food items that contain calcium.
5. What is the importance of high latent heat of vaporization of water?
6. How are cohesion and adhesion different?
7. Plants must get water from their roots to their branches. Explain how cohesion and adhesion
might help plant get water from the ground to its upper leaves?
8. Why do phospholipids form lipid bilayers in aqueous conditions?
9. Unlike glycogen storage in human body, fat storage is unlimited. Why?
80
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Content
Learning competencies
4.1 Cell cycle
Outline the series of events taking place in the cell cycle
4.2 Cell division
Identify the two types of cell division
4.2.1 Mitosis
Compare and contrast Mitosis and Meiosis
4.2.2 Meiosis
Explain the importance of cell division
4.3 Renowned Geneticist in
Recognize the occurrence of cancer cells due to failure to con-
Ethiopia
trol the cell cycle
Appreciate the works of renowned Ethiopian Geneticist
4.1 Cell cycle
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
define cell cycle,
outline the different stages of cell cycle and
collect information on cancer
What are the main divisions of a cell cycle ?
Before dealing with cell cycle, it is important to refresh your memory
about cell structure and function, particularly the nucleus where key
Why not a cell
diminishes in size
processes of cell reproduction takes place. The next activity (Activity
through repeated cell
4.1) gives you opportunity to construct at least two dimensional (2D)
division? What should
cell model to show an animal cell and arrangement of cell organelles
happen before and after
using a cardboard or stiff paper. You can follow the same procedure
cell division to maintain
to prepare a model of plant cell, where chloroplasts and cell wall are
cell size?
included as additional structures. The presence of cell wall in your
model creates difference in the cytoplasmic division of plant cells and
animal cells, which you will learn in the next lesson of cell division.
Grade 10 Biology
81
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
ACTIVITY 4.1 MODELING
Materials required: Card board or stiff paper. Glue, threads (with different colours), puncher, colored
paper, small beads or small seeds (e. g. pea , chickpea, lentils), wool or cotton , Scissor
Direction: Perform the activity in small group of two students sharing a seat or a table.
First create a round boundary by colour thread to represent the shape and the cell membrane
Fix the piece of rolled wool or cotton and the colour bead with glue at the center to show the
position of the nucleus and nucleolus
Then, fix small colored paper (punched out), beads (seeds of similar size or shape) and thin
colour threads with glue to represent the different organelles as shown in the figure below
Draw the diagram on a paper and label the parts without looking the Figure. Exchange your paper
with your neighbor and make corrections to the parts labeled wrong.
Discuss why nucleus is important for cell division. Identify the difference between nucleus and
nucleolus.
Mitochondrion
Golgi apparatus
Endoplasmic reticulum
(Smooth)
Vacuole
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Endoplasmic reticulum
(Rough - with ribosomes)
Lysosome
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
A cell cycle is a sequence of events that takes place in the parent cell
as a means of distributing genetic materials thereby forming daughter
G2
cells (Figure 4.1). There are two main divisions of the cell cycle:
M
Interphase and cell division.
S
Interphase is divided into three phases called G₁, S, and G2.
G₁ Phase (First Gap): is the first stage of interphase. During this stage,
G1
cells are quite active metabolically. They accumulate the building
blocks of chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins as well as
store sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of replicating
G1 growth
each chromosome in the nucleus.
S - DNA synthesis
G2 - Growth and
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA): is the stage of DNA replication
preparation for mitosis
(Synthesis).
M Mitosis
G2 Phase (second gap): is the stage where the cell replenishes its
Figure 4.1 Stages of the cell
energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosome
cycle
manipulation and movement. Some cell organelles are duplicated
during this stage. Cells may continue growing during the G, phase.
Cells make the final preparations before entering into the mitotic
phase.
82
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
The cell division, on the other hand, includes nuclear division -
Karyokinesis (mitosis, or, M - stage) followed by cytoplasmic
division (Cytokinesis). This ultimately results in two identical
daughter cells. Each daughter cell grows and starts the cycle the
mother cell has undergone.
In the next group activity you will have an opportunity to combine
skills in computation with geometry to estimate time spent or
determine the proportion (percentage) of each stage or phase of cell
cycle using Figure 4.1. This can help you to create paper time clock
taking one round cell cycle as 360 degree and assuming the whole
cell cycle is completed within 24 hrs.
ACTIVITY 4. 2 CRITICAL THINKING
Direction:
Form a small group of 2 or 3 students. Use Figure 4.1 while measuring degree of angles for each stage
with corresponding time from the 24 hr ( Hint: 15° = 1 hr )
For efficient way to accomplish your task, first divide the circle representing cell cycle into two halves
down in the middle with a ruler, and then in half again horizontally. You will get four quarters of 90°.
This can easily divide your cell cycle into 6 hrs of 15° each.
Once the cell cycle is divided into four segments and the hours will be labeled (24 hr at the top) with
one hr (15°) interval clock wise.
Measure the degree bounding each stage of the cell cycle and calculate the exact time spent for
each stage/phase of cell cycle.
Use the formula : (Degree measured / 360°) X 24 hr. Then summarize you results as shown in the next
table.
Variable
Interphase
Cell division
Total
G¹
S
G2
(mitosis + cytokinesis)
Measured degree
Time spent (hr)
Percentage
Questions
What is the proportion of time spent in interphase as compared to cell division ( mitosis &
cytokinesis)?
Why does a cell spend most of its time in the interphase?
Each stage of cell cycle is not static. What does this mean?
What will happen if cell cycle is not controlled?
The cell cycle in general and cell division has an internal controlling
system that enables it to follow regular pattern. If such regulatory
system fails to work properly, the cells excessively divide, and this
may be called "cell madness". Cancer will occur as a result of failure
Grade 10 Biology
83
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
of controlling cell division, Cancer cells do not respond normally to
Attention
the cell cycle controlling system; they divide in unregulated manner
Cancer can start when the
and may invade other tissues of the body
controlling factors over cell
division and cell growth fail.
ACTIVITY 4. 3 INTERVIEWING KEY INFORMANTS
Cancer occurs in the
absence of growth factors
Direction:
allowing a cell to divide
Go to the nearby health center around your school or your home
continuously at very high
and gather information by interviewing health workers about
density at the expense of
cancer.
other normal cells.
Your interview should include the following key questions:
1. What is cancer?
Cancer cells can have a
number of problems:
2. How does cancer affect a person?
they might not be able to
3. What should be done to prevent cancer?
communicate with healthy
4. How can cancer patients be treated?
cells;
they may not be able to
carry out normal cells;
4.2 The Cell division
they may not securely
Objectives
anchor themselves like
other cells do, which can
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
make them more likely
recognize the causes of cell division and
to travel somewhere and
explain the importance of cell division
spread to other parts of the
body.
In grade 9, you have learned that a cell is the basic structural and
functional unit of life. It is their ability to reproduce that distinguishes
living organisms from non-living organisms. This ability has a cellular
basis. There must be at least a single cell to have an organism, such
Imagine scraping your
as the unicellular organism amoeba. There are also multicellular
elbow. In addition to
organisms with a huge number of cells, which initially start with
being uncomfortable, you
will lose bunch of skin
a single cell or few cells and become multicellular by repeated cell
cells. How does your body
division. As it is stated in cell theory, new cells arise from pre-existing
make new cells to replace
cells by cell division. This fundamental principle, known as the cell
cells that are damaged or
doctrine, was originally postulated by Rudolf Virchow in 1858, and it
lost as a result of injury
provides the basis for the continuity of life.
or accident?
Cell division is a basic process in all living things where a parent
or mother cell, divides into two daughter cells. An ordered series
of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two
new daughter cells are termed the cell cycle. Cells on the path to cell
division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully
regulated stages of growth, DNA replication, and nuclear and
cytoplasmic division that ultimately produces two identical (clone)
cells.
As the cell grows the volume of cytoplasm relative to the cell
membrane will be small that it will have .low surface area to volume
84
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
ratio. As a result material transport across the cell membrane by
simple diffusion will be inadequate for the cell to survive. Moreover,
as the size of the cell increases the controlling power of the nucleus
is highly minimized. Thus to solve these problems cell employs a
mechanism called cell division by which one cell become two or
What causes a cell to
more.
divide?
You already know the cause of cell division, but it should also be
What is the importance of
noted that the cell is increasing its number as it divides repeatedly.
cell division to organisms ?
The increase in cell number in turn is important for many reasons.
In unicellular organisms, cell division is a means of reproduction or
getting new offspring. For instance, Amoeba is unicellular. When
a single cell Amoeba divides, it has increased its population, i.e.
ACTIVITY 4.4: PEER
DISCUSSION
Number of Amoebae (offspring). In multicellular organisms, cell
division is a means of increasing cell number either for growth
Direction:
or to replace damaged/dead cells and repair the body. In sexually
Carefully read the questions
reproducing organisms it occurs around reproductive organs as a
asked below. Think about
means of getting gametes or sex cells.
cell division taking place in
human body. Discuss with
From your previous lesson on cell cycle (Refer to Figure 4.1) cell
a friend sitting next to you.
division continues after G2 stage of the interphase. Cell division
Compare your answers with
consists of two sub divisions
your classmates.
i) Nuclear division (Karyokinesis) - results in the separation and
Where does cell division
distribution of duplicated genetic materials of mother cell (dividing
occurs mainly for tissue
cell) to daughter cells by mitosis or meiosis.
renewal rather than
growth - Is it in a child or
ii) Cytokinesis (cytoplasmic division) - is the separation of the
in adult human body?
cytoplasmic components into the daughter cells.
Mention our body
Hereafter, you will learn the pattern of arrangement and redistribution
part where cells are
of the duplicated genetic material during mitosis and meiosis.
undergoing continuous
replacement. Why is this
so?
4.2.1 Mitosis
Objectives
What is mitosis?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
outline the pattern of mitotic cell division,
tell how mitosis produces daughter cells as an exact copy of
mother cell and point out the importance of mitosis
Mitosis is a type of nuclear division where duplicated chromosomes
of a single mother cell are distributed between two identical daughter
cells, having the same number and kind of hereditary materials
(chromosomes) as the parent nucleus. As a result, a diploid (2n)
mother cell gives rise to two diploid (2n) identical daughter cells.
Grade 10 Biology
85
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
How does a cell divide by mitosis?
As illustrated in Figure 4.2, apart from cytokinesis (cytoplasmic
division), mitosis as nuclear division (Karyokinesis) is divided into
a series of phases namely; prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and
telophase.
Prophase
Metaphse
Anaphase
Telophase
Cytokinesis
X
Mother Cell
Figure 4.2 Illustration of cell division by mitosis
What happens in the different phases while a cell undergoes
mitosis?
Attention
Detailed description of what actually happens at different phases of
The term mitosis was
mitosis is presented as follows:
first coined by Walther
Flemming in 1882
1. Prophase (the "first phase"): During this phase
when he discovered
that chromosomes
each duplicated chromosome, composed of two sister chromatids
during cell division
and, containing identical genetic material pairs up.
split longitudinally to
the nuclear membrane breaks down, the nucleolus disappears.
distribute themselves
chromosomes shorten, thicken and become visible.
equally between two
daughter cells.
the centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the cell, and
spindle fibres emerge from the centrosomes (two in numbers and
The end result of
located outside the nucleus) - Figure 4.2
mitosis is growth of the
eukaryotic organism
Mitotic spindle
microtubules
and replacement of
damaged or dead cells
Centromenic
region
After fertilization (union
of sperm cell and egg
cell), the growth of the
zygote occurs by cell
Kinetochore
division through mitosis
into the 2 - cell stage,
then 4 - cell stage, 8 -
cell stage, 16 - cell stage,
Sister chromatids
and so. This is called
Cleavage.
Figure 4.3 Sister chromatids: Mitotic spindle emerging from the
centrosomes
86
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
2. Metaphase (arrangement phase)
What is the significance
During this phase
of cell division through
mitotic spindles are fully developed with centrosomes at the
mitosis?
opposite poles.
chromosomes line up ( arrange themselves ) end-to-end along
the centre or metaphase plate ( equatorial plane) of the cell.
each sister chromatids are attached to a spindle fibre originating
from opposite poles.
3. Anaphase (migrating phase)
During this phase cohesion proteins binding the sister chromatids
together known as centromere, breakdown.
separated sister chromatids are pulled apart by the mitotic
spindle which drags one chromatid to one pole and the other
chromatid to the opposite pole. This will ensure daughter cells
receive chromosomes that are the same in number and kind.
4. Telophase (a reverse of prophase)
This phase is also known as a reversed prophase because what has
disappeared during the interphase will reappear during the telophase
and vice versa. Accordingly,
nuclear membrane reappears and surrounds each set of
chromosomes to create two new nuclei arriving at opposite
poles.
The mitotic spindle breaks down and disappears.
Cytokinesis, also known as cytoplasmic division, will take place after
the four stages of mitosis (nuclear division) are completed. However,
its completion in animal cell is different from plant cell. As animal
cell is surrounded only by cell membrane, cytokinesis enables the
cytoplasm of the mother cell to pinch or constrict in the middle. As
a result the two daughter cells entirely separate. However, as plant
cell is surround by hard cell wall in addition to the cell membrane ,
the cytoplasm cannot simply pinch off and fully separate; instead a
new wall will be laid down between the two daughter cells, Thus,
the two adjacent cells remained joined together by the middle wall
- called middle lamella.
The redistribution of duplicated chromosomes through mitosis is
important to get two daughter cells from single diploid mother
cell that are identical in quality and quantity of chromosomes.. The
process of mitosis is important to increase cell number, which in
turn is essential for growth. We, human beings, after the union of
Grade 10 Biology
87
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
haploid (n) sperm and haploid (n) egg started as a zygote, which
is diploid (2n). Then the zygote by repeated cell division through
mitosis develops into multicellular organism. This is how we human
beings are made up of million cells.
Cells have a finite life span; they wear out or become damaged; so
they need to be replaced continuously. The process of growth, repair
and replacement of dead cells all rely on cell division through mitosis.
Unicellular organisms like Amoeba also use cell division through
mitosis to increase their number or population.
http://www.differencebetween.
Key terms
net/science/difference-between-
homologous-chromosomes-and-
Spindle fiber - is long protein fiber extending from structures
sister-chromatids/#ixzz72kDLiFk2
called centrioles. It starts from the pole of the cell and extends up to
the centre, where it is linked to duplicated chromosomes arranged
for distribution. It is necessary to pull chromosomes separated
towards the pole during the anaphase stage of cell division.
Homologous chromosomes - are couples of one maternal and
one paternal chromosome paired up during fertilization. They are
paired chromosomes, each of which represents a parent for a unit
character such as height, body colour, sex etc. The best analogy for
homologus chromosomes, is paired shoe with the same number
Every person like the unit character has same number, say shoe
size 41, two in number and fit to the right and left feet of Mr/Mrs
"X" or "Y". Likewise, in humans each diploid (2n) body (somatic)
cell has 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes, giving a total of 46
(2X23) chromosomes.
Sister chromatids: Two copies of one maternal or paternal
chromosome linked together by cohesive protein on the centromere.
ACTIVITY 4.5 GROUP WORK
Direction:
A
The figure below shows different phases
of mitosis in onion cells as seen under
B
the microscope
E
Form a small group and carefully look
at the figure, and based on your lesson
about mitosis, identify the phases repre-
sented by letters "A" to "E". Compare
your answer with other groups and de-
fend yourself if there is any difference.
c
D
88
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
4.2.2 Meiosis
Objectives
What is meiosis? How
does it differ from
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
mitosis?
outline the pattern of cell division by meiosis,
tell the importance of meiosis and
point out the difference between mitosis and meiosis
The process of meiosis is a characteristic feature of organisms that
reproduce sexually. It occurs in reproductive organs such as ovaries
of female animals, testes of male animals, anther and ovules of
flowering plants. Meiosis involves two fissions of the nucleus giving
rise to four gametes or sex cells, each possessing half the number
of chromosomes (n) present in the mother cell. Meiosis is called
reduction division, as the final daughter cells are haploid (n) as
compared to the diploid ( 2n) mother division.
What would happen if the human gametes (sperm cell and egg cell),
had 46 chromosomes like the other body cells? The answer is simple
that there will be 92 chromosomes in the zygote, which will not be
normal. Thus, during gametogenesis (gamete formation) in human
ovaries and testes, the 46 chromosomes in the initial mother will be
reduced by half to 23 chromosomes by meiosis. As a result, the sperm
or egg cells nuclei will have 23 chromosomes (haploid, abbreviated
as n). So, when sperm and egg join together at fertilization, a zygote
that contains the normal number of 46 chromosomes (23 pairs,
Why is meiosis so
Diploid abbreviated as 2n) will be formed.
important?
Figure 4.4 depicts the different phases of meiosis I and II. A short
description of each phase is presented in Table 4.1
Meiosis I
Mother cell
(Diploid= 2n)
Interphase
Prophase I
Metaphase I
Anaphase I
Telophase I
Cytokinesis I
Synapsis and
Two Diploid
Centrosomes
Sister
Nucleolus
Crossing Over
Spindle Fiber
Chromatids
Daughter Cells
Cell
Membrane
XX
Chromosome
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
Nuclear
Membrane
Tetrad
Centromere
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Meiosis II
Prophase II
Metaphase II
Anaphase II
Telophase II
Cytokinesis II
Sister
Four Haploid
Chromatids
Daughter Cells
Diploid
XX
11
Daughter
Cells from
Meiosis I
Figure 4.4 Illustration of
meiosis I and Meiosis II
Grade 10 Biology
89
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Table 4.1 Description of the different stages of Meiosis I and Meiosis II
Stage
Description
Prophase I
Each chromosome appears shortened and thickened form two chromatids
Homologous chromosomes pair up
Metaphase I
Chromosomes align on spindle fiber; lining up in the middle or metaphase plate
The centromere joining sister chromatids do not separate
The pair of chromatids from each homologous pair moves to the end (pole) of the
Anaphase I
cell.
Reduction to haploid (n) will take place because homologous chromosomes of male
and female parents separate
The nuclear membrane reforms and the cells begin to divide.
Telophase I
In some cells, the cell continues to full cytokinesis while in other cells there may be
prolonged interphase but with no further DNA duplication
Prophase II
New spindles are formed and the chromosome, still made up of paired chromatids
moves toward the middle of the cell.
Metaphase
The chromosomes line up in the metaphase plate , with the spindle attached to the
II
sister chromatids of each chromosome coming from the opposite poles.
Anaphase II
The centromeres divide and sister chromatids separate and pulled to the opposite
ends of each cell
Nuclear membrane reappears, the chromosomes return to the interphase state
Telophase II
Cytokinesis follows giving four daughter cells each with half the chromosome num-
ber of the initial parent ( mother) cell
ACTIVITY 4.6 DEMONSTRATION
Direction
With your small group (two pairs of neighbouring students) discuss and attempt the following
questions/task.
Is it Meiosis I or Meiosis II that is similar to mitosis? Why so?
What are the basic similarities between Mitosis and meiosis)?
Prepare a table of comparison that shows difference between Mitosis and meiosis
Let students bring threads with different colours (red and green). Show them how they start with
homologus chromosomes (paternal and maternal chromosomes represented by red and green
threads). Demonstrate the different stages of nuclear division with small pieces of the colour
threads and show the result of chromosomal duplication and redistribution that occur first in
mitosis and then in meiosis.
Ask students to repeat what has been demonstrated and identify the difference in mitosis and
meiosis
90
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
4.3 Renowned Ethiopian Geneticist
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
appreciate the work of a renowned geneticist and
look for more Ethiopian Geneticist who contributed a lot to
their field
Dr. Melaku Worede
Dr. Melaku Worede, a geneticist and agronomist, is renowned for
employing science to benefit poor farmers and saving Africa's seeds
from extinction. He was awarded the "Right livelihood Award" in
1989" for preserving Ethiopia's genetic wealth by building one of the
finest seed conservation centres in the world." He played key role
in the establishment of the Plant Genetic Resource centre in Addis
Ababa, where he became Director in 1979 and served for more than
14 years - until retirement
After retirement, Dr. Melaku developed his pioneer work on a
framing based native seed (landrace) conservation, enhancement
and utilization. He was able to develop and grow locally adapted
native seeds (e.g., durum wheat) without commercial fertilizers or
other chemicals. He was able to show that his native seeds exceeded
their high in put counterparts on the average by 10 - 15% and the
original farmers' cultivars by 20 - 25% in yield.
ACTIVITY 4.6 PEER DISCUSSION
Direction
Carefully read the work of Dr. Melaku and share your
impression with a friend sitting with you.
Form a group of four students and look for more renowned
Ethiopian Geneticists from books and /or the Internet. Organize a
report to share with your classmates.
Grade 10 Biology
91
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Unit Summary
A cell cycle is a sequence of events that takes place in the parent cell as a means of distributing
genetic materials thereby forming daughter cells. There are two main divisions of the cell
cycle: Interphase and Cell division.
Interphase is the stage of preparation where a cell exhibits growth and DNA (genetic material
synthesis)
Cell division is nuclear division either by mitosis or meiosis followed by cytoplasmic division
(cytokinesis).
Cell division is a basic process in all living things where a parent or mother cell, divides into
two cells, called daughter cells.
Cell division is a means of growth and replacing damaged or dead cells in multicellular
organisms. It is equivalent to reproduction in unicellular organisms.
Mitosis is a division of the somatic (body) cells to form identical daughter cells. It has four
stages namely prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.
Meiosis is a division of reproductive cells, resulting in daughter cells sex cells (gametes) with
half of the chromosomes in the initial or mother cell.
In meiosis a cell divides twice, Meiosis I and Meiosis II, resulting in four daughter cells.
In meiosis I, homologous chromosomes separate and move to opposite cells. This is a
reduction by half, going from diploid (2n) to haploid (n).
In meiosis II, sister chromatids separate and move to opposite poles of the cell.
Meiosis occurs only in reproductive organs such as testes and ovaries while mitosis occurs in
body (somatic) cells.
92
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 4: Cell Reproduction
Review Questions
True - False items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise book.
1. It is meiosis I that resembles mitosis.
2. Homologus chromosomes are duplicated one parent chromosomes.
3. Meiosis results in four haploid daughter cells.
4. DNA duplication is the longest phase of the interphase.
5. Prokaryotic organisms like Bacteria do not divide by mitosis.
Matching items: Match the descriptions under "Column A" with the terms under "Column B"
Column A
Column B
1. known as cytoplasmic division
A) Anaphase
2. paired maternal and paternal chromosomes
B) Cytokinesis
3. pull chromosomes to opposite ends of a cell
C) Homologous chromosomes
4. arrangement of chromosomes at the equatorial plane
D) Interphase
5. separation of sister chromatids
E) Metaphase
6. duplicated one parent chromosmes
F) Sister chromatids
G) Spindle fiber
H) Telophase
Short answers
1. What is the importance of meiosis to sexually reproducing organisms?
2. Mention at least two important features of cancer cells.
3. What is the difference between interphase and prophase?
4. What would happen if there is no cytoplasmic division at the end of telophase?
5. If a cell is having 2n=40 divide by meiosis
A. How many cells are formed at the end of meiosis i? Meiosis ii?
B. How many chromosomes are there in each daughter cells at the end of meiosis i? Meiosis
ii?
C .How many set of chromosome(s)/is/ are there at the end of meiosis i? Meiosis ii?
6. If a species A has 2n=28 chromosome and species B has 2n=32 chromosomes and allowed to
interbreed together to produce another organism(species C). What would be the number of
chromosomes in species C?
7. What is the difference between haploid and diploid cells? Are your skin cells haploid or
diploid? What about germ cells? Gametes?
Grade 10 Biology
93
Unit 5: Human Biology
Content
Learning competencies
5.1. Digestive system
Discuss the structure and function of the digestive system (alimentary
5.2. Circulatory and
canal and accessory organs).
Lymphatic system
Classify the types of digestion along the alimentary canal
5.2.1. Blood donation
List the end products of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats after complete
5.2.2. Diseases of
digestion
the circulatory and
Express the site of absorption of digested food, minerals, vitamins, and
lymphatic systems
water
(leukemia, varicose
Explore structural adaptations of the small intestine for the absorption
vein, elephantiasis,
Differentiate the absorption routs of different end products of digestion
cardiovascular diseases)
(hint: lacteals, capillaries)
5.3. Breathing system
Group enzymes of the digestive system based on their roles and pH
5.4. The excretory system
Demonstrate the structure of the heart using a heart model/ diagram
5.5. The immune system
Differentiate between pulmonary and systemic circulations.
5.6. Renowned Physicians
Compare and contrast arteries and veins based on their structures and
in Ethiopia
functions
Debate on the importance of blood donation and its health implications
on the donors and recipients.
Discuss the key functions and components of the lymphatic system.
Define the immune system
Discuss the types of immunity (innate and acquired).
Relate the lymphatic system with the immune system
Discuss the diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems (leukemia,
varicose vein, elephantiasis, cardiovascular diseases)
Draw and label the human breathing and excretory systems
Show the link between the human breathing system and the circulatory
system
Demonstrate the mechanism of breathing using locally available
materials
Design a model of one of the systems (excretory, circulatory, digestive
systems) using locally available materials
Examine the effects of smoking and cannabis on the normal functioning
of the breathing systems.
94
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.1 The Digestive System
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
discuss the structure and function of the digestive system (alimentary canal and accessory
organs),
classify the types of digestion along the alimentary canal,
list the end products of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats after complete digestion,
express the site of absorption of digested food, minerals, vitamins, and water,
explore structural adaptations of the small intestine for the absorption,
differentiate the absorption routs of different end products of digestion (hint: lacteals,
capillaries), and
group enzymes of the digestive system based on their roles and pH.
Activity 5.1 THINK-PAIR-
What do you know about the digestive system?
SHARE
In your previous grades,
All living organisms need nutrients to survive, plants can obtain
you have studied about the
nutrients from their roots and the energy molecules required for
digestive system of human
cellular function through the process of photosynthesis. Animals,
beings. Now, be in groups
of 2-3 students on the same
however, obtain their nutrients through the consumption of other
desk and discuss what you
organisms. At the cellular level, the biological molecules necessary
know about the digestive
for animal function are amino acids, lipid molecules, nucleotides,
system and the process that
and simple sugars. However, the food consumed consists of protein,
takes place beginning from
fat, and complex carbohydrates. Animals must convert these
the mouth to the anus and
macromolecules into the simple molecules required for maintaining
let one of you share it to the
whole class.
cellular function. The conversion of the food consumed to the
nutrients required is a multi-step process involving digestion and
absorption. During digestion, food particles are broken down into
smaller components, which are later absorbed by the body. This
happens by both physical means, such as chewing and by chemical
means, via enzyme-catalysed reactions. These processes take place in
the human digestive system step-wise.
The human digestive system is composed of four digestive processes:
1. Ingestion - the taking in of nutrients, in the mouth,
What are the components
and processes of the
2. Digestion - the breakdown of complex organic molecules into
digestive system?
smaller components by enzymes step-wise, physical, and chemical
processes that begins in the oral cavity and extends to the small
intestine,
3. Absorption - the transport of digested nutrients from the small
intestine to the cells of the body though finger like projection called
villi in the small intestine, and
Grade 10 Biology
95
Unit 5: Human Biology
4. Egesting - the removal of food waste from the body. The distinction
between excretion and egestion is based on the type of wastes excreted
by an organism. Undigested food that remains after digestion is
expelled in animals during the egestion process. Excretion is the
process through which metabolic wastes are expelled in both plants
and animals.
The digestive tract of adult humans is normally 6.5 m to 9m long. It
stores and breaks down organic molecules into simpler components.
Physical (mechanical) digestion begins in the mouth, where food
is chewed and formed a bolus (the Greek word for the ball) by the
tongue. Physical digestion breaks food into smaller pieces, increasing
the surface area for chemical digestion.
Activity 5.2 Group work
Where in the alimentary canal does the chemical digestion
begin?
Form a group of 3-4 students
and:
The chemical digestion of carbohydrate (starch) starts in the oral
1. discuss the structure and
cavity by an enzyme called salivary amylase or ptyalin. The food is
functions of the digestive
then swallowed and enters the esophagus a long tube that connects
system;
the mouth to the stomach. Using peristalsis, wave-like smooth-
2. draw, label and study the
muscle contractions, the muscles of the esophagus push the food
route of the alimentary
toward the stomach. The stomach contents are extremely acidic, with
canal and the types of
digestion (mechanical
a pH between 1.5 and 2.5. This acidity kills micro-organisms, breaks
and chemical) along the
down food tissues, and activates digestive enzymes. The chemical
alimentary canal;
digestion of protein starts in the stomach by the enzyme pepsin.
3. discuss digestion end
Further breakdown of food takes place in the small intestine where
products; and
bile is produced by the liver, and enzymes produced by the small
4. support your activity
intestine and the pancreas, continue the process of digestion. The
using virtual lab (digestive
smaller molecules are absorbed into the bloodstream through the
system animation)
using Internet and other
epithelial cells lining the walls of the small intestine. The waste
resources.
material travels onto the large intestine where water is absorbed and
the drier waste material is compacted into feces; it is stored in the
rectum until it is excreted through the anus.
The Oral Cavity
What is the process of digestion that takes place in the mouth?
In the oral cavity, both physical and chemical digestion begins. It is
the point of entry (ingestion) of food into the digestive system. The
process that takes place in the mouth includes the following.
If one ingests glucose
1. The food is broken into smaller particles by mastication, the
where will it be digested?
chewing action of the teeth.
2. Saliva, the watery fluid produced by the salivary glands contains
96
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
amylase enzyme, and breaks down starches into simpler molecules.
Activity 5.3 Individual
work
3. Saliva dissolves food particles and makes it possible to taste what is
being eaten.
Dry your tongue and
distribute a small amount of
4. Saliva lubricates the food so that it can be swallowed.
salt on it to dissolve in saliva.
5. We detect the flavour when food particles dissolved in saliva
What do you feel? Have you
detected any test? Why?
penetrate the cells of the taste buds located on the tongue and
cheeks.
6. The tongue, positions and mixes food and forms a ball of food
called bolus ready to be swallowed.
The teeth
-
What is the importance of teeth in digestion? Can you mention
the different types of teeth?
The teeth are important structures for physical digestion (Figure 5.1).
There are 4 types of teeth:
Activity 5.4 Group work
In group of 2-3 students,
Incisors: are eight chisel-shaped teeth at the front of your mouth
answer the following
specialized for cutting.
questions.
Canine: teeth that are sharp, dagger-shaped specialized for tearing.
Draw and label parts of a
single teeth.
Premolar: teeth that are broad flattened specialized for grinding.
Classify your teeth
Molars: teeth tend to be even broader and have cusps that are even
according to their
functions.
more flattened. They are designed for crushing and grinding food.
The last set of molars is the wisdom teeth, so-called because they
What are the reasons for
usually do not emerge until we reach about 16 to 20 years of age. Each
the teeth decay?
tooth is covered with enamel, which is the hardest substance in the
human body.
Enamel
Lips
Gingiva (gums)
Dentin
Hard palate
Pulp
FOODS
Crown
Soft palate
Gums
Uvula
Palatine tonsil
Papillae of tongue
Bone
Molars
Root
Premolar
Root
Canal
Canine
Tongue
Nerves and
blood vessels
Incisor
A. Types of teeth
B. The Structure of Teeth
Figure 5.1 The structure and types of teeth
Grade 10 Biology
97
Unit 5: Human Biology
External and internal structures of teeth
The teeth are the hardest substances in the human body. Besides
being essential for chewing, the teeth play an important role in
speech. Parts of the teeth include:
Enamel: the hardest, white outer part of the tooth. Enamel is mostly
made of calcium phosphate, a rock-hard mineral.
Dentin: a layer underlying the enamel. It is a hard tissue that contains
microscopic tubes. When the enamel is damaged, heat or cold can
enter the tooth through these paths and cause sensitivity or pain.
Pulp: the softer, living inner structure of teeth. Blood vessels and
nerves run through the pulp of the teeth.
Periodontal ligament- tissue that helps to hold the teeth tightly
against the jaw.
Roots- is the part of the tooth that extends into the bone and holds
the tooth in place. It makes up approximately two-thirds of the tooth
Gums. Gums, also called gingiva, are the fleshy, pink connective
tissue that's attached to the neck of the tooth and the cementum.
Crown: the crown of a tooth is the top portion of the tooth that is
visible.
Human dentition
The conventional way of expressing the total number of teeth in the
human beings are represented: incisor(I), canines(C), molars(M)
and premolars(P). It gives a set like I:C:P:M. For example, if it is
given 2:1:2:3 for upper teeth then, it indicates 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2
premolars and 3 molars of the upper mouth on one side. Include the
dental formula
The dental formula of human beings (adults):
(2123 / 2123) X 2 = 32 (2123 / 2123) X 2 = 32
There are 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2 premolars and 3 molars. In adults,
dentition pertains to all types of teeth development. In a normal
adult there are 32 teeth. There are two types of dentition: temporary
and permanent. There are 20 teeth in the temporary dentition and
32 teeth in the permanent dentition. In a child, there are 20 teeth
present which are called milk teeth or deciduous teeth. These teeth
grow at the age of 6 years.
i.e. (2102 / 2102) X 2 = 20 (2102 / 2102) X 2 = 20. These are two
incisors, 1 canine and 2 molars.
In order to represent the total number of the teeth in the jaw or
98
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
mouth, the whole formula is multiplied by two as the formula for one
side of the mouth. Both monkeys and human beings have the same
set of teeth and the same dental formula.
Keeping teeth health
Adult teeth should last you all through your life. However, this
doesn't always happen, because your teeth can be affected by bacteria
What are the
recommended measures
that cause dental caries. There are many different bacteria that are
for healthy tools
found naturally in your mouth. These bacteria, combined with
development?
food and saliva, form a thin film known as plaque on your teeth. If
these bacteria are given a sugar-rich diet (in other words, if you eat
a lot of sweet, sugary food) they produce a lot of acid waste. This
acid attacks and dissolves the tough enamel coating of your teeth.
Once through the enamel, the acid also dissolves away some of the
dentine and then the bacteria can get into the inside of your tooth.
The bacteria will then reproduce and feed, eating away at your tooth
until they reach the nerves of the pulp cavity causing toothache. The
same bacteria can affect your gums, causing periodontal disease.
The symptoms include tender gums, bleeding when you clean your
teeth and eventually the possible loss of all your teeth, not from tooth
decay but from gum disease. Taking in lots of acidic food and drink,
such as fruits and cola, can also weaken the enamel on your teeth.
This is particularly the case if you clean your teeth straight after an
acidic drink such as fruit juice or cola, when the softening effect on
the enamel is strongest and brushing your teeth can actually wear the
enamel away.
Tooth and gum disease are extremely common all over the world.
They cause pain, bad breath, loss of teeth and difficulty eating. The
good news is that they can both be avoided, especially if you have
good dental care available. Ways to avoid tooth decay include:
Regular brushing of your teeth and gums twice a day. This removes
the plaque from the teeth, preventing the build-up of a sticky,
acidic film over the enamel.
Avoiding sweet, sugary foods - if the bacteria in your teeth are
deprived of sugar, they cannot make acidic waste and your teeth
are safe.
Have regular dental check-ups. A dentist can clean your teeth
more thoroughly than you can, and any early signs of decay can be
treated. Your teeth won't heal themselves, but any tooth decay can
be removed and replaced by a filling.
The Esophagus
The swallowed food travels from the mouth to the stomach by way of
the esophagus. The bolus of food stretches the walls of the esophagus,
Grade 10 Biology
99
Unit 5: Human Biology
activating muscles that set up waves of rhythmic contractions called
peristalsis. Peristaltic contractions, which are involuntary, move food
Food mass muscle muscle
(Bollus) contracted relaxed
along the gastrointestinal tract (Figure 5. 2). Peristaltic action will
move food or fluid from the esophagus to the stomach. Look at the
process of peristalsis in figure 5.2.
Activity 5.5 Answer to the questions
After studying the digestive system in the mouth, answer the
following questions:
1. Discuss the structure and function of the teeth.
2. What are the functions of saliva?
3. How does chewing assist in the digestion of food?
4. What are amylase enzymes, and why are they necessary?
Figure 5.2 Rhythmic
5. How is food moved along the esophagus?
contractions of muscle move
food along the digestive tract
The stomach
The stomach is the site of food storage and initial protein digestion.
What are the processes of
The stomach contains three layers of muscle, which run in different
digestion that take place
directions so that the muscle contractions can churn the food (Figure
in the stomach?
5.3 (a)). The movement of food to and from the stomach is regulated
by circular muscles called sphincters. Sphincters act like the draw
strings on a bag. Contraction of the lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) closes the opening to the stomach, while its relaxation allows
food to enter. The lower esophageal sphincter prevents food and acid
from being regurgitated up into the esophagus. A second sphincter,
the pyloric sphincter, regulates the movement of food and stomach
acids into the small intestine (Figure 5.3(b)).
A
B
esophagus
Esophageal
sphincter
stomach
muscle layer
Pyloric
Sphincter
duodenum
Figure 5.3 a) Muscle is responsible for the contractions of the stomach
b) Sphincters regulate the movement of food.
The J-shaped stomach has numerous ridges that allow it to expand so
that it can store about1.5L of food. Millions of cells line the inner wall
of the stomach.
100
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Activities in the stomach:
1. the cells secrete the various stomach fluids, called gastric fluids or
gastric juice, that aid digestion;
2. contractions of the stomach mix the food with the gastric fluids;
and
3. it is involved in both physical (churning action if stomach wall) and
chemical digestion( (e.g. digestion of proteins by the action of enzyme
pepsin).
Approximately 500mL of the fluids in the stomach are produced
following a large meal.
What is the composition
of gastric juice?
Gastric fluid includes: (1)mucus, (2)hydrochloric acid (Hydrochloric
acid (HCI)), (4) pepsinogens, and other substances.
Hydrochloric acid kills many harmful substances that are ingested with
food. It also converts pepsinogen into its active form, pepsin, which is a
protein-digesting enzyme. Pepsin breaks the long amino acid chains in
proteins into shorter chains, called polypeptides.
The pH inside the stomach normally ranges between 2.0 and 3.0 but
may approach pH 1.0. Acids with a pH of 2.0 can dissolve fibres in a
rug. It is the high acidity of hydrochloric acid that makes it effective
at killing pathogens and allows pepsin to do its work.
How does the stomach safely store these strong chemicals, both
of which dissolve the proteins that makeup cells?
A layer of alkaline mucus protects the stomach lining from being
digested. Pepsinogen passes across the cell membrane and is
activated by Hydrochloric acid (HCl) to become pepsin. The pepsin
breaks down the proteins in the food, but not the proteins of the
stomach's cells because these proteins are protected by the mucous
layer. The esophagus does not have a protective mucous layer, so if the
lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is weak, stomach acid may enter the
esophagus and damage its lining. This causes pain known as heartburn.
The partially digested food and gastric juice mixture are called chyme.
Gastric emptying occurs within two to six hours after a meal. Only a
small amount of chyme is released into the small intestine at a time.
The movement of chyme from the stomach into the small intestine
is regulated by hormones, stomach distension, and muscular reflexes
that influence the pyloric sphincter. The low pH of the stomach will
denature the amylase and lipase that were secreted in the mouth.
What do we call the
Therefore, over time, the chemical digestion of starches and fats will
partially digested food in
decrease in the stomach and their further digestion will take place in
the stomach?
the small intestine.
Grade 10 Biology
101
Unit 5: Human Biology
Absorption in the stomach
What is the reason for the
release of small amount
Although the stomach absorbs few of the products of digestion, it can
of chyme in to the small
absorb many other substances, including glucose and other simple
intestine at a time?
sugars, amino acids, and some fat soluble substances, water, specific
vitamins, and alcohol, etc.
The small intestine
The small intestine is up to 7 m in length, but only 2.5 cm in diameter
(Figure 5.4a). Most chemical digestion takes place in the small intestine.
Parts of the small intestine:
1. duodenum the first 25 cm to 30 cm of the small intestine where
the majority of digestion occurs,
2. jejunum is the second component of the small intestine and
3. ileum the third component
The small intestine secretes digestive enzymes and moves its contents
along by peristalsis. The stomach absorbs some water, specific
vitamins, some medicines, and alcohol, but most absorption takes
place within the small intestine. Long finger like projections called
villi (singular: villus) greatly increase the surface area of the small
intestine (Figure 5.4(b)). One estimate suggests that villi account for
a tenfold increase in surface area for absorption. The cells that make
up the lining of each villus have microvilli, which are fine, threadlike
extensions of the membrane that further increase the surface for
absorption.
Mouth
Tongue
Teeth
Pharynx
Salivary
glands
Esophagus
Villus
sperosa
Muscle layers
Submucosa
Liver
Stomach
Gallbladder
Pancreas
mu coosa
villi
Small
Large
intestine
intestine
Duodenum
Transverse
colon
Jejunum
Ascending
artery
ileum
colon
Descending
vein
colon
WW
Cecum
Appendix
Rectum
Anus
A
B
Figure 5.4 Parts of the digestive system and the absorption villi
102
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Each villus is supplied with a capillary network that intertwines with
lymph vessels called lacteals that transport materials. Some nutrients
thin
are absorbed by diffusion, but some nutrients are actively transported
surface layer
lactial
from the digestive tract. Monosaccharides and amino acids are
absorbed into the capillary networks; fats are absorbed into the
capillaries
lacteals(Figure 5.5).
blood vessel
Activity 5.6 Group work
Figure 5.5Anatomy of a villus,
In a group of 2-3 students, discuss:
with the lacteal
1. the sites of absorption of digested foods, minerals, vitamins,
water;
2. the structural adaptation of the small intestine (villi with
lacteals and capillaries) for absorption.
3. the causes of poor absorption;
Then, present your work to the class.
Finally, your teacher will summarize the sites of absorption;
adaptations of the small intestine for absorption and the roles of
lacteals and capillaries.
The accessory organs
The organs discussed above are the organs of the digestive tract
through which food passes. Accessory organs add secretions and
enzymes that break down food into nutrients. Accessory organs
What are accessory
organs?
include:
the salivary glands,
the pancreas,
the liver, and
the gall bladder.
The secretions of the pancreas, liver, and gallbladder are regulated
by hormones in response to food consumption. The liver is the
largest internal organ in humans and it plays an important role in
the digestion of fats and detoxifying blood. The liver produces bile,
which is a digestive juice that is required for the breakdown of fats in
the duodenum. The liver also processes the absorbed vitamins and
fatty acids and synthesizes many plasma proteins. The gallbladder is
a small organ that aids the liver by storing bile and concentrating bile
salts. The pancreas secretes bicarbonate that neutralizes the acidic
chyme and a variety of enzymes (trypsin, amylase, and lipase) for
the digestion of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, respectively. The
details of the accessory organs are presented in the next sections.
Grade 10 Biology
103
Unit 5: Human Biology
Pancreas
Activity 5.7 Discussion
The pancreatic secretions contain enzymes that promote the
As you already know, food
breakdown of the three major components of food: proteins,
moves from the stomach to
carbohydrates, and lipids. Pancreatic secretions contain the following
the small intestine. Partially
digestive enzymes:
digested food reaches the
small intestine already
Trypsin- a protein-digesting enzyme called trypsinogen is released
soaked in HCl and pepsin.
from the pancreas. Once trypsinogen reaches the small intestine, an
How are the cells of the
enzyme called enterokinase converts the inactive trypsinogen into
small intestine protected
trypsin, which acts on the partially digested proteins. Trypsin breaks
from the effects of HCl and
pepsin? Discuss this issue
down long-chain polypeptides into shorter-chain peptides.
with your classmates after
Erepsins- are released from the pancreas and small intestine. They
collecting information from
complete protein digestion by breaking the bonds between short-
the internet or books.
chain peptides, releasing individual amino acids.
Amylase- continue the digestion of carbohydrates that begun in the
mouth by salivary amylase. The intermediate-size chains are broken
down into disaccharides. The small intestine releases disaccharide
enzymes, called disaccharidases, which complete the digestion of
carbohydrates
Lipases-enzymes released from the pancreas that breaks down lipids
(fats). There are two different types of lipid-digesting enzymes:
Pancreatic lipase, the most common lipase, breaks down fats into
fatty acids and glycerol.
Phospholipase acts on phospholipids.
The summary of the enzymes found in the small intestine, where
they are produced, and their actions that take place are given in Table
5.1 below.
Table 5.1 Digestion in the Small Intestine
Enzyme
Produced by
Reaction
lipase
pancreas
fat droplets + H2O
glycerol + fatty
acids
trypsin
pancreas
protein + H2O
peptides
erepsin
pancreas, small intestine
peptides + H2O
amino acids
pancreatic amylases
pancreas
starch + H2O
maltose
maltase
small intestine
maltose + H2O
glucose
Liver and Gallbladder
The liver continually produces fluid called bile. Bile contains bile
What is the importance of
salts, which aid fat digestion. When the stomach is empty, bile is stored
liver?
and concentrated in the gallbladder. When there are fats in the small
intestine, the hormones trigger the gall bladder to release bile salts.
104
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Once inside the small intestine, the bile salts:
Why liver is said to
Emulsify or breakdown, large fat globules. The breakdown of fat globules
be unusual organ
into smaller droplets is physical digestion, not chemical digestion
with regard to blood
since chemical bonds are not broken. Physical digestion prepares the
circulation?
fat for chemical digestion by increasing the exposed surface area on
which fat-digesting enzymes, such as pancreatic lipase, can work.
Bile also contains pigments. The liver breaks down haemoglobin from
red blood cells and stores the products in the gallbladder for removal.
The characteristic brown colour of feces results from haemoglobin
breakdown.
Stores glycogen and vitamins A, B12, and D.
Detoxify many harmful substances in the body. Harmful chemicals
are made soluble and can be dissolved in the blood and eliminated in
the urine. One of the more common poisons is alcohol.
Large Intestine
The human large intestine is much smaller in length compared to the
Activity 5.8 Library/
small intestine but larger in diameter. It has three parts: the cecum,
Internet search
the colon, and the rectum. The cecum joins the ileum to the colon
Conduct library/internet
and is the receiving pouch for the waste matter. The colon is home
search on groups of enzymes
to many bacteria or intestinal flora that aid in the digestive processes.
associated with digestion
The colon has four regions, the ascending colon, the transverse
of different food staffs, the
colon, the descending colon and the sigmoid colon (Figure 5.4a).
sites of their action and the
The main functions of the colon are to extract the water and mineral
required environment (pH)
for each group. Finally,
salts from undigested food, and to store waste material.
present your findings to the
Chemical digestion is complete by the time food reaches the large
class for discussion.
intestine (Figure 5.4a). The colon, the largest part of the large intestine,
must store waste long enough to reabsorb water from it. During this
time, some inorganic salts, minerals, and vitamins are also absorbed
with the water.
The large intestine houses bacteria, such as Escherichia coli
(E. coli), which are essential to life and use waste materials to
synthesize vitamins B and K. Cellulose, the long-chain carbohydrate
characteristic of plant cell walls, reaches the large intestine undigested.
Although cellulose cannot be broken down by humans, it serves
an important function: cellulose provides bulk. As wastes build up
in the large intestine, receptors in the wall of the intestine provide
information to the central nervous system, which, in turn, prompts
a bowel movement. The bowel movement ensures the removal of
potentially toxic wastes from the body. Individuals who do not eat
sufficient amounts of cellulose (roughage or fiber) have fewer bowel
movements. This means that wastes and toxins remain in their bodies
for longer periods. Scientists have determined that cancer of the colon
Grade 10 Biology
105
Unit 5: Human Biology
can be related to diet. Individuals who eat mostly processed, highly
refined foods are more likely to develop cancer of the colon.
List the fibre rich foods
that are commonly found
The rectum (Figure 5.4a) stores feces until defecation. The feces are
in you locality.
propelled using peristaltic movements during elimination. The anus
is an opening at the far-end of the digestive tract and is the exit point
for the waste material. Two sphincters regulate the exit of feces, the
inner sphincter is involuntary and the outer sphincter is voluntary.
Table 5.2 Summary of digestion in human alimentary canal
Region of gut
Glands and
Enzymes and opti- Food digested, products and other activity
secretion
mum pH
Mouth: mastica-
Salivary glands
1. pH-7, slightly
1.mucin lubricates food bolus
tion by jaws and
:saliva 1-2
acid in adults,
.(A) arch(amylase)
dextrins
tongue
liters/daily
slightly alkali to
(B) cooked starch
maltose
neutral in children
2. amylase
Oesophagus
None
None
Food bolus moves by peristalsis
Stomach churn-
Gastric gland,
1. pH 1, strongly
1. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) is bacteriocidal
ing action. Tem-
stomach
acidic
2. clots milk protein-caesin
porary storage 1
wall-gastric
2. rennin (in young
3. lipids---fatty acids and glycerine
to3 hrs
juice
children)
4. proteins-amino acids
2-4L; stores
3. lipase(in young
Absorption: water, salts, vitamins and ethanol
daily
children)
4. pepsin
Duodenum(Ac-
1.liver- bile
1. pH 7-8, slightly
1. alters pH of stomach contents
cessory organ
juice, 700CM3-
alkaline
2. bile salts emulsify or cream lipids
secretions)
1.2 litres daily
2. no enzyme
2 pancre-
1. pH 7-8,slightly
1. .food as chime propelled by peristalsis
as-pancreatic
alkaline
2. starch(amylase)
maltose
juices, 700Cm3
2. amylase
3. lipids
fatty acids and glycerol
daily
3. lipase
4. peptones
short peptides
4. Trypsin
5. nucleic acids nucleotides
5.nuclease
Small intestine
Glands in
1. pH 7-8
1
and duodenum
intestine and
2. entrokinase
2. dipeptides, peptides
amino acids
duodenum
changes trypsino-
3. lipids---fatty acids and glycerol (propanetriol)
wall-intestinal
gen into trypsin
4. maltase maltose into glucose molecules
juice, 200cm3
3.lipase
Lactase
lactose into glucose and galactose
4.glycosi-
Sucrose sucrose into glucose and fructose
dases-maltase,
Absorption: large surface area, villi, and mi-
lactase, sucrase
crovilli, main region of absorption of vitamins,
minerals, amino acids, glucose, fatty acids and
glycerol
Large intestine
Lining with
pH 6-8
1. mucous lubricates faces
mucous glands
no enzymes
2. water absorbed from faces
3. bacteria synthesis vitamin B groups
4. faces mainly water 75%, bacteria, 8%, lipids,
6%, dietary fiber cellulose, 2% etc
106
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.2 The circulatory and lymphatic system
Objectives
What do you know about
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
the movement of blood in
Demonstrate the structure of the heart using a heart model/
your body?
diagram
Differentiate between pulmonary and systemic circulations.
Compare and contrast arteries and veins based on their
structures and functions
Discuss types of blood
Debate on the importance of blood donation and its health
implications on the donors and recipients.
Discuss the key functions and components of the lymphatic
system.
The circulatory system is a means by which blood moves throughout
your body. The circulatory system:
carries nutrients to cells,
remove wastes away from cells,
carry chemical messages from cells in one part of the body to
distant target tissues,
distributes heat throughout the body and, along with the kidneys,
maintain levels of body fluid,
provide oxygen for the cellular respiration and
transport of immune cells throughout the body to defend against
invading organisms
Moreover, your circulatory system has 96 000 km of blood vessels to
sustain your 100 trillion cells. Your heart is about the size of your fist
and with a mass of about 300g. The heart beats about 70 times/min
from the beginning of your life until death. Every minute, 5L of blood
cycles from the heart to the lungs, picks up oxygen, and returns to
the heart. The structure of the heart and the activities of its parts are
given in the figure (Figure5.6).
Activity 5.9 Group work
In groups of 4-6 students,
Have you ever heard about a live pump?
prepare diagrams /models
of the heart and study each
part with its functions and
In this section, you will explore the remarkable live pump - the heart
present for the whole-class.
that propels the blood into the vessels. There is no single better word
to describe the function of the heart other than "pump" since its
Grade 10 Biology
107
Unit 5: Human Biology
contraction develops the pressure that ejects blood into the major
vessels: the aorta and pulmonary trunk. From these vessels, the
What are the chambers of
the heart?
blood is distributed to the other parts of the body. A field of study
about the heart is called cardiology and the scientists, cardiologists.
Posterior
3
Description
Tricuspid valve
Bicuspid (mitral)
4
valve
1. Right atrium (Atrium
5
dextra)
2. Left atrium (Atrium
2
sinistrum)
1
3. Superior Vena Cave
(Venea cava Superior)
4. Aorta
Right
Left
5. Pulmonary artery
side of
side of
6
6. Pulmonary vein
heart
heart
13
7
7. Bicuspide (Mitral) valve
8
8. Semilunar (Aortic) valve
12
9. Left ventricle
10. Right ventricle
11. Inferior Vena Cave
10
9
(Venea cava Inferior)
Aortic valve
11
12. Tricuspid valve
Pulmonary valve
13. Semilunar (Pulmonary)
valve
Anterior
Figure 5.7 The valves of the heart
Figure 5.6 The heart anatomy
The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood to circulate
throughout the body. The heart wall consists of three layers: the
endocardium, myocardium, and epicardium.
The endocardium is the thin membrane that lines the interior of the
heart,
The myocardium is the middle layer of the heart. It is the heart
muscle and is the thickest layer of the heart, and
The epicardium is a thin layer on the surface of the heart in which
the coronary arteries lie.
The pericardium is a thin sac the heart sits in, often filled with a small
amount of fluid, which separates the heart from the other structures
in the chest such as the lungs.
Activity 5.10 Group discussion
In group of 2-3 students:
1.
Discuss the 4 chambers of the heart.
2.
Explain the process of movement of blood though the
chambers.
3.
Which chamber is the strongest?
4.
Which chamber carries deoxygenated blood?
What types of valves are there between the heart chambers?
108
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Valves
Attention
In the cardiovascular system of the heart four valves prohibit the
backflow of blood:
The heart consists of two
a. Tri-cuspid valve (Right atrioventricular RAV) - valve separates the
(right & left) parallel
pumps separated by the
rightatria from the rightventricle.
septum (Figure 5.6). The
b. Bi-cuspid valve (Left atrioventricular LAV) -valve separates
four-chambered human
the left atria from the left ventricle
heart is composed of two
thin-walled atria (singular:
Semi-lunar valves
atrium) and two thick-
walled ventricles. Blood
a. Valve that separate the right ventricle from the pulmonary artery
from the systemic system
and
enters the right atrium, and
blood from the pulmonary
b. Valve that separate the left ventricle from the aorta. The semi-lunar
system enters the left atrium.
valves are half-moon-shaped (hence, the name semi-lunar), and
The stronger and more
they prevent blood that has entered the arteries from flowing
muscular ventricles pump
back into the ventricles (Figure 5.6).
the blood to the lungs and
distant tissues.
Laboratory Activity 5.11: Dissection of mammalian heart (cow or sheep)
The human heart is a pump. It pumps blood around the body at different speeds and at
different pressures according to the body's needs. It can do this because the wall of the
heart is made from cardiac muscle. Cardiac muscles are unlike any other muscle. It never
gets fatigued like skeletal muscles. On average, cardiac muscle fibres contract and relax about 70
times a minute. In a lifetime, this muscle will contract over two billion times. The objective of
this activity, therefore, is to study the external and internal structure of this amazing mammalian
heart.
Procedures:
1. Collect a freshly slaughtered sheep or cow heart from the butcheries
2. Carefully handle and observe:
the external structures (the outlets and inlets of the pulmonary artery and pulmonary veins),
the inlets (superior and inferior vena cava), and
the epicardium.
3. Using a dissecting knife carefully cut open the heart vertically and observe the following
structures:
the right and left ventricles,
the septum,
the tricuspid and bicuspid valves and
the semi-lunar valves.
Answer the following questions
1. What do you deduce from your study of the structure of the mammalian heart structure?
2. Now, can you associate what you have studied in the classroom with your practical activity in
the laboratory?
3. Write a short report on your activity in the laboratory.
Grade 10 Biology
109
Unit 5: Human Biology
Activity 5.12 THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
What are the two types of blood circulation?
Recall what you have studied
about the 4 chambers of
The human circulatory systems are a double circulatory system. It
the heart and movement
has two separate circuits and blood passes through the heart twice:
of blood. Then, share ideas
pulmonary and systemic circulation.
about the movement of
blood in our body. Finally,
Pulmonary circulation - the movement of blood from the heart
your teacher will help you
to the lungs for oxygenation, then back to the heart again. Oxygen-
to classify the two types of
depleted blood from the body leaves the systemic circulation when
circulations. Try to support
your activity using virtual
it enters the right atrium through the superior and inferior venae
lab (circulatory system
cavae. The blood is then pumped through the tricuspid valve into the
animation, video).
right ventricle. From the right ventricle, blood is pumped through
the pulmonary valve and into the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary
artery splits into the right and left pulmonary arteries and the blood in
the arteries travel to each lung (Figure 5.8).
Lungs
Pulmonary
circulation
Pulmonary
artery
Pulmonary vein
Vena cava
Aorta
Upper
body
Liver
Vessels transporting
Hepatic
oxygenated blood
vein
Hepatic artery
Vessels transporting
Systemic
circulation
Hepatic
deoxygenated blood
portal vein
Vessels involved in gas
Stomach,
excange
intestines
Renal
vein
Renal artery
Kidneys
Lower body
Figure 5.8 Pulmonary and
systemic circulation
Systemic circulation - is the movement of blood from the heart
through the body to provide oxygen and nutrients to the tissues
of the body while bringing deoxygenated blood back to the heart.
Oxygenated blood enters the left atrium from the pulmonary veins
(Figure 5.8). The blood is then pumped through the mitral valve into
the left ventricle. From the left ventricle, blood is pumped through
the aortic valve and into the aorta, the body's largest artery. The
aorta arches and branches into major arteries to the upper body
before passing through the diaphragm, where it branches further
into the iliac, renal, and suprarenal arteries which supply the lower
parts of the body.
110
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
The arteries branch into smaller arteries, arterioles, and finally
capillaries. Gas and nutrient exchange with the tissues occurs within
the capillaries that run through the tissues. Metabolic waste and
carbon dioxide diffuse out of the cell into the blood, while oxygen
and glucose in the blood diffuse out of the blood and into the cell.
Systemic circulation keeps the metabolism of every organ and every
tissue in the body alive, except the parenchyma of the lungs, which
are supplied by pulmonary circulation.
Activity 5.13 Pulse rate
Walking or mild exercise will increase your heart rate by 20 to 30%. For those in good health,
increased energy demands during extreme exercise can raise the heart rate to an incredible 200
beats per minute. Although few individuals can sustain such a rapid heart rate, it indicates the
capacity of the heart to adjust to changing situations.
1. While sitting still, place your index and middle finger near your wrist. The pulse you feel is
blood rushing through the brachial artery in your arm. Count the number of heartbeats in 30 S.
Record your pulse at rest and then calculate the heart rate as beats per min.
2. Remain sitting quietly and place your index finger and middle finger on the side of your neck
just to the side of your trachea. You will feel blood pulse through the carotid artery, which is an
artery that carries blood to the head. Take your pulse for 30 S and then calculate the heart rate
for 1 min.
3. Run on the spot for approximately 2 min.
4. Take your pulse immediately after exercise using either the carotid artery or the brachial artery.
5. Record your heart rate.
a. Compare the strength of the pulse in the carotid artery with that in your arm.
b. Compare your heart rate before and after exercise.
c. Do you think the difference between resting heart rate and the heart rate after exercise would
be greater for athletes? Explain your answer.
Cardiac Cycle
The period of time that begins with contraction of the atria and ends
with ventricular relaxation is known as the cardiac cycle. The period
of contraction that the heart undergoes while it pumps blood into
circulation is called systole. The period of relaxation that occurs as
the chambers filled with blood is called diastole. Both the atria and
ventricles undergo systole and diastole, and it is essential that these
components be carefully regulated and coordinated to ensure blood
is pumped efficiently to the body.
Grade 10 Biology
111
Unit 5: Human Biology
Heart Sounds
One of the simplest, yet effective, diagnostic techniques applied to
assess the state of a patient's heart is auscultation (listening to various
internal sounds) using a stethoscope. In a normal, healthy heart,
there are only two audible heart sounds: Lub and Dup (or Dub).
Lub, or rest heart sound is the sound created by the closing of the
atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction. The second
heart sound, "Dup" (or "Dub") is the sound of the closing of the
semilunar valves during ventricular diastole.
The term murmur is used to describe an unusual sound coming from
the heart that is caused by the turbulent flow of blood. Murmurs are
graded on a scale of 1 to 6, with 1 being the most common, the most
difficult sound to detect, and the least serious. The most severe is a
scale of 6. Specialized electronic stethoscopes are used to record both
normal and abnormal sounds.
When using a stethoscope to listen to the heart sounds, called
asculation, it is common practice for the clinician to ask the patient
to breathe deeply. This procedure not only allows for listening to air
flow, but it may also amplify heart murmurs. Inhalation increases
blood flow into the right side of the heart and may increase the
amplitude of right-sided heart murmurs. Expiration partially restricts
blood flow into the left side of the heart and may amplify left-sided
heart murmurs.
Activity 5.14 Heart sound
Medical workers use stethoscopes to measure blood pressure and to listen
to the heart, lungs, and intestines. You will use a stethoscope to listen to
your heart. Disinfect the earpieces of the stethoscope with rubbing
alcohol before and after use.
i. Place a stethoscope on your own chest and listen for a heart
sound. Locate the area where the heart sounds are loudest and
clearest.
ii. After 1 min of moderate exercise (e.g., walking on the spot), listen
for your heart sounds again.
a)
Drawa diagram of a chest showing where you located the clearest
sound.
b) Did the sound of your heart beat change after exercise? Describe
what differences you heard.
Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is the force of the blood on the walls of the
arteries. It can be measured indirectly with an instrument called a
112
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
sphygmomanometer. A cuff with an air bladder is wrapped around
the arm. A small pump is used to inflate the air bladder, thereby closing
off blood flow through the brachial artery, one of the major arteries
of the arm. A stethoscope is placed below the cuff and air is slowly
released from the bladder until a low-pitched sound can be detected.
The sound is caused by blood entering the previously closed artery.
Each time the heart contracts, the sound are heard. A gauge on the
sphygmomanometer measures the pressure exerted by the blood
What are the major foods
during ventricular contraction. This pressure is called systolic blood
which lead to high blood
pressure. Normal systolic blood pressure is less than 120 mmHg.
pressure (hypertension)?
Blood pressure is measured in the non-SI units of millimeters of
mercury, or mmHg. The cuff is then deflated even more, until the
Do you have any idea
about the lines of
sound disappears. At this point, blood flows into the artery during
movement of blood in the
ventricular relaxation, or filling. This pressure is called diastolic blood
body?
pressure. Normal diastolic blood pressure is less than 80 mmHg. A
systolic pressure of 120 mmHg and a diastolic pressure of 80 mmHg
would be reported as 120/80 (120 over 80). Reduced filling, such as
that caused by an internal hemorrhage, will cause diastolic blood
pressure to fall.
Blood Vessels
Blood vessels are the channels or conduits through which blood
Activity 5.15 Compare and
is distributed to body tissues. The vessels make up two closed
contrast
systems of tubes that begin and end at the heart. One system,
In a pair, compare and
the pulmonary vessels, transports blood from the right ventricle to
contrast arteries, veins and
the lungs and back to the left atrium. The other system, the systemic
capillaries based on their
vessels, carries blood from the left ventricle to the tissues in all parts
structures and functions by
of the body and then returns the blood to the right atrium. Based
using diagrams and models,
on their structure and function, blood vessels are classified as
and then prepare your own
summarized notes.
arteries, capillaries, and veins.
In small groups, answer the following questions.
What is blood?
What components of blood do you know?
What types of cells are there in blood?
Why do you think your white blood cells could be higher
than the normal?
What are platelets?
Blood
Blood is a constantly circulating fluid providing the body with
nutrition, oxygen, and waste removal. Blood is mostly liquid, with
numerous cells and proteins suspended in it, making blood "thicker"
than pure water. The average person has about 5 litres of blood.
Grade 10 Biology
113
Unit 5: Human Biology
Liquid called plasma makes up about half of the content of the
blood. Plasma contains proteins that help the blood to clot, transport
substances through the blood, and perform other functions. Blood
plasma also contains glucose and other dissolved nutrients. About
half of blood volume is composed of blood cells.
Blood Components
Normally, 7-8% of human body weight comes from blood. This
essential fluid carries out the critical functions of transporting
oxygen and nutrients to our cells and getting rid of carbon dioxide,
ammonia, and other waste products. In addition, it plays a vital
role in our immune system and in maintaining a relatively constant
body temperature. Blood is a highly specialized tissue composed of
more than 4,000 different kinds of components. Three of the most
important ones are:
Red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the tissues
White blood cells, which fight infections
Platelets, smaller cells that help blood clot
Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
Red blood cells, or erythrocytes, are relatively large microscopic cells
without nuclei. Red blood cells normally make up 40-50% of the total
blood volume. They transport oxygen from the lungs to all of the
living tissues of the body and carry away carbon dioxide. The red cells
are produced continuously in our bone marrow from stem cells at a
rate of about 2-3 million cells per second. Haemoglobin (containing
iron) is the gas transporting protein molecule that makes up 95%
of a red cell. People who are anemic generally have a deficiency in
red cells, and subsequently feel fatigued due to a shortage of oxygen.
The red colour of blood is primarily due to oxygenated red cells.
Human fetal haemoglobin molecules differ from those produced by
adults in the number of amino acid chains. Fetal haemoglobin has
three chains, while adults produce only two. As a consequence, fetal
haemoglobin molecules attract and transport relatively more oxygen
to the cells of the body.
Red blood cell adaptation for efficient oxygen transportation:
RBC have nucleus at the young stage and lose its nucleus when
What are adaptations of
matured. Not having a nucleus means that there is more space inside
a red blood cell that equip
for haemoglobin, so each red blood cell can carry more oxygen.
it for efficient oxygen
transport?
Biconcave shape gives it a larger surface area for gaseous diffusion
than a flat disc of the same volume.
Very thin cell surface membrane enables oxygen and carbon dioxide
can diffuse in and out rapidly.
114
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Flexible cell surface membrane allows it to squeeze along the
narrowest blood capillaries.
White blood cells (leukocytes)
White blood cells, or leukocytes, exist in variable numbers and types
but make up a very small part of blood's volume; in normally exists
among only about 1% in healthy people. Leukocytes are not limited
to blood. They occur elsewhere in the body as well, most notably in
the spleen, liver, and lymph glands. Most are produced in our bone
marrow from the same kind of stem cells that produce red blood
cells. Others are produced in the thymus gland, which is at the base
of the neck. White blood cells (called lymphocytes) are:
the first responders to our immune system. They seek out,
identify, and bind to alien proteins on bacteria, viruses,
and fungi so that they can be removed. Other white blood cells
(called granulocytes and macrophages) then arrive to surround and
destroy the alien cells.
have the function of getting rid of dead or dying blood cells as well
as foreign matter.
Individual white blood cells usually only last for 18-36 hours before
they are removed, though some types live as much as a year. There
are several different kinds of white blood cells (Table 5.3). The two
important types are:
neutrophils white blood cells that have a lobed nucleus, and
lymphocytes white blood cells that are smaller than neutrophils and
which have a large nucleus that takes up most of the cell.
Platelets or thrombocytes that are tiny cell fragments without
nuclei enclosed in a membrane. Platelets play an essential role in
What are platelets?
blood clotting. Clotting has two important functions:
it helps to stop blood from flowing out of the damaged vessel, and
it prevents disease-causing pathogenic micro-organisms (viruses,
bacteria) from getting into the body.
they collect where a damaged blood vessel is leaking blood and
form a temporary plug by combining with fibres of collagen, a
protein of the blood vessel wall.
they release an enzyme that sets off a chain of chemical reactions
in the blood. The result of these reactions is to change fibrinogen,
a soluble plasma protein into a network of insoluble fibrin
threads. These networks of fibrin threads, then plug in the cut
and clot the blood.
Grade 10 Biology
115
Unit 5: Human Biology
Table 5.3 Red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets
Cell types
Number
Life span
Functions
Erythrocytes(red blood cells)
5-6million
120 days
Transport oxygen and
help transport carbon-
dioxide
Leukocytes(White blood cells)
Neutrophil
Eosinophil
Basophil
5000-10000
18-36 hours, some
Defense and immunity
can survive as long as
Monocyte
Lymphocyte
a year
Platelets
250000-400,000
9-10 days
Blood clotting
Plasma
Plasma is a yellow-tinted water, sugar, fat, protein, and salt fluid that
transports red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
Plasma makes up 55 percent of our blood volume.
provides nutrients to cells while also removing metabolic waste.
What is plasma?
blood clotting factors, carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, minerals,
hormones, enzymes, antibodies, and other proteins are all found
in it.
includes some of every protein generated by the body; so far, only
about 500 proteins have been discovered in human plasma.
Activity 5.16 Answer to the
questions
Blood groups
1. Have you ever heard
The blood grouping depends on which antigens are on the surface
about A, B, AB & O
of the red blood cells. Antigens are molecules. They can be either
blood groups?
proteins or sugars. The types and features of antigens can vary
2. If yes, do you know what
between individuals due to small genetic differences. The antigens in
your blood group is?
blood have various functions, including:
3. What are the bases for
blood grouping?
transporting other molecules into and out of the cell,
maintaining the structure of red blood cells, and
116
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
detecting unwanted cells that could cause illness.
Scientists use two types of antigens to classify blood types:
ABO antigens and
Rh antigens.
Antigens and antibodies play a role in the immune system's defence
mechanism. White blood cells produce antibodies. These antibodies
will target an antigen if they consider it a foreign object. This is why it
is essential to match blood types when a person needs a transfusion.
If a person receives red blood cells with antigens that are not already
present in their system, their body will reject and attack the new red
blood cells. This can cause a severe and possibly life-threatening
reaction.
The ABO blood group system classifies blood types according to the
different types of antigens in the red blood cells and antibodies in the
plasma. They use the ABO system alongside the Rh antigen status to
determine which blood type or types will match for a safe red blood
cell transfusion.
The following are the four ABO groups.
Group A: The surface of the red blood cells contains A antigen, and
the plasma has anti-B antibody. Anti-B antibodies would attack blood
cells that contain B antigens.
Group B: The surface of the red blood cells contains B antigen, and
the plasma has anti-A antibody. Anti-A antibody would attack blood
cells that contain A antigen.
Group AB: The red blood cells have both A and B antigens, but the
plasma does not contain anti-A or anti-B antibodies. Individuals with
type AB can receive any ABO blood type.
Group O: The plasma contains both anti-A and anti-B antibodies,
but the surface of the red blood cells does not contain A or B antigens.
Since these antigens are not present, a person with any ABO blood
type can receive this type of blood.
Do you have any idea about the relationship between biology
and other sciences?
Rhesus factor
During the 1940s scientists discovered another antigen on the red
blood cell, the Rhesus factor. Like the ABO blood groups, the Rhesus
Grade 10 Biology
117
Unit 5: Human Biology
factor is inherited. Individuals who have this antigen are said to be
Rhesus positive (Rh+). Approximately 85 % of the populations have
the antigen. The remaining 15% of individuals who do not have the
antigen are said to be Rhesus negative (Rh⁻). Individuals who are
Rh- may donate blood to Rh+ individuals, but should not receive Rh+
blood. The human body has no natural antibodies against Rh factors,
but antibodies can be produced following a transfusion. Although
Rh antibodies are produced in response to antigens, it should be
pointed out that the immune reaction is subdued compared with
that of the ABO group.
How does Rh+ blood differ from Rh- blood and what happens if
the Rh factor of the blood transfused is incompatible?
Rhesus-factor incompatibilities become important for Rh+ babies of
Rh- mothers. If the baby inherits the Rh+ factor from the father, a
condition called erythroblastosis fetalis (a medical condition where
an Rh negative mother's antibodies attack the red blood cells of an
Rh positive fetus) can occur with these condition and subsequent
pregnancies. The first child is spared because the blood of the mother
and baby are separated by the placenta (a membrane inside the uterus
that exchanges materials between mother and baby). During birth,
the placenta is shed from the uterus. Capillary beds rupture, and, for
the first time, the blood of the baby comes into contact with the blood
of the mother.
Why does a fetus with erythroblastosis fetalis develop anemia?
The mother's immune system recognizes the Rh+ antigens and
triggers the production of antibodies. But, by the time the antibodies
are produced, the first baby is no longer connected to the placenta and
has escaped the potentially dangerous situation. However, a second
pregnancy presents problems if the fetus is Rh+. The mother retains
many of the antibodies from her first encounter with Rh+ blood. If
antibodies cross the placenta, they attach to the antigen on the red
blood cells of the fetus, causing them to be destroyed. Symptoms
when an Rh negative mother's antibodies attack the red blood cells of
an Rh positive fetus include anemia, jaundice, and an enlarged liver.
118
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.2.1 Blood Donation
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
Discuss the reason for blood donation,
Outline the conditions for blood transfusion, and
Discuss blood type and Rh factor compatibility.
Blood is a very vital component of the human body. In case of an
Activity 5.17 THINK-PAIR-
injury, severe sickness, or during operations, loss of a large quantity
SHARE
of blood may result in death. In such cases, blood from a healthy
In a group of 4-5 students,
person called the donor is given to the sick or a person that lost
go to the nearby blood
blood under some other unexpected condition. The sick person who
bank, hospital, health
receives blood is called the recipient. The process of transferring
centers or posts, and
blood from a healthy person (donor) to a person deficient in blood
gather information on
(recipient) is called blood transfusion. Great care has to be taken by
the importance of blood
donation and its health
the doctors while transfusing blood from the donor to the recipient.
implication (if any) on the
Blood group compatibility
donor and/or the recipients.
Finally, report your findings
If the blood from two different blood groups is mixed and if it is
to the classroom discussion.
not compatible, there may be a reaction between the antigen and
the complementary antibody which makes the red blood cells stick
together, a phenomenon known as agglutination. The agglutins
block the capillaries and even larger blood vessels. But if someone
loses a lot of blood in an accident, an injury, during giving birth or
an operation, then they may need a blood transfusion. This is when
blood taken from one person is given to another to save their life.
Before a transfusion it is vital to know the blood groups of both the
person giving the blood (the donor) and the person receiving the
blood (the recipient).
This means the right type of blood can be given to prevent
agglutination. The blood groups must be compatible. It is not
usually the case that only one type of blood can be given, simply
that blood containing a particular antigen must not be mixed with
blood containing the matching antibody (summarized in table 5.4).
For example, blood group O has no antigens so it can be given to
anyone, but someone who has blood group O has both antibodies
so they can only receive group O blood. On the other hand someone
with blood group AB which has no antibodies can receive any type
of blood. Figure 5.9 summarizes the compatibilities of the different
blood groups.
Grade 10 Biology
119
Unit 5: Human Biology
Table 5.4 Antigens and antibodies
Form group of 2-3
Blood group
Antigen on red blood
Antibody in plasma
students and do a
cells
library search about the
A
A
B
lymphatic system and
B
B
A
present your findings to
AB
AB
None
the class.
O
None
AB
The O blood groups is termed "Universal Donor" while the AB blood
group is termed as a "Universal recipient"
Key: x-shows coagulation
Recipient
O
A
B
AB
(antibodies
(antigen A,
(antigen B,
(antigens
Donor
a and b)
antibody b)
antibody a)
A and B)
o
(antibodies
a and b)
A
(antigen A,
antibody b)
B
(antigen B,
antibody a)
AB
(antigens
A and B)
Figure 5.9 Blood compatibility chart
The Lymphatic System
A little amount of protein spills from capillaries into tissue voids on
What is the lymphatic
a regular basis. Even if the leak is modest, the build-up of proteins in
system?
the extracellular fluid (ECF) would be a significant problem; osmotic
pressure would drop and tissues would enlarge.
The proteins are emptied from the ECF and return to the circulatory
system via the lymphatic system, a collection of vessels (Figure 5.10).
Lymph, a fluid similar to blood plasma, is transported through lymph
vessels that are open-ended like veins. This low-pressure return
system is driven by slow muscle contractions against the arteries,
which are equipped with flap-like valves to prevent fluid back flow.
Through the right and left subclavian veins, the lymphatic system
returns lymph to the venous system.
120
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Activity 5.18 Outline the
relationship
Lymph vessels
Based on your studies
Right lymphatic
duct, entering right
Thoracic duct entering
above and using Internet
subclavian vein
and books a source of
subclavianvein vein
Thymus
information, outline the
Thoracic duct
relationship between the
Spleen
lymphatic and the immune
systems.
Appendix
Lymph vessels
Bone marrow
Figure 5.10 The lymphatic system
Lymph nodes are enlargements that appear in the lymph channel at
regular intervals (Figure 5.10). These contain white blood cells that,
through the process of phagocytosis, filter out any bacteria present.
Lymph nodes store lymphocytes in addition to screening damaged
cells and debris from the lymph. The lymph nodes in your neck can
expand when you have a sore throat.
What are the functions of the lymphatic system?
The key functions of the lymphatic system:
returns excess interstitial fluid to the blood.
the absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins from the digestive
system and the subsequent transport of these substances to the
venous circulation. The blood capillaries absorb most nutrients,
but the fats and fat-soluble vitamins are absorbed by the lacteals.
The lymph in the lacteals has a milky appearance due to its high
fat content and is called chyle.
defence against invading microorganisms and disease. Lymph
nodes and other lymphatic organs filter the lymph to remove
microorganisms and other foreign particles. Lymphatic organs
contain lymphocytes that destroy invading organisms.
Components of the Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system consists of a fluid (lymph), vessels that
Which components of the
transport the lymph and organs that contain lymphoid tissue.
lymphatic system do you
know?
Grade 10 Biology
121
Unit 5: Human Biology
Lymph
Lymph is a fluid substance made up of lymphocytes and white blood
cells that is clear to white in colour. Lymph is a component of the
lymphatic system that is present in lymphatic veins and other cavities
throughout the body. It transports white blood cells within lymph
nodes and bones, removes interstitial fluid from organs, and fights
disease-causing and infectious bacteria invading blood cells. Lymph
serves a variety of purposes:
Removes metabolic wastes from tissue cells,
Provides the body with nutrition,
Aids in the invasion of microbe-caused pathogenic diseases,
Through lymphatic vessels, absorbs fat-soluble vitamins and
other digested fat molecules from the small intestine, and
Maintain the composition of tissue fluid.
Lymphatic vessels
Unlike blood vessels, lymphatic vessels transport only fluid away
from tissues (Figure 5.11). The lymph capillaries are the smallest
lymphatic vessels, beginning in the tissue spaces as blind-ended sacs.
Lymph capillaries can be found in every part of the body except
the bone marrow, the central nervous system, and tissues that lack
blood vessels, such as the epidermis. The wall of the lymph capillary
is made up of endothelium, which is made up of simple squamous
cells that overlap to form a simple one-way valve. This configuration
allows fluid to enter the capillary but prevents lymph from exiting
the vessel.
Tissue
Arteriole
cell
Tissue
Lymph
spaces
capillary
Venule
Tissue
fluid
Lymphatic
vessel
Figure 5.11 Lymphatic vessels
Lymphatic vessels are formed when microscopic lymph capillaries are
connected. Small lymphatic vessels connect to form larger tributaries
known as lymphatic trunks, which drain large areas. The lymphatic
trunks join together until lymph enters the two lymphatic ducts. The
right lymphatic duct drains lymph from the upper right quadrant of
the body. The thoracic duct drains the remainder.
122
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Lymphatic tributaries, like veins, have thin walls and valves to
prevent blood back-flow. The lymphatic system lacks a pump like
Why the lymphatic
in cardiovascular system. The pressure gradients that move lymph
system is an open system?
through the vessels are caused by skeletal muscle action, respiratory
movement, and smooth muscle contraction in vessel walls.
Organs of the lymphatic system
Clusters of lymphocytes and other cells, such as macrophages, are
enmeshed in a framework of short, branching tissue fibres that
Which types of lymphatic
distinguish lymphatic organs. Lymphocytes are formed alongside
organs do you know?
other types of blood cells in the red bone marrow and are transported
in the blood from the bone marrow to the lymphatic organs.
When the body is exposed to microorganisms and other foreign
substances, lymphocytes proliferate within the lymphatic organs
and are transported to the site of the invasion via the blood. This
Have you ever
is a component of the immune response that seeks to eliminate the
encountered injury
invading agent. Among the lymphatic organs are:
on your hands, legs or
somewhere on your limbs
Lymph nodes
and felt tenderness, pain,
Tonsils
and uncomfortable at
Spleen, and
your groin area and
armpits? What do you
Thymus.
think is the reason?
i. Lymph nodes
Lymph fluid flows in the lymph nodes throughout the body before
finally making its way back to the blood stream. While doing so,
it collects and traps harmful matter, such as bacteria, viruses, and
You may have
bodily waste products. The lymph nodes filter the fluid and release it
experienced tonsillitis
in your early child hood
back into the bloodstream. Lymph nodes also contain immune cells
with red swollen tonsils.
that help fight infection by attacking the germs that the body's lymph
Do you know why the
fluid has collected. The lymph nodes may swell when a person has a
tonsils are swollen?
temporary infection. The swelling occurs as a result of immune cell
What are the causative
activity in the lymph nodes. The location of the swelling often relates
agents for this ?
to the affected area. For example, an ear injury/infection may cause
swollen lymph nodes near the ear, while someone with an upper
respiratory tract infection may notice swollen lymph nodes in their
neck.
ii. Tonsils
Hard
palate
Tonsils are lymphatic tissue clusters located just beneath the mucous
BOAR
Soft palate
membranes that line the nose, mouth, and throat (pharynx) (Figure
Uvula
Tonsils
5.12). The tonsils' lymphocytes and macrophages protect us from
Tongue
harmful substances and pathogens such as bacteria and viruses that
enter the body through the nose or mouth.
Figure 5.12 Locations of
Tonsils
Grade 10 Biology
123
Unit 5: Human Biology
Spleen
The spleen is found in the upper left abdominal cavity, just below the
diaphragm and posterior to the stomach (Figure 5.10). Its shape and
structure are similar to that of a lymph node, but it is much larger.
The spleen performs the following functions:
filters blood in the same way that lymph nodes filter lymph;
lymphocytes in the spleen react to pathogens in the blood and
attempt to destroy them;
macrophages engulf debris, damaged cells, and other large
particles;
removes old and damaged erythrocytes from the circulating
blood; and
it produces lymphocytes, particularly in response to infection.
Thymus
The thymus is a soft organ with two lobes anterior to the ascending
aorta and posterior to the sternum (Figure 5.10). It is relatively
large in infants and children, but after puberty, it begins to shrink
in size until it is quite small in older adults. The thymus' primary
function is to process and mature special lymphocytes known as
T-lymphocytes or T-cells. Pathogens and foreign agents are not
recognized by lymphocytes while they are in the thymus. After
maturing, lymphocytes enter the bloodstream and travel to other
lymphatic organs, where they aid in disease defence. Thymosin,
a hormone produced by the thymus, stimulates the maturation of
lymphocytes in other lymphatic organs.
Activity 5.19 THINK-PAIR-
5.2.2. Diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
SHARE
Objectives
Nowadays, with the
modernization of human
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
life style, feeding habits and
Discuss the diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic
environmental pollution,
systems (leukemia, varicose vein, elephantiasis,
people all over the world
cardiovascular diseases).
are suffering from severe
cardiovascular diseases of
different types. Being in
Leukemia
groups of 2-3 students, write
Leukemia is a type of cancer that affects blood-forming tissues,
down the types of circulatory
including bone marrow (Figure 5.13). There are several types of
and lymphatic system
diseases and discuss causes
leukemia, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid
and symptoms of such
leukemia, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. For example, many
diseases. Finally, report your
patients with slow-growing leukemia are asymptomatic, and rapidly
finding to your classmates.
progressing types of leukemia can cause fatigue, weight loss, frequent
Some of them are described
infections, and easy bleeding or bruising. Also, the treatment
below.
varies greatly. Treatment for slow-growing leukemia may include
124
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
monitoring. Chemotherapy, sometimes followed by radiation and
stem-cell transplant, is used to treat aggressive leukemia.
normal blood
leukemia
RBC
- Neutrophil
- Lymphocyte
- Monocyte
- Platelets
Figure 5.13 Leukemia
Varicose veins
Varicose veins are enlarged, swollen, and twisting veins that often
have blue or dark purple colour (Figure 5.14). They occur when
faulty vein valves allow blood to flow in the wrong direction or pool.
Varicose veins are thought to affect more than 23% of all adults. It is
common in:
pregnant women are more prone to varicose veins, and
overweight people are more prone to varicose veins
Aching legs, swollen ankles, and spider veins are some of the
symptoms. It occurs when the valves in the veins fail to function
properly, allowing blood to flow inefficiently. Treatment for varicose
veins is rarely necessary for health reasons; however, if swelling,
aching, and painful legs occur, and there is significant discomfort,
treatment is available. There are several options, including some
home remedies. In severe cases, a varicose vein may rupture or
develop into varicose ulcers on the skin.
Healthy
Varicose
vein
vein
C
d
Valve
Valve
Figure 5.14 Figure A, shows a
normal vein with a properly
a - dilated vein
C - thin wall of vein
working valve. In Figure B, the
varicose vein has a faulty valve;
b - skin bulging
d - deformed valve
the walls of the vein are thin and
stretched
Grade 10 Biology
125
Unit 5: Human Biology
Elephantiasis
Activity 5.20 Reflection
Elephantiasis is a condition that causes a large enlargement of a part
of the body, usually the limbs (Figure 5.15). External genitals are
Based on your studies in the
another area that is frequently affected. Elephantiasis is caused by a
previous lessons, reflect on
diseases of the circulatory
blockage in the lymphatic system, resulting in an accumulation of a
and lymphatic system, and
fluid known as lymph in the affected areas. Elephantiasis is caused
explain why some people are
by parasitic worms transmitted by mosquitoes. Wuchereria bancrofti,
easily susceptible to infection
Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori are the three worms involved.
while others are resistant to
many infections. Use virtual
lab (animation and video) to
reflect.
Figure 5.15 Elephantiasis
Worms have an impact on the body's lymphatic system. The
lymphatic system is in charge of eliminating waste and toxins. If it
becomes clogged, it is unable to properly remove waste. This causes
a build-up of lymphatic fluid, resulting in swelling.
Cardiovascular diseases
Cardiovascular diseases are classified into several types. Among
them are:
What are cardiovascular
diseases?
Abnormal heart rhythms, also known as arrhythmias;
Aorta disease and Marfan syndrome are two examples,
Congenital heart disease is a condition that occurs at birth,
Coronary artery disease is a condition that affects the arteries in
the heart (narrowing of the arteries),
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE),
A heart attack,
Heart failure, and
Muscle disease of the heart (cardiomyopathy).
Have you heard about any type of heart disease? If yes, mention
and share your classmates.
126
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Heart disease
Heart and blood vessel disease (also known as heart disease)
encompasses a wide range of issues, many of which are linked to a
process known as atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a condition that
occurs when a substance called plaque accumulates in the artery
walls. This buildup narrows the arteries, making blood flow more
difficult. When a blood clot forms, it can obstruct blood flow. This
can result in a heart attack or a stroke.
Heart attack
A heart attack occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to a
portion of the heart. If the clot completely obstructs blood flow, the
part of the heart muscle supplied by that artery begins to die. Most
people recover from their first heart attack and go on to live normal
lives, gaining many more years of productive activity. However,
having a heart attack means that you must make some changes. The
medications and lifestyle changes recommended by your doctor may
differ depending on how badly your heart was damaged and the
degree of heart disease that caused the heart attack.
Stroke
What is the reason for stroke?
Stroke is a cerebrovascular disease. It occurs when a blockage or
bleed of the blood vessels either interrupts or reduces the supply of
blood to the brain. When this happens, the brain does not receive
enough oxygen or nutrients, and brain cells start to die.
There are 2 types of stroke:
1. An ischemic stroke (the most common type of stroke) occurs
when a blood vessel that supplies the brain becomes blocked,
typically due to a blood clot. When a part of the brain's blood
supply is cut off, some brain cells begin to die. This can lead to
the loss of functions controlled by that part of the brain, such as
walking or speaking.
2. When a blood vessel in the brain bursts, it causes a hemorrhagic
stroke. Uncontrolled hypertension is the most common cause of
this (high blood pressure). Some stroke effects are permanent if
too many brain cells die as a result of oxygen deprivation. This
population of cells is never replenished.
The good news is that brain cells do not always die during a stroke;
instead, the damage is only temporary. As injured cells repair
themselves, previously impaired function improves over time. In
Grade 10 Biology
127
Unit 5: Human Biology
other cases, nearby undamaged brain cells may take over for the
Activity 5.21 Group work
injured areas of the brain. In any case, strength may return, speech
Here in this section
may improve, and memory may improve.
are mentioned some
Heart failure
cardiovascular and
lymphatic system diseases.
Heart failure, also known as congestive heart failure, occurs when
Yet there are too much of
the heart does not pump blood as efficiently as it should. Heart
them to mention. Therefore,
failure does not imply that the heart ceases to beat; this is a common
in groups of 3-4 students
and reading books and
misconception. Instead, the heart continues to beat, but the body's
browsing Internet resources,
need for blood and oxygen is unsatisfied. If left untreated, heart
list cardiovascular and
failure can worsen. It is critical to follow the doctor's orders if your
lymphatic system diseases as
loved one has heart failure.
much as you can and discuss
among your classmates. Two
Arrhythmia
of them are given below.
An abnormal heart rhythm is referred to as arrhythmia. Arrhythmias
1.
Endocarditis?
come in a variety of forms. The heart can beat too slowly, too quickly,
2.
Rheumatic fever?
or in an irregular pattern. Bradycardia or a slow heart rate, occurs
when the heart rate is less than 60 beats per minute. Tachycardia, or
an abnormally fast heart rate, is defined as a heart rate of more than
100 beats per minute. An arrhythmia can impair the function of your
heart. Your heart may not be able to pump enough blood to meet
your body's needs if it has an irregular heartbeat.
5.3 The breathing system
Hold your breath and
Objectives
see how long you can
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
hold your breath as
Draw and label the human breathing systems,
you continue reading.
How long can you do
Show the link between the human breathing system and the
it? May be you are
circulatory system, and
feeling uncomfortable
Demonstrate the mechanism of breathing using locally
available materials
already. Why do you feel
uncomfortable? Then,
individually, write down
You can't go more than 3 minutes without breathing, and even if
the reasons why this
you tried, your autonomic nervous system would take over. This
happens. Share your list
is because every cell in the body needs to run the oxidative stages
and discuss in groups on
of cellular respiration, the process by which energy is produced
your reasons.
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Oxygen is used as a
reactant, and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product, in order
for oxidative phosphorylation to take place. Although cells require
oxygen, your need to breathe is primarily driven by the accumulation
of carbon dioxide.
The respiratory system, which includes muscles to move air into
and out of the lungs, passageways through which air moves, and
microscopic gas exchange surfaces covered by capillaries, allows
128
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
carbon dioxide to be exhaled and oxygen to be inhaled. Gases are
Activity 5.22 Individual
transported from the lungs to tissues throughout the body via the
work
circulatory system. If your breathing is disrupted by a variety of
Students, you will be
conditions, such as what you did in your activity above, or diseases
provided with prepared
of the respiratory system, such as asthma, emphysema, chronic
diagram/model of the
obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), and lung cancer, you will
human breathing systems.
experience difficulties in the normal functioning of your breathing
Observing your diagram/
system, which can be quite severe at times.
model draw, label and study
the breathing system. During
What is the primary function of the breathing system in human
your activity use virtual
body?
lab (simulation software,
animation and video).
The breathing system organs' primary functions are to:
Then, answer the following
question given below.
provide oxygen to body tissues for cellular respiration,
remove the waste product, carbon dioxide,
help to maintain acid-base balance, and
portions of the breathing system are also used for non-vital
functions such as sensing odors, producing speech, and coughing.
The nose, larynx, pharynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchios, and alveoli
are the major structures of the breathing system. The following
sections go over these structures and their functions one by one.
nasal
passages
epiglottis
larynx
oesophagus
(voice box)
(gullet)
trachea
WIRTHI
rings of
cartilage
alveoli
left bronchus
bronchile
heart
intercostal
muscles
pleural
membranes
pleural cavity
containing
pleural fluid
ribs
muscular
diaphragm
Figure 5.16. The human breathing system
Grade 10 Biology
129
Unit 5: Human Biology
In humans, air enters the breathing system through the two nasal
Activity 5.23 Individual
work
cavities or the mouth (Figure 5.18). The tiny hairs that line the nasal
When you are sick of
cavities act as a filter, keeping foreign particles out of the lower
common cold or influenza,
breathing tract. The nasal cavity contains mucus, which warms and
you may lose your smelling
moistens the incoming air, traps foreign particles and keeps the cells
sense for some time and
that line the cavity moist.
regain it back when you get
better of the common cold.
Major breathing structures and their functions
1. Explain this
phenomenon
The Nose
2. What is the reason for the
The nostrils are the main entry and exit points of breathing system,
loss of you sense of smell?
which are located in the nose. The nasal cavity, which is divided
into left and right sections by the nasal septum, receives the inhaled
air. The air moves from the nasal cavities to the pharynx. Mucous
membranes line portions of the nasal cavities, which contain
sebaceous glands and hair follicles that prevent large debris, such as
dirt, from passing through the nasal cavity.
Why nasal cavity is considered as a good air conditioner?
Goblet cells, a type of specialized columnar epithelial cell that
produces mucus to trap debris, are found in the nasal epithelium.
With a constant beating motion, the cilia of the breathing epithelium
help remove mucus and debris from the nasal cavity, sweeping
materials towards the throat to be swallowed. Cold air, on the other
hand, slows the movement of the cilia, resulting in the accumulation
of mucus, which can lead to a runny nose in the winter. This moist
epithelium warms and humidifies the incoming air. The incoming air
is warmed by capillaries just beneath the nasal epithelium. Because
the thick mucus produced to defend you from pathogens blocks the
surface of the receptors on the nasal epithelium, you lose your ability
to smell during a common cold or influenza.
Nasal cavity
Pharynx
The pharynx is a tube made up of skeletal muscle and mucous
Oral cavity
membrane that runs parallel to the nasal cavities. The pharynx, also
Uvula
known as the throat, is a tube that runs from the base of the skull to
Lips
Pharynx
the sixth cervical vertebra. It receives air from the nasal cavity and
Epiglottis
air, food, and water from the oral cavity, serving the breathing and
Jaw
Oesophagus
Tongue
digestive systems. It opens into the larynx and esophagus from the
Larynx
back.
Figure 5.17. The pharynx
Only air can pass through the upper part of the pharynx (throat).
Air, food, and fluids can pass through the lower parts. The pharynx
130
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
contains the pharyngeal, palatine, and lingual tonsils. Sometimes the
pharynx can be infected by microorganisms. The pharyngeal tonsil
has a large number of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) and
is covered with ciliated epithelium that traps and destroys pathogens
that enter through inhalation.
Larynx
The larynx is a structure that connects the pharynx to the trachea
and helps regulate the amount of air that enters and leaves the lungs
(Figure 5.18). Several pieces of cartilage make up the structure of
larynx.
Hyoid bone
Epiglottis
False vocal cords
Thyroid cartilage
Vocal ligament
Cricoid cartilage
Vocal cords
Tracheal cartilage
Trachea
Figure 5.18. The larynx extends to the trachea.
The epiglottis is a thin, elastic cartilage that covers the trachea's
opening and is attached to the thyroid cartilage. When the epiglottis
is closed, the unattached end of it rests on the glottis. The glottis is
made up of the vestibular folds, true vocal cords, and space between
them (Figure 5.19).
I
Do you know how sound is formed in the voice box?
The inner borders of the real vocal cords (Figure 5.19) are free,
allowing oscillation to make sound. The size of true vocal cord
membranous folds varies from person to person, resulting in voices
with various pitch ranges. Males have greater folds than females,
which gives them a deeper voice.
What happens if pieces of food or fluid you swallow-in wrongly
entered into your trachea? Which structure of. your laryngeal
area prevents you from such drop-ins?
During swallowing, the pharynx and larynx lift upward, allowing the
pharynx to expand and the laryngeal epiglottis to swing downward,
Grade 10 Biology
131
Unit 5: Human Biology
closing the trachea opening. Because of these movements, food and
liquids cannot enter the trachea, which creates a bigger region for
food to travel through.
Arytenoid cartilage
Inner Lining of trachea
True vocal folds
Glottis
False vocal folds
Epiglottis
Tongue
Figure 5.19 The vocal cords
Trachea
The trachea (windpipe) extends from the larynx toward the lungs
(Figure 5.20). The trachea is formed by 16 to 20 stacked pieces
of cartilage that are connected by connective tissue. The elastic
membrane of the trachea allows it to stretch and expand slightly
during inhalation and exhalation, whereas the rings of cartilage
provide structural support and prevent the trachea from collapsing.
Larynx
Trachea
Primary bronchi
Secondary Bronchile
Figure 5.20 The trachea
132
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Bronchi and Bronchioles
The right and left primary bronchi branch of the trachea towards
the right and left lungs. The primary bronchi further branch into
the secondary and tertiary bronchi. A bronchiole branches from the
tertiary bronchi. Bronchioles, which are about 1 mm in diameter,
further branch until they become the tiny terminal bronchioles,
which lead to the structures of gas exchange. There are more than
1000 terminal bronchioles in each lung. The muscular walls of
the bronchioles do not contain cartilage-like those of the bronchi.
However, smooth muscle can change the size of the tubing to increase
or decrease airflow through it.
Activity 5.24 Group work
Before you move to the next topic, in groups of 2-3 students, identify
the interplay between the circulatory and the breathing systems.
How is the breathing system interrelated to the circulatory system?
Explain.
Breathing Gas Exchange
Structures involved directly in gas exchange are found in the breathing
Where in the breathing
zone. The breathing zone begins when the terminal bronchioles join
system does the actual
a breathing bronchiole (Figure 5.21), the smallest type of bronchiole
gas exchange take place?
which leads to an alveolar duct and opens into a cluster of alveoli.
Pulmonary Artery
Inhaled Air
Aleveolar (air sac)
Air in
and out
Pulmonary
vein
Blood
capillary
oxygenated
blood
Muscle
Bands
Bronchioles
Alveolus
Capillaries
Deoxygenated
blood
Elastic Fibers
Alveoli
A
B
Figure 5.21 Bronchioles (a) lead to alveolar sacs (b) in the breathing zone,
where gas exchange occurs.
Alveoli
An alveolar sac is a cluster of many individual alveoli that are
responsible for gas exchange. An alveolus with elastic walls, stretch
during air intake which greatly increases the surface area available for
Grade 10 Biology
133
Unit 5: Human Biology
gas exchange. Alveoli are connected to their neighbours by alveolar
Activity 5.25 Individual
pores, which help maintain equal air pressure throughout the alveoli
work
and lung (Figure 5.21).
Now individually, do the
In the following table is shown the composition of atmospheric and
following: (the teacher will
exhaled air.
help you in this activity)
1. Put your pointing figure
Table 5.5 Comparison of atmospheric and exhaled air
in between two of your
ribs.
Component
Atmospheric air
Exhaled air
oxygen
21%
16%
2. Inhale air to the
maximum. What happens
Nitrogen
78%
78%
with your ribs?
Carbon dioxide
0.04%
4%
3. Now, exhale the volume
Temperature
37 degree centigrade
variable
of air you inhaled. What
Moisture
saturated
variable
happens to your ribs?
4. What happens with
Breathing Movements
your chest cavity as you
Pressure differences between the atmosphere and the chest, or
inhales and exhale air
thoracic cavity determine the movement of air into and out of the
from your lungs?
lungs. Atmospheric pressure remains relatively constant, but the
pressure in the chest cavity may vary. An understanding of breathing
hinges on an understanding of gas pressures. The mechanism of
breathing is shown in Figure 5.22.
Gases move from an area of high pressure to an area of low pressure:
Inspiration occurs when the pressure inside the lungs is less than
that of the atmosphere, and
expiration occurs when the pressure inside the lungs is greater
than that of the atmosphere.
Inhalation
Exhalation
air enters lungs
air pushed out of
lungs
external
internal
intercostal
intercostal
muscles
muscles
contract, pulling
contract, pulling
ribs up and out
ribs down and in
lower pressure
higher pressure
than the outside
than the outside
diaphragm
diaphragm
muscles
muscles relax
contract
diaphragm
diaphragm
becomes
A
flattens
dome-shaped
B
Figure 5.22 Breathing movements: a) Inspiration b) Expiration
The diaphragm, a dome-shaped sheet of muscle that separates the
thoracic, or chest cavity from the abdominal cavity, can regulate the
pressure in the chest cavity.
134
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
During inspiration, the diaphragm muscle contracts, or shortens,
Activity 5.26 Individual
pulling downward. The chest volume increases and pressure in the
work
lungs decreases. The atmospheric pressure is now greater than the
pressure in the chest cavity, and air moves into the lungs.
With the help of an
During expiration, the diaphragm relaxes and returns to its dome
experiment prove that
shape due to the force exerted by the organs in the abdomen. The
exhaled air carbon dioxide.
chest volume decreases and pressure increases. The pressure in the
Procedures
chest cavity is now greater than the atmospheric pressure, and air
1. Take two beakers A and B
moves out of the lungs (Figure 5.22).
containing equal volume of
lime water.
Changes in chest volume during inspiration and expiration:
2. Cover both beakers with
A. The intercostals muscles contract and the rib cage pull upward.
cardboard using tape and
Because the pressure in the chest cavity is lower than the
make hole in them for straw.
atmospheric pressure, air moves into the lungs.
3. Blow air in beaker B
with the help of a strew A
B. The intercostals muscles relax and the rib cage falls. Because
undisturbed.
the pressure in the chest cavity is higher than the atmospheric
What is the color change in
pressure, air moves out of the lungs.
beaker B? Why?
What happens with the
content in baker A? Why?
Activity 5.27 Observing the mechanism of breathing
In order to observe the breathing movement of your lungs, prepare a lung
model from locally available materials as indicated in the left hand corner.
rubber
tubing
Materials you may need for this activity: 1. A bell jar 2. Plastic tubing (like
"Y'-piece
juice straw) 3. Threads 4. The stopper and rubber tubing
balloon
Finally, produce the model and observe how your lungs move during
'lungs'
inhalation and exhalation.
bell-jar
'thorax'
rubber sheet
diaphragm
ring to pull rubber sheet
The respiratory and circulatory systems work together to provide OX-
ygen to the body and remove carbon dioxide from the body. While the
former deals with air and the latter with blood, they work together to
coordinate the operations of each system's components. Other body
systems, such as the digestive and neurological systems, are crucial
as well, but the circulatory and respiratory systems must work contin-
ually even without a few minutes of rest.
How a blood circulatory
system does interact with
The circulatory and respiratory systems take oxygen from the air and
the respiratory system?
transport it throughout the body while the digestive and respiratory
systems take carbon dioxide from the body and release it into the at-
mosphere. The lungs expand and fill with fresh air as a person inhales.
The respiratory system works in collaboration with the circulatory
Grade 10 Biology
135
Unit 5: Human Biology
system to transport oxygen from fresh air to red blood cells in the
arteries of the lungs, as well as to release carbon dioxide from the
blood into the lungs' air. This used air leaves the body when a person
exhales. The heart circulates blood from the lungs, carrying oxygen-
ated red blood cells, down the arteries to the cells, where oxygen is
released and carbon dioxide is absorbed. Then the used blood is sent
back through the veins to the lungs, and the cycle begins again.
Table 5.6 Summary: Comparison of inspiration and expiration
Parts of respiratory system
Inspiration
Expiration
1. Diaphram
Contracts and flattens down-
Relaxes and moves upwards to
wards
dome shape
2. External Intercostal Muscles
Muscles contract
Muscles relaxes
3. Internal Intercostal Muscles
Muscles relax
Muscles contract
4. Ribcage And Sternum
Move upwards and out wards
Moves downwards and inwards
5. Thorax Volumes
Increases
Decreases
Air Pressure
Decrease in pressure inside
Increases in pressure inside thorax
thorax and lung
and lung
Air Movement
External air pressure drives
Air forced out of lungs by thorax
air into lungs at low pressure
compression and elastic recoil of
lungs
Activity 5.28 Individual
Disorders of the Breathing System
presentation
All breathing disorders share one common characteristic: they all
Conduct Internet search/
decrease oxygen delivery to the tissues. The following activity will
consult health professionals/
users about the effects of
help you to explore the different types of breathing disorders.
smoking and cannabis on
Some of the breathing disorders are:
the normal functioning of
the breathing system and
Bronchitis
present your findings to your
classmates. During your
Breathing difficulties can be caused by bacteria or viral illnesses,
presentation, use virtual
as well as reactions to environmental pollutants. Bronchitis is a
lab (simulation software,
condition in which the airways narrow and the mucous lining of the
animation and video) as
bronchial tubes becomes inflamed. Excess mucus production, tissue
available.
swelling, constriction of the airways, and restricted airflow through
the bronchi are all symptoms of this condition. In the bronchioles,
the situation becomes even more acute. The bronchioles, unlike the
trachea and bronchi, are not maintained by cartilage bands to keep
them open.
Emphysema
The alveolar walls become irritated in emphysema. The air sacs lose
their flexibility, stretch, and eventually rupture as a result of this. As
a result, exhaling becomes difficult, and air is trapped in the lungs.
Because there are fewer alveoli, the surface area available for gas
136
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
exchange is reduced, resulting in lower oxygen levels. Emphysema
is caused by smoking, which is by far the most common cause.
Chronic bronchitis has been linked to emphysema. COPD (chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease) is the name given to both of these
conditions. COPD, like bronchitis, causes the bronchioles to become
more resist[pant to air movement. Although air moves freely into
the alveoli, the smaller diameter of the bronchioles increases barrier
to air movement out of the lungs, making exhalation difficult. The
breathing rate increases as the body attempts to maintain homeostasis.
The circulatory system responds by speeding up the heartbeat.
Bronchial Asthma
The inflammation of the bronchioles is linked to bronchial asthma.
Exhaling requires more work than inhaling in asthma. The imbalance
between the amount of air entering and leaving the lungs must be
addressed by increasing the exertion of expiration. Common causes
for asthma are tobacco smoking, pollution, and allergens such as
pollen, mold, dust, etc.
5.4 The Human Urinary system
You will be provided with
diagrams or models of
the human excretory
Objectives
system(kidney) and you
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
should draw, label, and
study the structure and
discuss the structure and function of the kidney,
function of the excretory
identify the process of urine formation, and
system(Kidney). Finally,
tell the role of the excretory system in the homeostatic process.
present your diagram to
your classmates. Support
your activity using
virtual lab (simulation
software, animation and
What do you know about the excretory system of human beings?
video). You can browse
from internet, books and
school digital libraries.
You may be familiar with the functions of the excretory system,
which include blood purification and waste removal. The system, on
the other hand, performs additional equally vital functions. Consider
pH control, which is shared by the lungs and blood buffers such as
carbonic acid (H2CO₃) and bicarbonate anion (HCO₃) in order to
maintain blood pH between 7.35 and 7.45 as the value higher than
7.8 or lower than 6.8 can lead to death.
What do you know about regulating the concentration of solutes
in the blood? Did you know that the kidney is important in
determining the concentration of red blood cells?
The kidneys produce 85% of the erythropoietin (EPO) needed
Grade 10 Biology
137
Unit 5: Human Biology
to drive red blood cell formation. The kidneys also undertake the
Activity 5.29 Group work
final synthesis step in the creation of vitamin D. When the kidneys
Being in groups of 3-4
fail, these functions are weakened or removed entirely, causing
students and using locally
homeostasis to be disrupted. Weakness, fatigue, shortness of breath,
available resources construct
anemia, generalized edema (swelling), metabolic acidosis, increased
a model of the kidney and
potassium levels, heart arrhythmias, and other symptoms may occur
discuss its structure and
in the affected person. Each of these functions is critical to your
functions.
survival and well-being.
The section explains the anatomy of the excretory system and how
it facilitates the physiologic tasks required for equilibrium. The
kidney should be thought of as a plasma regulator rather than a urine
maker. As you read through each section, consider the following
scenario: What if this doesn't work? This inquiry will assist you in
comprehending how the urinary system maintains homeostasis and
influences all other bodily systems as well as one's quality of life.
External structure of kidney
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs in the abdominal
cavity that are placed directly below the liver. The endocrine system
includes the adrenal glands, which are located on top of each kidney.
Blood is purified and filtered by the kidneys. The kidneys filter all of
the blood in the human body on a daily basis, consuming over 25%
of the oxygen taken by the lungs in the process. Through aerobic
What do we call the
respiration, oxygen enables kidney cells to produce chemical energy
in the form of ATP.
filtrate that leaves the
human urinary system?
Urine is the filtrate that comes out of the kidneys. The ureters, which
are around 30 cm long, transport urine from the kidneys to the urinary
bladder. Urine is driven through the ureters by waves of peristalsis,
rather than passively draining into the bladder (smooth muscle
contractions). Urine from both ureters is collected in the bladder. Its
capacity is diminished during late pregnancy because to compression
by the increasing uterus, resulting in increased urination frequency.
Urine is transported from the bladder to the exterior of the body via
the urethra.
The only urologic organ that differs significantly between males and
girls is the urethra; all other urine transport systems are identical.
Female urethras are shorter than male urethras, measuring around
4 cm in length, and provide less protection against fecal germs
(approximately 20 cm). The increased frequency of urinary tract
infections (UTIs) in women can be explained by this length disparity.
In males, the urethra also serves as a reproductive organ, transporting
sperm (sperm and accessory fluids).
138
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Renal artery.
Renal vein
Ureter
Kidney
prostate
Bladder
Figure 5.23 Kidneys filter the
Urethra
blood and produce urine that
is stored in the bladder before
removal
Internal structure of kidney
The kidney is divided into three sections on the inside: an outer
cortex, a medulla in the middle, and the renal pelvis in the hilum
of the kidney. The hilum is the concave portion of the bean form
where blood arteries and nerves enter and exit the kidney, as well as
where the ureters exit. The presence of renal corpuscles causes the
renal cortex to be granular, and nephron tubules can be observed
throughout the renal cortex and renal pyramids, which make up the
majority of the renal medulla. Each kidney has an average of eight
renal pyramids. The urine produced by the nephrons passes via the
renal pelvis and into the ureters, which transport it to the bladder
(5.24).
Cappilaries
Venule
Arteriole
Minor calyx
Renal vein
Major calyx
Renal pelvis
Renal nerve
Pyramid
Renal artery
Medulla
Ureter
Capsule
Cortex
Figure 5.24. The internal
structure of the kidney
The network of blood arteries in the kidney is an important part of
its anatomy and function because it filters blood. The renal hilum
is where the arteries, veins, and nerves that supply the kidney enter
and exit. Renal blood flow begins with the aorta branching into renal
arteries and finishes with the renal veins exiting to join the inferior
vena cava, which takes blood back to the heart's right atrium. Before
branching into several afferent arterioles and entering the capillaries
supplying the nephrons, the renal arteries split multiple times to form
Grade 10 Biology
139
Unit 5: Human Biology
additional blood vessels. As mentioned previously, the functional
unit of the kidney is the nephron, illustrated in figure 5.25. Each
kidney is made up of over one million nephrons that dot the renal
cortex. A nephron consists of three parts:
a renal corpuscle,
a renal tubule, and
the associated capillary network.
Glomerular capsule
Efferent
arteriole
Afferent
arteriole
Proximal
convoluted tubule
Ureter
Renal artery
Renal vein
Interlobular
artery
Venule
Interlobular
vein
Loop of
the nephron
Peritubular
Minor
Renal
Renal
capillary
network
calyx
medulla
cortex
Urine flows into renal papilla
Figure 5.25. The Structure of a nephron.
Renal corpuscle
The glomerulus, a network of capillaries that surrounds the renal
corpuscle in the renal cortex, is made up of the glomerular or
Bowman's capsule, a cup-shaped chamber that surrounds it (Figure
5.25).
Renal Tubule
The renal tubule is a long, convoluted structure that emerges from the
glomerulus and can be split into three segments based on function:
1. the Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT),
2. the loop of Henle, which forms a loop (with descending and
ascending limbs), and
140
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
3. the Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT). The DCT, or distal
collecting duct, joins and discharges the nephron's contents into
collecting ducts. Urine will eventually pass via the renal pelvis
and into the ureters.
Capillary Network within the Nephron
The nephron receives blood that needs to be filtered via a capillary
network that branches off from the renal arteries. Afferent arterioles
are the branches that enter the glomerulus. Efferent arteriole refers
What are the functions of
to the branch that leaves the glomerulus. The glomerular capillary
the kidney?
bed is the capillary network that runs through the glomerulus. The
peritubular capillary network surrounds and interacts with portions
of the renal tubule after the efferent arteriole exits the glomerulus.
The formation of urine
Kidneys filter blood in a three-step process:
The nephrons filter blood as it passes through the glomerulus'
capillary network. Except for proteins, almost all solutes are filtered
out into the glomerulus by a process known as glomerular filtration.
The filtrate is collected in the tubules of the kidneys. Tubular
reabsorption is the process by which most of the solutes are
reabsorbed in the PCT. The filtrate continues to exchange solutes
and water with the peritubular capillary network in the Henle loop.
During this phase, water is also reabsorbed.
Tubular secretion, which is essentially the inverse of tubular
reabsorption, secretes extra solutes and wastes into the renal tubules.
The collecting ducts collect filtrate from the nephrons, which are
then carried into the renal pelvis and eventually to the ureters as
urine. The full procedure is depicted in Figure 5.26.
2. Proximal convoluted tubule:
5. Distal tubule:
reabsorbs ions, water, and
selectively secretes
nutrients; removes toxins
and absorbs different
Activity 5.30 Group work
and adjusts filtrate pH
ions to maintain blood
pH and electrolyte
1. Glomerulus:
balance
In group of 3-4 students
filters small
solutes from
answer the following
the blood
questions with examples.
6. Collecting
duct:
1. Do you find any
reabsorbs
solutes and
relationship between
water from
the filtrate
circulatory system and
excretory system? What
4. Ascending loop
are they?
3. Descending
of Henle:
loop of Henle:
reabsorbs Na⁺ and
aquaporins
2. Nowadays our society is
Cl⁻ from the filtrate
allow water
into the interstitial
to pass from
affected by kidney diseases.
fluid
the filtrate
What could be the reason?
into the
interstitial fluid
Figure 5.26. The process of urine formation in the kidney
Grade 10 Biology
141
Unit 5: Human Biology
Each part of the nephron performs a different function in filtering
waste and maintaining
Homeostatic balance:
1. The glomerulus forces small solutes out of the blood by pressure.
2. The proximal convoluted tubule actively transfers toxins and
medications from the interstitial fluid into the filtrate, reabsorbing
ions, water, and nutrients from the filtrate. By selectively secreting
ammonia (NH₃) into the filtrate, where it interacts with H+ to
generate NH₄⁺, the proximal convoluted tubule also regulates
blood pH. More ammonia is secreted when the filtrate is acidic.
3. Aquaporin-containing cells border the descending loop of Henle,
allowing water to flow from the filtrate into the interstitial fluid.
4.Na+ and Cl- ions diffuse into the interstitial fluid in the thin
section of the ascending loop of Henle. These same ions are
actively transferred into the interstitial fluid in the thick region.
The filtrate becomes increasingly dilute as it passes up the leg
because salt but not water is lost.
5.K+ and H+ ions are selectively secreted into the filtrate in the distal
convoluted tubule, while Na⁺, Cl; and HCO3 ions are reabsorbed
to maintain blood pH and electrolyte balance.
6. Solutes and water from the filtrate are reabsorbed by the collecting
duct, resulting in dilute urine.
5.5 The immune system
In a group of 3 students,
Objectives
discuss the immune
system and types of
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
immunity, and present
define what is immunity,
your findings to the class
mention types of immunity, and
with the guidance of your
discuss what is innate and acquired immunity.
teacher.
Immunity is defined as the body's ability to prevent the invasion
of pathogens. The immune system includes varieties of defences
against viruses, bacteria, fungal infections, and parasites (such as
threadworms). The lymphatic system is part of the broader immune
system. The types of immune systems include innate and adaptive
(Acquired) immune systems.
Mothers are recommended to breastfeed their kids immediately
after delivery. Do you know why?
142
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
a) Innate immune system
The body's initial line of defense against invading microbial diseases
is innate immunity. Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which are
produced by innate immune cells, help to maintain homeostasis by
regulating endogenous processes including inflammation and cell
death.
These are the non-specific, unchanging lines of defenses which
include:
Physical and chemical barriers to pathogens.
To attract immune cells to infection locations, cytokines and other
chemical agents are produced.
To recognize bacteria, stimulate cells, and facilitate the clearance
of dead cells or antibody complexes, the complement cascade is
activated.
Specialized white blood cells identify and remove foreign
compounds found in organs, tissues, blood, and lymph.
What do you know about the vaccines against certain diseases
e.g. vaccine against COVID-19?
ii) Adaptive (Acquired) immune system
After an initial reaction to a new pathogen, adaptive (or acquired)
immunity is formed, resulting in an increased response to future
exposure to the same disease. Vaccination is based on this acquired
immunity process. Because bacteria and viruses are always changing
and evolving in an 'arms war' with our immune systems, this is critical.
The adaptive immune system has the following characteristics:
During the antigen presentation process, particular "non-self"
antigens are recognized.
The development of targeted responses to eradicate specific
infections or pathogen-infected cells.
Immunological memory is the process through which signature
antibodies or T cell receptors "remember" each infection. If another
infection arises, these memory cells can be summoned to eliminate
the invader swiftly.
Do you have any idea about the cells of the immune system?
What types of cells of the immune system do you know?
Grade 10 Biology
143
Unit 5: Human Biology
Cells of the immune system
The immune system is made up of numerous different cell types and
subtypes. The following are some of the most common types:
Lymphocytes: White blood cells that travel between the bloodstream
and the lymphatic system. They are crucial in the battle against
infection. T cells, B cells, and natural killer cells are the three most
common types of lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are formed in the bone
marrow. Some move to the thymus and mature into T cells, while
others mature into B cells in the bone marrow.
Neutrophils: The most common form of white blood cell, neutrophils
play a vital role in the innate immune system. A type of phagocyte
is neutrophils (cells that engulf and then digest cellular debris
and pathogens). They are ordinarily located in the bloodstream,
but chemical signals like Interleukin-8 cause them to be promptly
recruited to the site of injury or infection.
Macrophages: phagocytes that play a role in both the innate and
adaptive immune systems are another form of phagocyte. Foreign
chemicals, pathogenic bacteria, and cancer cells are all targets for
them. Lymphocytes and other immune cells are also stimulated by
macrophages to respond to infections.
Dendritic cells: Antigen-presenting cells serve as intermediaries
between the innate and adaptive immune systems. They are
frequently found in tissues that come into contact with the outside
world, such as the skin, nose, lungs, stomach, and gut linings. They
travel to lymph nodes in response to infections, where they interact
with T cells and B cells to start the adaptive immune response.
Antigens and antibodies
Antibodies (also called immunoglobulins) are Y-shaped proteins
produced by B-cells that bind to antigens on the surface of foreign
substances like bacteria and viruses. This recognizes and identifies
the foreign thing as "non-self," prompting other immune cells to
attack it.
Hormones and the immune system
The immune system produces a wide range of hormones. Lymphokines
are the common name for these hormones. The immune system is
suppressed by steroids and corticosteroids (adrenaline components).
144
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
5.6 Renowned Physicians in Ethiopia
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
mention renowned Ethiopian physicians,
discuss contributions of renowned Ethiopian physicians,
and
appreciate the contributions of Ethiopian physicians.
1. Prof. Asrat Woldeyes (1928-1999) was the first distinguished
Ethiopian surgeon and professor of medicine in Addis Ababa
University. He was the first Ethiopian to qualify in this field of
medicine in the West after medical studies at Edinburgh University.
He devoted the majority of his working life to surgery at Addis
Adaba's two main hospitals, as well as the deanship of medicine at
the university.
Prof. Asrat Woldeyes
2. Dr. Widad KidaneMariam was born to an Ethiopian emigrant
family in Palestine during the Italian occupation of her country of
origin. She studied medicine at the American University of Beirut
and became the "first female" medical practitioner and topmost
physician administrator in charge of the medical services division in
the Ministry of Health in the 1960s-1970s. When she was asked to be
the first Ethiopian gynecologist to volunteer for the Swedish Save the
Children Fund project in Addis Abeba, she also became a founding
organizer responsible for the establishment of the first Ethiopian
Family Planning Association as well as Maternal and Child services
for the homeless in Addis Abeba Municipality.
Dr. Widad Kidane Mariam
Activity 5.31 THINK-PAIR-SHARE
In Ethiopia, as it is true in all countries of the world, the history of
medicine begins much earlier and the number of physicians that
contributed to their country has increased time to time. Here are
mentioned two of the most renowned pioneer Ethiopian physicians.
Now, being in groups of 3-4 students and using books, internet and
interviewing as a source of information:
1. List down names of the renowned Ethiopian physicians.
2. Write a report on their contributions to Ethiopian society
and the world.
3. Finally, share your findings to the whole classroom.
Grade 10 Biology
145
Unit 5: Human Biology
Unit Review
The digestive tract is made up of the alimentary canal and its auxiliary organs, which break down
food into molecules that may be absorbed and used by the body's cells.
In the body, food travels through four different processes: ingestion, digestion, absorption, and
excretion.
The digestive system has six actions or tasks that prepare nutrients for use by body cells: ingestion,
mechanical digestion, chemical digestion, motions, absorption, and elimination. The wall of the
digestive tract has four layers or tunics: mucosa, submucosa, muscular layer, and serous layer or
serosa.
The alimentary tract and accessory organs are the two primary components of the digestive system.
The mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small and large intestines, rectum, and anus are all
parts of the digestive system's alimentary tract.
The salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas are all accessory organs that are connected to
the alimentary system.
Secretions of organs and glands in the digestive system
Organ/gland
Secretion(s)
Function
of secretion
Salivary
Salivary amylase
Initiates the breakdown of polysaccharides to simpler carbohy-
glands
drates
Stomach
Hydrochloric acid
Converts pepsinogen to pepsin; kills microbes
Pepsinogen
when converted to pepsin, initiates the digestion of proteins
Mucus
protects the stomach from pepsin and Hydrochloric acid
(HCl)
Pancreas
Pancreatic Amy-
Continues the breakdown of carbohydrates into disaccharides
lase
Bicarbonate ions
neutralize Hydrochloric acid (HCl) from the stomach
Trypsinogen
when activated to trypsin, converts long-chain peptides into
short-chain peptides
Lipase
Breaks down fats to glycerol and fatty acids
Small intes-
Erepsin
Completes the breakdown of proteins
tine
Disaccharidases
breakdown disaccharides (e.g., maltose) into monosaccharide
(e.g., maltase)
Liver
Bile
Emulsifies fat
Gallbladder
Bile
Stores and secretes concentrated bile from the liver
Large intes-
Mucus
Helps the movement of food waste
tine
The cardiovascular system is made up of a muscle pumping apparatus called the heart, as well as
a closed system of vessels called arteries, veins, and capillaries.
The heart is a muscle pump that provides the required force to circulate blood throughout the
body's tissues.
The epicardium, myocardium, and endocardium are the three layers of the heart.
The right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle is the four chambers of the heart.
146
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
Atrioventricular valves and semi-lunar valves are two types of heart valves.
The right atrium pumps blood to the right ventricle, which then pumps it to the lungs, where it
receives oxygen. Blood goes from the lungs to the left atrium and subsequently to the left ventricle.
It is then injected into the systemic circulatory system.
The conduction system of the heart is made up of specialized cardiac muscle cells that coordinate
the contraction of the chambers.
Blood travels from the right ventricle to the lungs and returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary
arteries.
The systemic vessels transport blood from the left ventricle to all regions of the body's tissues
before returning it to the right atrium.
Diffusion, filtration, and osmosis are all ways for substances to flow past the capillary wall.
Ventilation, external respiration, gas transfer, internal respiration, and cellular respiration are all
part of the respiration process.
The pharynx also referred to as the throat, is a tract that runs from the base of the skull to the sixth
cervical vertebra.
The larynx, often known as the voice box, is an airway that connects the pharynx above and the
trachea below.
The major airway to the lungs is the trachea, sometimes known as the windpipe.
The trachea is divided into the right and left principal bronchi, which branch off into smaller and
smaller passages until they reach alveoli, which are tiny air sacs.
Beyond the major bronchi, the two lungs contain all of the bronchial tree's components.
The right lung is narrower, wider, and divided into three lobes than the left lung.
The left lung is longer, narrower, and divided into two lobes than the right lung.
The urinary system eliminates waste products from the body, controls fluid volume, maintains
electrolyte concentrations in body fluids, regulates blood pH, and secretes erythropoietin and
renin.
The kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra are all parts of the urinary system.
The parenchyma of the kidney is made up of the cortex and medulla.
The renal pelvis is located in the centre of the kidney and collects urine as it is produced.
A nephron, which is made up of a renal corpuscle and a renal tubule, is the functional unit of the
kidney.
Urine is transported from the kidney to the urinary bladder via the ureters.
The urinary bladder serves as a temporary urine storage reservoir.
The urethra is the last tube through which urine flows.
An involuntary internal urethral sphincter and a voluntary external urethral sphincter govern the
passage of urine through the urethra.
Grade 10 Biology
147
Unit 5: Human Biology
Review Questions
I. True False Items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise book.
1. Blood pressure is highest in veins.
2. Atherosclerosis is the build-up of plaque inside arteries.
3. Platelets are blood cells that fight infections.
4. Food travels from the mouth to the stomach because of gravity.
5. Most absorption of nutrients takes place in the stomach.
6. For good health, you should never eat lipids.
7. The kidneys are the main organs of the excretory system.
8. Nephrons carry urine out of the body.
II. Multiple Choice Items: Choose the correct answer from A - E and write on your exercise book.
1. Part of the alimentary canal where mechanical digestion and the chemical digestion of
polysaccharides begin.
A. Mouth
B. Stomach
C. Liver
D. Small Intestine
E. None of the above
2. The 1st location in the digestive system where peristalsis occurs:
A. Mouth
B. Esophagous C. Stomach D. Small Intestine
E. Large Intestine
3. Where in the alimentary canal does pepsinogens are activated into pepsin to aid in the digestion
of proteins.
A. Mouth
B. Esophagous C. Stomach D. Small Intestine
E. Pancreas
4. The organ that releases many enzymes that aid in the breakdown of all types of organic molecules:-
A. Mouth
B. Gall Bladder
C. Stomach
D. Liver
E. Pancreas
5. The tube though which food and air (that you breathe) passes:-
A. Esophagous
B. Larynx
C. Trachea
D. Pharynx
E. Rectum.
6. Bile is produced in
.
A. Salivary Glands
B. Pancreas
C. Stomach
D. Liver
E. Gall Bladder
7. Which of the following organs produce insulin, required for glucose uptake into body cells?
A. Liver
B. Gall Bladder
C. Pancreas
D. Stomach
E. None of the above
8. Which of the following is not a major task of the digestive system?
A. Secretion
B. Digestion
C. Absorption D. Elimination E. Circulation
9. Which of the following is not considered an accessory gland to the digestive system?
A. Wall of the gastrointestinal tract GI)
C. Liver
B. Salivary Glands
D. Pancreas
E. All of the above
148
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
10. Rank the following blood vessels in order of their average pressure, from highest to lowest:
artery, vein, arteriole, venule, aorta, capillary.
A. Capillary > vein >venule> arteriole > artery > aorta
B. Aorta > arteriole >venule> artery > vein > capillary
C. Aorta > artery > arteriole > capillary >venule> vein
D. Capillary > arteriole >venule> artery > vein > aorta
E. None of the above
11. Which of the following statement about circulatory systems is false?
A. In closed circulatory systems, blood flows through vessels that are separate from the
interstitial fluid of the body.
B. The earthworm has a closed circulatory system.
C. In an open circulatory system, the hemolymph empties into the body cavity.
D. Lobsters are organisms that have closed circulatory systems.
12. Red blood cells are also known as:-
A. Lymphocytes
B. monocytes
C. erythrocytes
D. basophils
13. How does the structure of red blood cells allow them to deliver oxygen to the cells of the body?
A. Their size and shape allow them to carry and transfer oxygen.
B. Their disc shape contains many small vesicles that allow them to carry and transfer oxygen.
C. They have nuclei and do not contain haemoglobin.
D. They contain coagulation factors and antibodies.
E. All of the above
14. Which of the following best describes plasma?
A. It is a protein synthesized in the liver.
B. It is a liquid that contains only lipids and antibodies.
C. It is a blood component that is separated by spinning blood.
D. It is an antibody produced in the mucosal lining.
E. All of the above except A
15. Which of the following is a function of the breathing system?
A. gas exchange
C. transport of oxygen
B. absorption of nutrients
D. structural support
E. A and D
16. The trachea leads to the
.
A. bronchioles
B. Bronchii
C. oesophagus
D. pulmonary vessel E. Nasal cavity
Grade 10 Biology
149
Unit 5: Human Biology
17. The space at the back of the mouth, which leads either to the airway or the esophagus is the:
A. larynx
B. nasal cavity
C. Pharynx
D. None of the above
18. Oxygen from the air enters the bloodstream through:-
A. cardiac notch B. pulmonary vein C. alveoli D. paranasal sinuses E. larynx
19. When the diaphragm contracts (is pulled downward),
occurs.
A. inhalation
C. hiccup
B. exhalation
D. Lung collapse E. Both exhalation and inhalation
20. Which one of the following is the correct path urine takes as it moves through the urinary system?
A. kidneys - ureters - bladder - urethra
C. bladder - kidneys -urethra - ureters
B. ureters - kidneys - bladder - urethra
D. Uretra - kidneys - Ureters - badder
E. None of the above
21. The
is the functional unit of the kidney.
A. Villus
C. Lymph node
B. Alveoli
D. Nephron
E. All of the above
22. Which of the following substances are not filtered out of the blood in the nephrons?
A. Blood cells and proteins
C. Urea and water
B. Glucose and amino acids
D. Salts and hormones E. A and C
23. All of the substances that are removed from the blood via the Bowman's capsule are called
.
A. Plasma
B. Filtrate
C. Urine
D. Lymph
W E. C and D
24. What substances must be reabsorbed back into the blood from the convoluted tubule and loop
of Henle?
A. Water
B. Salts C. Glucose
D. All of the above
E. None of the above
25. Urine is primarily composed of:
A. Lymph
B. Red blood cells C. Carbon dioxide
D. Water
E. Oxygen
26. What is the role of liver in the maintenance of homeostasis?
A. Stores extra carbohydrates in the form of glycogen
B. Produces bile to aid in fat digestion
C. Produces clotting proteins
D. All of the above
E. Only A and B
III. Fill in the Blanks: Fill in the blank with the term that best completes the sentence.
1. Blood pressure that is higher than normal termed
.
2. The liquid part of blood is referred to as
.
3. Blood type is determined by the presence or absence of
on blood cells.
150
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 5: Human Biology
4. Tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place are called
.
5. The disease in which air passages of the lungs periodically become too narrow is
.
6. A wave of involuntary muscle contractions that moves food through the digestive system is
called
.
7. The physical breakdown of chunks of food into smaller pieces is referred to as
digestion.
8. The small intestine is lined with tiny finger-like projections named
.
9. Solid waste that leaves the large intestine is known as
.
10. Nutrients needed in small amounts for the body to function properly are
.
IV. Short Answer Items
1. Which enzymes secreted by the pancreas promote digestion?
2. Explain the chemicals and processes involved in protein and carbohydrate digestion. Why are
carbohydrates not digested in the stomach?
3. List the lipid-digesting enzymes secreted from the pancreas. Do these enzymes allow for acomplete
breakdown of lipids?
4. How is the duodenum protected against stomach acid? Why does pepsin remain inactive in
the duodenum?
5. In cases of extreme obesity, a section of the small intestine may be removed. What effect do you
think does this procedure have on the patient?
6. Describe what the inside of the small intestine looks like and how this organ increases thethe
efficiency of its operation.
Write the structures A-L
1.
F
2.
A
G
3.
H
4.
5.
6.
B
I
C
7.
J
8.
K
D
9.
E
10.
L
11.
12.
Grade 10 Biology
151
Unit 5: Human Biology
7. Discuss functions of the circulatory system?
8. Mention types of blood circulation in human body?
9. Define pulmonary Circulation.
10. What is the difference between pulmonary and Systemic Circulation?
11. Discuss the effect of fat deposits on the artery walls.
12. State functions of the right atrium.
13. What is the function of the right ventricle?
14. Why muscles of the heart on the left side are thicker?
15. Label the following kidney diagram following the letters pointed at each structure.
Write the structures A-F
E
B
1.
A
F
1.
C
G
1.
1.
1.
1.
D
1.
16. What are the Breast milk components?
17. Describe the process from food intake to excretion? How does nutrition and immunity
development relates?
152
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Contents
Learning Competency
6.1. Trophic levels
outline with examples the trophic levels in an
6.1.1. Food chains & Food webs
ecosystem
6.1.2. Flow energy and matter through ecosystems
elaborate food chain and food web with
6.2. Cycling of materials in the ecosystem
examples
6.2.1. Water cycle
show the flow of energy and matter in an
6.2.2. Carbon cycle
ecosystem
6.2.3. Nitrogen cycle
discuss ecological pyramid
6.2.4. Phosphorus cycle
draw and label the water, carbon, nitrogen and
phosphorus cycles
relate the carbon cycle with global warming
associate nitrogen cycle with soil fertility and
agriculture
appreciate the role of soil organisms in soil
fertility
investigate why farmers in their locality use
crop rotation in cultivation
6.1 Trophic Levels
Objectives
A cat always hunts a
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
rat. You know what
Define trophic level, food chain, and food web,
will happen if a hyena
construct food chain and food web-based on observed
and dog come together.
feeding relationship among common organisms in their
What does this remind
locality and
you about feeding
outline the flow of energy from the sun to plants than to a
relationship in your
higher trophic level.
environment?
6.1.1 Food chain and food web
What is the ultimate source of energy in life? How is energy
transferred from organism to organism?
Have you observed solar panels used to collect energy from the
sun, which transform solar energy to electrical energy for different
purposes? Your answer might be yes, however, the best way to trap
and store energy from sunlight is to grow plants and use the food they
synthesize. This stored energy is transferred to other living organisms
that eat plants and themselves have been eaten by another organism.
Thus, the ultimate source of energy in living organisms is the sun.
Grade 10 Biology
153
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
In this lesson, you will learn how energy is transferred from plants
through a series of organisms. Plants are the first to trap energy
and produce their food. They are called producers, also known
as autotrophs (self - feeding). Animals feed on either plants or
other animals as a source of energy. They are known as consumers
or heterotrophs, feeding on plants (herbivores) or other animals
How does energy flow in
(carnivores) or feed on both plants and animals (omnivores). Thus,
food chain?
energy is transferred from plants through a chain of organisms,
employing the "to eat or to be eaten process. This process is known as
the food chain or food web.
The following are characteristic features of a food chain
There is repeated process of "to eat or to be eaten", so the food chain
represent nutritive interaction among biotic component of the
ecosystem.
Plants (producers) are at the base or beginning of the food chain.
There is the unidirectional flow of energy from the sun to the
producers and then to series of consumers.
Omnivorous (animals that feed both on plants and other animals)
Is it the unidirectional
occupy more than one position in the food chain.
flow of energy that is
commonly observed in an
You daily observe that one organism does not eat one organism
ecosystem?
only. Every organism eats different organisms and it can be eaten
by other different organisms. Therefore, ecosystems normally exhibit
multidirectional energy flow, which is more than a direct chain of
who - eats - what. What is occurring in the ecosystem is a complex
web structure, called the food web. A food web is an interconnected
food chain that makes interwoven or web-like structures. As shown
in Figure 6.1 food chain follows a single path whereas the food web
follows multiple paths.
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
H
H
H
H
H
H
P
P
P
P
P
P
Food Chain
Food Web
Figure 6.1 Schematic illustrations of the food chain and food web
(P = producer, H= Herbivore, C1= Primary carnivore, C2 = Secondary
carnivore).
154
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
ACTIVITY 6.1 Think — Pair - Share
Direction:
Think of a possible feeding relationship of organisms commonly
observed in your locality.
Share your ideas with your classmates. Discuss whether it is a food
chain or food web that is observed on the ground and anticipate why
this is so.
Based on the food web illustrated below, construct different short
food chains and share your work with other groups.
Grasshopper
Lizard
Grass
Rabbit
hawk
What is a trophic level?
How is it different from
Rat
feeding level?
Snake
Each organism occupies a specific position in the food chain, called
trophic level. Basically, a trophic level indicates the position of the
ACTIVITY 6.2 Field Visit
organism in an order of receiving energy and usually ranges from 1 to
3 or 4 trophic levels. Plants, which are the first to trap solar energy,
Your teacher will arrange
stand at the first trophic level; herbivores that eat plants stand at the
a short visit to your school
second trophic level and carnivores that eat herbivores stand at the
garden or corner with
third trophic level (Figure 6.2).
grass for you to observe
feeding relationship among
The feeding level is the order of consuming or eating one another.
organisms.
Herbivores are at the first feeding level consuming plants also known
You may encounter insects
as primary consumers. Carnivores that eat herbivores stand at the
like grasshopper. Observe
second feeding level and so on.
what these insects feed on
and which organisms are
Trophic level
Feeding level
hunting grasshoppers. Take
field note on the different
Third Trophic
feeding relationships that
Secondary Consumer
you observed.
level
Frog
(carnivore)
After coming to class,
discuss with your small
group on what you
Second Trophic
Primary Consumer
observed and construct a
level
(Herbivore)
food chain and /or food
Grasshopper
web to show feeding
relationship among
First Trophic
Self Feeding
organisms.
level
(Producer )
Prepare a report and
Grass
submit it to your teacher
as an input for class
discussion.
Figure 6.2 Illustration of Trophic level
Grade 10 Biology
155
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.1. 2 Flow of energy and matter through ecosystem
How does energy flow in an ecosystem during a nutrient
recycle?
You already know that the ultimate source of energy in life is the sun.
You have also learned that it is solar energy trapped by the producer
during photosynthesis that flows through a series of organisms by a
food chain or food web. As shown in Figure 6.3, the energy from the
sun flows through organisms, but this energy cannot go back to the
sun. This is why we say energy cannot be recycled - it flows through
the ecosystem. However, nutrients in food (organic matter) recycle
within an ecosystem and are reused over and over again. This is the
result of composition (synthesis) and decomposition (breakdown),
which take place in the ecosystem.
Plants synthesize food (organic matter) from simple inorganic matter.
When producers or consumers die, fungi and other decomposers
obtain energy by breaking down the organic matter and in the process;
they return key nutrients like nitrogen to the soil so that producers
can use them as raw materials for photosynthesis.
Sun-light
Eagle
Snake
Frog
Grasshopper
Decomposers
Producers
Figure 6.3 Flow of energy and matter (inorganic and organic) in an
ecosystem
As energy flows from one trophic level to the next it successively
What happens to energy
declines in amount. Fig 6.4 demonstrates how energy contained in
as it is transferred from
the grass is not fully transferred to a cow that feeds on the grass. It
one trophic level to the
is only about 10% of the energy in grass that will turn to biomass
next trophic level?
(living organic mass) in the body of the cow. The rest (90% of the
total energy) is lost as heat or used for different activities of the cow
156
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
or removed from the cow's digestive system as an undigested and
indigestible food item.
30% is lost as energy for heat and
to do work
10% is assimilated
as biomass
60% not digested or egested
as extract
Figure 6.4 Energy transfer
from grass (producer) to cow
(herbivore)
The flow of energy at each trophic level in a particular ecosystem can
be shown using an ecological pyramid (Figure 6.5). It is constructed
What is an ecological
using horizontal bars, where each bar represents organisms of specific
pyramid ? How is it
trophic levels and their order, which is based on who eats whom.
constructed ?
The ecological pyramid primarily represents the flow of energy with
the producers (first trophic level) at the very bottom, followed by
the primary consumers (Herbivores), then secondary consumers
(carnivores), and so on, with the highest trophic level being on the
top of the pyramid.
The ecological pyramid can also be constructed to represent the
biomass or number of organisms at each trophic level. Accordingly,
there are three types of ecological pyramids namely: the pyramid
of energy, the pyramid of number and the pyramid of biomass. The
pyramid of energy is always upright and narrowing sharply from the
base to the top-level carnivore because there is commonly 90% energy
loss at each trophic level (Figure 6. 5).
Figure 6.5 An Idealized
pyramid of energy.
Tertiary Consumers
10
Heat energy in
Secondary Consumers
100 J
atmosphere
Primary Consumers
1,000 J
Producers
10,000 J
1,000,000 J sunlight
Grade 10 Biology
157
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
transfer of energy for each link in the food chain. Notice that the
Key terms
producer - Grass, is capable of converting only 1% of solar energy by
Biomass. is the weight of liv-
photosynthesis.
ing organic matter contained
or assimilated to the body
ACTIVITY 6.3 Think — Pair — Share
of an organism per unit time
Direction:
Ecological pyramid. This
is a graphical representation
Discuss with a friend sitting next to you and answer the following
of the feeding relationship
questions
of a group of organisms in
the form of a pyramid. A
Why is trophic level usually limited to 3 or 4? Why not more?
horizontal bar is construct-
ed to represent the different
What is the trophic level of a human being? Explain
trophic level or feeding lev-
el. The bars at the base of
the pyramid always repre-
As opposed to pyramid of energy, pyramids of biomass or number can
sent plants (producers). The
be upright (with the long bar at the base and shorter bar at the apex)
length of the bar shows the
amount of energy (pyramid
or inverted depending on the type of ecosystem and the particular
of energy), biomass (pyra-
food chain (Figure 6.6)
mid of biomass) or number
of organisms (pyramid of
number) present at each tro-
A
B
phic level.
Tilapia
(fish)
Tilapia
(fish)
Daphnia
(zooplankton)
Daphnia
Chlorella
(zooplankton)
(green algae)
Chlorella
(green algae)
Figure 6.6 Illustration of the pyramid of number (A) and pyramid of
biomass (B) in the aquatic food chain
Self Test
ACTIVITY 6.4 Homework
What is the advantage of
being vegetarian (feeding on
Direction: Critically observe figure 6.6, and construct similar
plants and plant products)?
pyramid of number and pyramid of biomass based on the following
food chain. Tree -bird-bird flea
1. Compare your pyramid with Figure 6.6 and comment on the
difference.
2. What do you conclude about the pyramid of number and
pyramid of biomass?
158
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2 Cycling of Materials in an Ecosystem
Objectives
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
draw and label the water, carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorous cycle,
relate the carbon cycle with global warming,
associate nitrogen with soil fertility and agriculture,
appreciate the role of soil organisms in soil fertility and
identify why crop rotation is important to farmers
What is meant by cycling of materials in an ecosystem?
An ecosystem refers to the complex of living organisms (biotic
component), their physical and chemical environment (abiotic
component), and all their interaction and interrelationship in a
particular unit of space. As materials in an ecosystem are found in a
Attention
limited amount, it is essential that the same nutrients materials should
continuously be reused, over and over again. The cycling occurs
Decomposers are bacteria
between the biotic (living) and the abiotic (non-living) components
and fungi, commonly found
in soil. They play key role
of the ecosystem. The biotic component consists of plants, animals,
in returning nutrient to the
and microorganisms while the abiotic comprises the atmosphere (air),
ecosystem.
hydrosphere (Aquatic/water), and lithosphere (soil). Materials always
Unlike ingesters, animals
move around within an ecosystem when organisms feed, breathe,
that swallow food (organic
respire, and excrete. Nutrients are released when the waste product
matter) and digest inside
or dead bodies are decomposed. What is a waste product to one
their gut, digestion in
organism becomes a vital nutrient to another. For example, animal
decomposers takes place
excreta (a waste product) will be broken down by decomposers,
outside the living body in
release nitrogen and phosphorous (vital nutrients) which will be used
the soil, or wherever the
dead matter happens to be.
for plant growth, thereby increasing agricultural yield. Note that the
waste product, instead of polluting the environment, can be a rich
Decomposers exhibit
source of organic fertilizer.
extracellular digestion by
releasing enzymes on to the
dead matter, digesting the
What are the important materials that cycle through the
complex organic matter into
ecosystem?
simpler and smaller ones
and absorb these products
of decomposition. Since
ACTIVITY 6.5 Peer discussion
the products released are
accumulated in the external
Direction: In pairs, discuss and answer the following questions
environment (soil), they
Why is the cycling of materials in an ecosystem so important?
serve as "nutrient pool" and
What will happen to organisms or life if decomposers are absent
increase soil fertility as well
from the ecosystem?
as plant productivity.
Grade 10 Biology
159
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
In addition to water, there are 4 elements (nutrients) that cycle
through the ecosystem: oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous.
These elements take the path from the non - living environment to
living organisms, such as trees, and then back to the non - living
environment. The paths that include biological, geological, and
chemical processes form cycles, known as the bio-geochemical cycle.
In this, subsection you will learn about the aforementioned major
cycles in detail, discuss and share ideas in class.
6.2.1 Water cycle
What happens during the water cycle?
Water on earth does not stay still. It is always on move. Rain that falls
at a particular place can be the result of evaporation that occurred at
a distant ocean days before. Likewise, water in a river may have been
rainfall somewhere at a distance or melting ice or snow from the top
of high mountains. It is the water cycle that is responsible for water
movement in the ocean, on the land, and in the atmosphere.
The earth has a limited amount of water. When examining the water
on Earth, 97.5 percent of it is non-potable saltwater. Of the remaining
water, 99 percent is locked underground as ground water or as icecap
in the polar areas. Thus, less than 1 percent of freshwater is easily
accessible from lakes and rivers. This water keeps going around
and around in what we call the water cycle or the hydrologic cycle.
Water continuously cycles between the oceans, atmosphere, land,
and organisms, as illustrated in Figure 6.7. A change in temperature,
heating, and cooling, is the main driving force in the water cycle,
causing a change in the state of water as water vapour (gas), ice or
snow (solid), and liquid water. Among the many processes involved in
the water cycle, the most important are: evaporation, transpiration,
condensation, precipitation, and runoff.
The water cycle is sun driven process. It is solar heating that helps the
cycle to start with evaporation. Evaporation of water from the earth
and surface of the leaf by transpiration rises in the atmosphere in the
form of water vapor. Then, the water vapor cools and condenses in
the atmosphere into rain or snow, and falls again to the earth's surface
as precipitation (Rainfall or snowfall). The water falling on earth
through surface run off collects in rivers, lakes, soil, and soft rocks,
where some water is taken up by plant roots and much of it flows into
oceans and also infiltrate the soil and accumulated as ground water.
The surface water by evaporation and evapotranspiration will restart
the cycle.
160
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Water accumulated in the ground can come to the surface as a
spring or stream. Groundwater can also be pumped out for different
purposes such as drinking and irrigation and join the water cycle by
surface evaporation.
PRECIPITATION
VAPOR TRANSPORT
PRECIPITATION
EVAPORATION
EVAPORATION
RUNOFF
PERCOLATION
GROUNDWATER
Figure 6.7 Water cycle
Activity 6.6. Group Work
Title: How does the water cycle work?
Materials Needed: Large glass beaker (100ml), Smaller glass beaker (50ml), Water, Plastic cover, string
or Large rubber-band
Procedure:
Place the small glass beaker at the centre of the larger glass beaker.
Fill the large glass beaker with water about 2/3rd of the way up the small beaker (do not put water
inside the small beaker).
Cover the large glass beaker with a plastic cover and either tie it with string or put a large rubber
band around it to secure the plastic cover.
Place the set up outside in a sunny area for a few hours.
After a few hours observe what happens to the plastic cover and look if there is water inside the small
beaker.
Key questions:
1. What did you observe on the plastic cover?
2. What is the process that enabled water particles to move up towards the plastic cover?
3. What process is demonstrated when the water drops are getting too heavy and falling back to small
glass beaker?
4. Why do we say the water cycle is sun-driven process?
Grade 10 Biology
161
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2.2 Carbon cycle
The air around us is composed of many different gases including
What happens during
oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and inert gases. Oxygen and
carbon cycle?
carbon dioxide, in particular are important for the survival of living
organisms. The amount of these gases is maintained in the atmosphere
by photosynthesis and cellular respiration.
As depicted in Figure 6.8, the amount of carbon in the atmosphere is
maintained by process that continuously takes it from the atmosphere
and various processes that release it back to the atmosphere. When
green plants undergo the process of photosynthesis to make their food
they absorb carbon dioxide from the air. The carbon element stored
in the plant is transferred to animals that eat the plant. When plants
and animals die their dead bodies are decomposed and release carbon
dioxide back to the air due to the action of bacteria and fungi in the
soil. In addition all living organisms including plants and animals
release carbon dioxide through respiration in their entire life time.
Over a period of long time dead bodies of organisms become fossil
fuel which can be used by factories, power stations and vehicles. The
combustion or burning of fossil fuel also releases carbon dioxide into
the air.
Carbon dioxide CO2
Atmosphere
Photosynthesis
Combustion
Respiration
Respiration
LLL
Plants
Animals
Respiration
Factories
power stations
vehicle emissions
Decay
decomposers
Figure 6.8. The carbon cycle
How do you link
Though CO2 is a natural part of Earth's atmosphere, humans produce
carbondioxide to climate
more of it every year, and that's changing our climate. Its atmospheric
change?
concentrations has significantly increased since the Industrial
Revolution (late 18th century). Burning of the fossil fuels (coal, oil,
162
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
natural gas) and wood for energy are the major sources. Atmospheric
CO2 acts like a heat-trapping blanket, absorbing the heat and holding
it in, causing global warming. Global warming is a rise in the overall
temperature of the earth's surface. There are also other heat-trapping
gases (Greenhouse gases) in the atmosphere (methane and nitrous
oxide), but CO2 is the most important one. Thus, adition of excessive
CO2 in to the atmosphere due to human activity is the root cause of
climate change.
Attention
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are the major processes that
maintain the balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
If sunlight and chlorophyll are left out, the reactant for photosynthesis
is the product of respiration and vice versa as shown below.
Photosynthesis
CO₂ + H₂O
C₆H₁₂ O₆ + O2
(Food)
Respiration
While photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast of the leaf cell,
aerobic cellular respiration takes place in the mitochondrion of a cell
of aerobic organisms.
ACTIVITY 6.7 Group Discussion
Direction
In a group of four students (two pairs of neighbouring students) discuss and attempt the question
below.
How do illegal logging (cutting trees)
Ways to reduce the interference to the
and forest burning interferes in the
carbon and oxygen cycles
carbon-oxygen cycle? How can this
be related to climate change such as
Making tougher laws
Plant more trees
global warming?
onmental
Law
In small group , carefully look at the
summary chart below Discuss the
ways suggested to human interference
Ban illegal logging
Stop burning fields
with the carbon - oxygen cycle. Select
and forests
at least two ways mentioned in the
chart , elaborate and write a short
group report to present in class.
Avoid excessive use
Prevent excessive release
of pesticides
of smoke from vehicles
Grade 10 Biology
163
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2.3 Nitrogen cycle
What is nitrogen cycle?
You have learned that proteins are made up of the elements C, H, O,
N and S. You also know that the immediate result of photosynthesis
is carbohydrate (glucose), which consists of C, H, and O which is
transformed to protein upon the addition of nitrogen. Nitrogen is
available to the plant from the soil through the nitrogen cycle.
Nitrogen In the Atmosphere (N2)
DENITRIFICATION
NITROGEN
FIXATION
Animals
Plants
Denitrifying
Bacteria
ASSIMILATION
NITROGEN
FIXATION
Bacteria in
Roots
Nitrogen-containinig
Nitrates
organic compounds
(NO3-)
Decomposers
Nitrifying
Bacteria
AMMONIFICATION
NITRIFICATION
Soil Bacteria
Ammonia(NH3)/
Nitraites (NO2-)
Ammonium(NH4+)
Figure 6.9. The Nitrogen cycle
As shown in Figure 6.9 the nitrogen cycle is a repeating pathway of
processes during which nitrogen in different forms moves through both
biotic ( plants, animals, bacteria and fungi) and abiotic ( atmosphere,
soil, water ) components of the ecosystem. The major processes
involved in cycling nitrogen are: nitrogen fixation, ammonification,
nitrification, assimilation and denitrification. A brief description of
these processes is given hereafter
1. Nitrogen fixation
Nitrogen accounts for about 78% of the atmosphere. Most living or-
ganisms are unable to incorporate atmospheric nitrogen, N₂, into
their systems. To be usable, the N₂ should be fixed into usable forms
such as ammonia or nitrate. Nitrogen fixation is the conversion of N₂
into ammonia either biologically (mediated by bacteria) or non-bio-
logically (atmospheric fixation by lightning and industrial fixation in
the laboratory). In this lesson, we will focus on the biological fixation
of nitrogen.
Based on the group of bacteria involved, the biological N₂ fixation
may be categorized into two:
i) Symbiotic nitrogen fixation and
ii) Non - symbiotic fixation
164
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
i. Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation
This form of biological nitrogen fixation is carried out in the root
nodules of leguminous plants (such as peas, beans, and peanuts) by the
group of soil bacteria known as rhizobia. Rhizobia form a symbiotic
association with leguminous plants and form the root nodules where
N₂ is reduced into ammonia (Figure 6.10). The nitrogen fixation
reaction (conversion of N2) is catalyzed by an enzyme known as
nitrogenase.
How are rhizobia linked
The ammonium ions produced by this process are passed to the
to global climate?
legume plant (assimilated) and used to synthesize amino acids-
building units of protein.
N₂ + 8e + 8H + 16ATP
2NH₃+H₂+16ADP+16Pi
Figure 6.10. Root nodules of legume plant
It is well known that concentrations of carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have increased since the
beginning of the industrial era due to human activities. Among these
gases is nitrous oxide (N₂O), an intermediate product of microbial
denitrification in the nitrogen cycle. The emission of N₂O is one risk
to global climate change because of its global warming potential (over
300 times than carbon dioxide) and long atmospheric residence time.
Excessive use of synthetic N fertilizer in the agricultural system is the
major source of N₂O emissions. Biological N₂ fixation by rhizobia
could be an alternative source of fixed N to synthetic N fertilizer to
improve or sustain agricultural productivity and at the same time
mitigate emission of N2O to the atmosphere.
ii. Non - symbiotic nitrogen fixation
This form of biological nitrogen fixation is carried out by free living
soil bacteria (belonging to the genera Azotobacter and Klebsiella).
These bacteria reduce nitrogen gas into ammonium ions, which can
Grade 10 Biology
165
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
either be used by plants or oxidized immediately into nitrates by ni-
trifying bacteria.
2. Nitrification
This is a microbial process by which ammonia is sequentially oxi-
dized - converted first to nitrite and then to nitrate.
In the first step of nitrification, ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (belong-
ing mainly to the genus Nitrosomonas) oxidize ammonia to nitrite
according to the following equation:
NH₃ +02
NO₂ + 3H+ + 2 e⁻
In the second step of nitrification, nitrite-oxidizing bacteria (mainly
belonging to the genus Nitrobacter) oxidize nitrite to nitrate accord-
ing to the following equation
NO₂ +02
NO₃ + 2H+ + 2 e⁻
3. Assimilation of ammonium and nitrate by plant
Plants commonly absorb nitrogen in inorganic forms either as nitrate
(NO₃) or as ammonium (NH₄⁺). Plants preferentially take up the re-
duced ammonium (NH₄⁺) rather than the oxidized nitrate (NO₃), be-
cause the energy expenditure for the NH₄⁺ assimilation is much lower
than for NO₃:
The mechanism of absorption of ionic forms of nitrogen is essentially
similar to the mechanism involved in the uptake of other ions. Like
other nutrients, they can be absorbed by the root actively or passively,
reach the root xylem and then transported to the stem and leaves of
the plant. Both ammonium and nitrate assimilated by plants are used
in the synthesis of several amino acids which in turn are polymerized
into different proteins.
4. Ammonification
This is an essential step that converts reduced organic matter having
amine group (of general formula R - NH₂) present in the soil to re-
duced inorganic nitrogen (NH₄⁺) through the action of microorgan-
isms. Ammonification is the last step of the nitrogen cycle involving
an organic compound and is an intermediary step between depolym-
erization of large organic molecules and the nitrification process as
presented hereunder.
Dead organic matter
Depolymerization
Ammonification
Nitrification
(Protein, Chitin,
Amino acid, Urea,
Ammonium
Nitrate
Peptidoglycan,
Amino sugar and
(NH₄⁺)
(NO₃⁻)
and Nucleic acid)
Nucleotide
166
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
5. Denitrification
The flow of atmospheric nitrogen (N₂) and its various forms through
soil, microorganism, plants and animals should involve a process of
returning nitrogen (N₂) to the atmosphere to maintain balance. This
process, called denitrification, converts nitrate to nitrogen gas (N₂),
thus removing bioavailable nitrogen and returning it to the atmosphere.
Unlike nitrification, denitrification is an anaerobic process, occurring
mostly in waterlogged soils that are anoxic (without oxygen), layers of
sediments in lakes and oceans.
NO3
NO2
NO + N2O
N₂
It is important to know that the biological processes of the nitrogen
cycle is largely mediated by different microorganisms, mainly
bacteria. This is summarized in the following table.
Biological process
Microorganisms involved
1. Nitrogen Fixation
Nitrogen fixing bacteria living in legume
root nodule ( Rhizobium)
Nitrogen fixing bacteria living in soil
(Azotobacter and Klebsella)
2. .Nitrification
Nitrifying bacteria ( Nirtrosomonas, Ni-
trobacter)
3.Ammonification
Ammonifying bacteria ( Aerobic and an-
aerobic bacteria, fungi)
4. .Denitrification
Denitrifying bacteria ( Pseudomonas,
Thiobacillus, Micrococcus)
Self Test
THE NITROGEN CYCLE
After studying the brief description of major
steps in the nitrogen cycle as illustrated with
in which
Figure 6.9, complete the following mental map
and label the processes represented by letters
NITROGEN
IN THE
(A to E).
ATMOSPHERE
goes through
D
A
to be
converted into
B
produce
Ammonium
to
ions
goes back to the atmosphere through
protein
the
caled
C
in
Plants
remains its organicrgo
goes through
E
to
Aa Pagrosqe
Nitrates
and is is converted
Grade 10 Biology
167
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Nitrogen is the most important component in an organism in the
Why is cycling nitrogen
form of DNA, RNA and proteins. You know that DNA contains a
important?
unique genetic code to guide all activities in living organisms. Like a
recipe book, it holds the instruction for making all the proteins, both
structural and functional, in our bodies.
Key terms
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is an organic compound of complex
structure that is found in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. DNA
codes genetic information for the transmission of inherited traits.
DNA is key to life because it determines how a cell replicates and
performs its various activities.
A DNA molecule is composed of a long chain of monomers,
the nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of a five carbon sugar
(deoxyribose) to which is attached a phosphate group and a
nitrogenous base ( contains nitrogen)
Functional proteins perform different functions that play key role
to life. These key roles can be : catalytic (E.g. enzymes), Storage (
E.g. albumin in egg, casein in milk) transport ( E.g. haemoglobin
transport oxygen), protective ( E.g. antibodies, blood clotting factors
etc.
ACTIVITY 6.8 Think-Pair-
Structural protein, unlike functional proteins, are involved in
Share
producing structures such as bones and muscles as well as cell
Direction: With a friend
membrane and skin that covers the cell and the external body
sitting next to you
respectively.
anticipate and point out
what will happen to life
How do you relate nitrogen cycle, soil bacteria and soil
or living things if there
fertility?
was no nitrogen in the
atmosphere; and
You already know that atmospheric nitrogen (N₂) cannot be directly
discuss the importance
used by both plants and animals. Plants use nitrogen in the inorganic
of soil bacteria in cycling
form as ammonium and nitrate and convert it to organic forms such
nitrogen and comment
as amino acids and proteins. It is, thereafter, animals that feed on
on the misconception that
plants get the organic form and transform, use and store the organic
bacteria are commonly
taken as harmful and
form of nitrogen in their body. Here, the different soil bacteria, like
dangerous to human
the nitrogen bacteria and nitrifying bacteria are absolutely essential
beings.
to providing plants with ammonium and nitrate. Moreover, the
ammonifying bacteria, decomposing dead organic matter, liberate
ammonium. Thus, soil bacteria that plays a key role in cycling
nitrogen increase soil fertility, which in turn results in increased plant
growth and agricultural productivity. For instance, the nitrogen-
fixing bacteria can be used as biofertilizers due to their big capacity
for fixing a huge amount of nitrogen increasing soil fertility without
causing any harmful effect on aerial and soil environment. They help
improve soil structure and serve as a continuous source of natural
fertilizer without being leached easily.
168
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Earthworms are soil organisms that are visible to the naked eye
(Figure 6.11). They are one of the major decomposers of organic
matter. The mutual action of earthworms and microbes brings faster
decomposition of organic matter, and enhance cycling of nutrients
thereby facilitating plant growth and crop productivity. Having an
abundance of earthworm is a good indicator of fertile soil and ensure
higher agricultural yield As a result, earthworms are nicknamed as
"Friends of farmers".
When earthworms move through the soil, they form tubular channel
or burrows. These burrows improves soil structure, particularly soil
What is the role of larger
soil organisms such as
porosity which increases the amount of air and water holding capacity.
earthworms ?
From your lesson on seed germination, you have learned that air and
water are essential for seed to break dormancy (resting stage) and
start growth and development of seedling.
Key terms
Bio-fertilizers are microbial preparations containing living cells of
different microorganisms which have the ability to mobilize essen-
tial plant nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus in soil from
unusable to usable form through biological processes.
Bio-fertilizers, being cost effective, non-toxic, and eco-friendly,
serve as good substitute for expensive and harmful chemical fertil-
izers. They increase crop yield, ensure food security and sustainable
agriculture.
Vermicompost or worm compost is organic fertilizer obtained by
using worms. These are commonly earthworms that decompose
food scraps, dungs, other wastes and dead organic matter and fa-
cilitate nutrient recycling.
Farmers that use organic fertilizers (Organic farmers) usually grow
legumes such as peas and beans for dual purpose. First, they harvest
the legumes as a crop as these plants are freely supplied with nitro-
gen fertilizer due to the nitrogen fixing bacteria in their root nod-
ules. After harvesting yield, the organic farmers grow a non-legume
crops to take an advantage of all nitrogen fixed and accumulated in
the soil and root of the legumes: none is lost in a crop.
Grade 10 Biology
169
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
6.2.4. Phosphorus cycle
ACTIVITY 6.9 Homework
Direction
How is phosphorus recycled?
Collect information from
books about crop rotation.
Phosphorus, like nitrogen, is needed by organisms to build proteins.
Then, prepare brief note
Moreover, it is an essential component of the nucleotides of DNA,
and show why farmers use
which is key for life. Phosphorous is also needed in the synthesis of
crop rotation and how they
ATP, known as the energy currency of a cell. Phosphorus is usually
practice it.
present in the form of phosphate ions in soil and rock.
As illustrated in Figure 6.12 cycling of phosphorus can be summarized
as follows
phosphate ions present in soil or water are taken up by plants and
aquatic algae are converted to organic phosphate
organic phosphate synthesized by the producers is passed along
food chains to various consumers or feeders.
dead bodies of plants and animals are decomposed by bacteria and
fungi and phosphate ions are released from different compounds
like phospholipids, ATP, DNA and returned to the soil and water
bodies. Phosphate is also excreted from animals and aquatic
organisms.
phosphate will enter the soil in the form of fertilizers obtained
by mining phosphate rocks and applying them in agricultural
lands to boost crop yield. Phosphate fertilizer from farmlands can
be leached by rainfall, reach the nearby water bodies and cause
eutrophication.
Figure 6.12. Phosphorus cycle
Cellular respiration
phosphate excreted
Feeding
Phospherous taken
Fertilizer
as phosphate ions by
Fish
plants and fixed as
organic phosphate in
plant body
Agriculture
Mining phosphate
Algae
rock
Leaching
Sedimentation
Phosphate in soil
Phosphate dissolved in
Millions of years
(Formation of
water
phosphate rock)
170
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
ACTIVITY 6.10 Group work
Direction
Discuss in a small group and prepare a short report on the danger of
agrochemicals (fertilizers and pesticides) released from farmlands
to the nearby water body, such as lakes or reservoirs.
Key terms
ATP, abbreviation for Adenosine, is the immediate source of energy
(instantly liberates energy) needed for various activities of a cell.
Energy released during cellular respiration is harvested and stored as
ATP.
Eutrophication is undesirable excessive growth of aquatic plants
(hydrophytes or macrophysics) and massive growth of algae (algal
bloom). It is induced by leaching of fertilizers (rich in nitrogen and
phosphorus from nearby farmlands or water loaded.
Biofertilizers, being cost effective, non toxic , and eco - friendly
, serve as good substitute for expensive and harmful chemical
fertilizers. They increase crop yield , ensure food security and
sustainable agriculture.
Unit Summary
The Earth obtains energy which is trapped by plants for
photosynthesis and transferred to animals that feed on them.
A food chain is a unidirectional energy flow from the sun to
producer and then to a series of consumers.
Food web is interconnected food chains that make interwoven
or web-like structures where energy flows in different directions
(multidirectional) from producers to different consumers.
The order of receiving solar energy is known as trophic level
in that plants (producers) are at the First trophic level and
animals that feed on plants will be at the Second trophic level
or First feeding level and so on.
The flow of energy at each trophic level in a particular
ecosystem can be shown using an ecological pyramid.
The ecological pyramid can be a pyramid of energy, number
and biomass.
As energy is successively decreasing as it is transferred from one
level to another level the pyramid of energy is always upright.
As a result, the number of trophic where energy transferred is
sufficient to sustain life will be limited from 4 to 5.
Grade 10 Biology
171
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Ecological pyramid of number and biomass, depending on the particular ecosystem and
food chain, pyramid of number and biomass can be upright or inverted.
Materials in an ecosystem are found in a limited amount and the same nutrients are
continuously re-used, over and over again. This is what we call the cycle of materials.
The most important cycle of materials in an ecosystem include: water, carbon -oxygen
cycle, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles.
Water (hydrologic) cycle is a change in the state of water as water vapour (gas), ice or snow
(solid) and liquid water is driven by solar heating and mainly due to change in temperature.
Among the many processes involved in the water cycle, the most important are: evaporation,
transpiration, condensation, precipitation and runoff.
The carbon cycle maintains the amount of carbon in the atmosphere by process (es) that
continuously take it from the atmosphere and release it back to the atmosphere.
In cycling carbon, atmospheric carbon dioxide is continuously taken by plants as raw material
for photosynthesis and the uptake is balanced by respiration, decomposition and combustion,
all of which release carbon dioxide back to the atmosphere.
As opposed to the carbon cycle, in the oxygen cycle, where oxygen is continuously taken
from the atmosphere by processes like respiration, decomposition, combustion and rusting is
balanced by photosynthesis which releases it back to the air
The nitrogen cycle is a repeating pathway of processes during which nitrogen in different
forms moves through both biotic (plants, animals, bacteria and fungi) and abiotic (atmosphere,
soil, water) components of the ecosystem.
The major processes involved in cycling nitrogen are nitrogen fixation, ammonification,
nitrification, assimilation, denitrification.
The phosphorus cycle is mainly the transfer of phosphate ions from the soil, water and rock
to plants and aquatic algae, first converted to organic phosphate in the producers and transferred
to consumers through the food chain. Phosphate ions are released from consumers through their
excreta and as their dead bodies are decomposed by soil bacteria and fungi.
172
Grade 10 Biology
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
Review Questions
I. True - False items: Say "True" or "False" for the following statements on your exercise
book.
1. There is more energy at the third trophic level than at the second trophic level.
2. Ammonium is more preferred by plants than nitrate
3. Plants can release as well as take carbon to and from the atmosphere
4. Denitrifying bacteria are aerobic
5. It is food web, not food chain that actually exists in ecosystem
II. Multiple-choice items: Choose the correct answer from A - D and write on you exercise
book.
1. In the food chain: Grass - rat - snake - Eagle, the position of Snake is at
feeding
level and
trophic level
A) 3, 2
B) 3, 4
C) 4, 3
D) 2, 3
2. If the producers in the ecological pyramid have a total of 70, 000 Kcal of energy, which of the
following will be true
A) The secondary consumers would have a total of 7 Kcal energy
B) The primary consumers would have a total of 7000 Kcal energy
C) The secondary consumers would have a total of 70 Kcal energy
D) The tertiary consumers would have a total of 700 Kcal energy
3. The biomass of an ecosystem is
A) The total energy of living and non - living organisms in an ecosystem
B) The total mass of living organisms in an ecosystem
C) The total energy of living organisms in an ecosystem
D) The total mass of living and non - living matter in an ecosystem
4. In nitrogen fixation, nitrogen combines with
A) Carbon B) Hydrogen C) Oxygen D) Water
5. What is the correct term for rising water vapour meeting colder air and turning back in to
water droplets?
A) Condensation B) Dehydration C) Evaporation D) Precipitation
Grade 10 Biology
173
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions
III. Match the description under "Column A" with the terms under "Column B".
Column A
Column B
1. Is the process by which the protein in the waste matter, dead
A) Ammonification
plants or animals is converted to ammonia
2. Carbon dioxide is the by-product of this biological process
B) Condensation
3. The position of an organism in an order of receiving solar energy
C) Denitrification
4. This process converts atmospheric nitrogen into usable form.
D) Evaporation
5. The position of an organism in an order of who eats whom
E) Feeding level
6. This contributes to the return of vapor to the atmosphere
F) Nitrogen fixation
G) Photosynthesis
H) Respiration
I) Trophic level
IV. Short Answer Items
1. Why is it unusual for a large number of organisms to be present at the top of an ecological
pyramid?
2. How do plants get nitrogen?
3. List down the advantages of organic fertilizers such as dead bodies and waste products of
animals as compared to chemical fertilizers.
4. What is the difference between forest clearing (cutting trees) and forest burning in terms of:
a) carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere
b) effect on global warming
174
Grade 10 Biology