UNIT 1: BIOLOGY & TECHNOLOGY
The design
What are the technologies
body since timeless. The successful design of
and
imitated from nature?
technologies from robotics to material
adaptation
sciences
was through imitating nature
of many technologies we utilize today
(Figure1 1).
imitated natural working systems. Many
technologies have been imitating birds, bats,
termites, spiders,
Lotus Temple India
Cucumber fruit
bees, ants and
Lotus
parts of human
Talpei World tower
Camouflage dress
Partridges Bird S
Bee
Gherkin tower Inspired London
way
Aerogians
Hook, loop (velcro)
I
seed
Bamboo tree
Fins
Cocklebur
block Buipiing
Cactus plant
Reef Shark
Wind Wind shield
Nature
Inspired
Products
Qatar Sprouts tower
Palm Jumeirah
Noiseless fan
Elephant trunk
Robot
Lotus
feet
2
leaf
Gecko
Bird nest
Gecko tape
palm tree
Robotic
10881
unipers
scale Fish
asnou sninnen
Kevlar
Beijing National
Kingfisher Bird
Sea shell
Bullet train nose
Figure 1.1 Nature imitated technologies and architectures
Nature inspires scientists and engineers and serves as a reliable source of knowledge, ideas and
concepts from which technologies can be developed.
Buildings were made through the imitation of the mound architecture of termites that have
chimneys, constant temperature and humidity. Examples of technology that imitates nature:
1. Swallow nests have inspired the house building design.
2. Weaving technologies have been developed by studying the formation of spider webs.
3. Buildings have been made through the imitation of the mound architecture of termites. These
buildings mimic termite mound architecture that has chimneys with constant temperature and
humidity. An example is The East gate Center in Harare (Figure 1.2).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
3
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Termite's mound
East Gate Building
Figure 1.2 Mound inspired architecture for the East Gate Building
4. The first heavy aircraft technology was designed by imitating birds. Aircraft engineers
designed aircraft wings and their flight techniques by imitating the wings of birds and bats
5. Engineers imitating human eyes made the technology of photograph camera.
6. The movement of bio-robots was designed from the movement of kangaroo.
7. Injection needle technology was copied from mosquito proboscis (Figure 1.3).
Proboscis
Injection needle
Figure 1.3 Injection needle imitated from a mosquito's proboscis
8. The sensors of electrical devices were imitations of biological neurons.
9. A cutting saw was imitated from the nature of the sharp teeth of animals.
10. Synthetic bulletproof vests are imitations of the spin silks of spiders.
11. Ceramics are an imitation of the nature of crack-resistant shellfish exoskeleton.
12. A robotic arm was imitated from an elephant trunk (Figure 1.4).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
4
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 1: BIOLOGY & TECHNOLOGY
Figure 1.4 Robotic arms imitated from elephant trunk
Lab activity 1.1 Construction of models imitating
nature
Construct a model of a human hand to imitate nature.
Materials
Locally available resources
Procedure
Construct a human hand model with jointed finger structures
Paint the model with pertinent color
Assessments
1. How closely does your model hand match a natural human
hand?'
2. What is missing in imitating the model to full function of
human hand?
3. What other technologies could be developed by imitating the
nature and produce other technologies?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
5
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
1.2 Biology and technology
After the successful completion of
this section, the student will be able to:
Self-questioning
Describe the use of technology in
biology
Before starting this section, ask
yourself this question "What do I
Explain biology and technology
Explain the benefits of biology to
know about the role of biology in
technology
technology and technology in
biology, and what do I want to
learn from this section?"
Biology is the study of life: the structures, functions,
What does the blend of biology
growth, origins, evolution and distribution of living
and technology form?
organisms.
Technology is the application of scientific knowledge, skills, methods and processes for the
production of devices and tools for scientific investigations.
The blend of biology and technology forms biotechnology, which is a technology that utilizes
biological systems to develop useful products. Biotechnology is the integration of natural and
engineering sciences to achieve the application of organisms, cells, parts and molecular analogues
for products and services. Examples: people use yeasts to produce bread and beer.
1.2.1 The benefits of biology to technology
There are many benefits of biology to technology. Biology is a source of materials that enable us to
imitate, design, adapt and develop modern technologies and solve complex human problems. The
diversity of nature stimulates the development of new technologies. Scientists and engineers imitate
nature to innovate, problem solve and expand their scientific understanding. Here are just a few
examples of the benefits of biology to technology:
1. Medicinal plants: Many biochemical substances in plants have been used to develop
medicines. Scientists have imitated nature to develop artificial versions of the these
biochemical substances.
2. Gene engineering and biosynthetic materials: Scientists have imitated the nature of
human, animal and plant genes. The uses of imitating genes include gene engineering to
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
6
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 1: BIOLOGY & TECHNOLOGY
cure genetic conditions and the creation of biosynthetic materials to repair damaged body
tissues.
3. Building design: Engineers have imitated the mound architecture of termites in the
design of buildings with chimneys which have a constant temperature and humidity.
4. Bullet train design: The noses (front) of bullet trains have been designed by engineers
imitating the shape of the beaks of kingfishers when they dive into water (Figure 1.5).
Inquiry
activity
1.2
Technologies imitating nature
For each technology, identify the natural
source(s) that was imitated:
1. Hexagonal structures
2. A brand new drone design
3. Techniques for preserving live vaccines
4. Powerful repellent spray
5. Cutting saws
U1-TNK
JR700
Research the natural source(s) using the
internet and/or available textbooks.
Figure 1.5 Bullet train noses imitate the beak of a kingfisher
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
7
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
1.2.2Uses of technology in biology
The uses of technology in biology are the ways in which
What are the uses of technology in
technological tools can be applied to solve various human
biology?
problems. It is the practical application of biotechnological
instruments (products) in providing required human services and investigations of new biological
questions.
Biological studies that use technological tools include:
1. Biochemical studies are helpful to investigate information on carbohydrates, proteins, lipids
and nucleic acids.
2. Biomedical studies deal with providing detailed of information on the chemical components of
medicinal plants.
3. Biophysical studies are the science of using physical devices to gather biological information
at all scales of biological organization (molecular, organismic, and populations).
4. Environmental studies are a multidisciplinary system dealing with the interactions of humans
with the environment.
5. Bioinformatics is a scientific discipline involving computer technology to collect, store,
analyze, and disseminate biological data and information (DNA and amino acid sequences).
6. Biogeographical information is the study of the distribution of species along with geographic
ecosystems through geological periods.
The following are examples of technological devices:
1. A digital thermometer is an instrument used for measuring body temperatures (Figure 1.6).
A pregnancy urine test is a tool that checks if a woman is pregnant or not by detecting the
amount of the hormone Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (HCG), produced in the placenta around six
to ten days after fertilization in either the urine (pee) or blood. The test result in one line is a
control line showing negative (no pregnancy) and the other line (two lines) confirms the existence
pregnancy (Figure 1.7).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
8
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
