UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Positive
(Pregnant)
HICKS 917
Negative
(Not Pregnant)
Figure 1.6 Digital thermometers
Figure 1.7 Pregnancy urine test tool
2. The diabetic blood test is a tool to measure the level of blood sugar taking sample blood
from figure tip (Figure 1.8).
3. An HIV test is a detector to identify infections with the virus or not (Figure 1.9).
Uni-Gold
Uni-Gold
HIV
HIV
Positive
Negative
Control
Control
508
Test
Test
Sample
Sample
TRINITY
TRINITY
BIOTECH
BIOTECH
Figure 1.8 Diabetic test tool
Figure 1.9 HIV test tool
4. Microscopes used to magnify objects (Figure 1.10).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
9
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Eyepiece
Revolving
nosepiece
Carrying arm
Objective lenses
Stage controls
Stage clips
Stage
Coarse focus
Fine focus
Condensor
adjusment
Diaphragm
Figure 1.10 Microscope and its parts
5. Computer Information Technology Scanning (CITS) is a device used for investigating
information on diseases or cancerous areas of the human body.
6. Computed Tomography scan (CT scan) is a sophisticated x-ray technology used to take
many X-ray pictures of the body, used to detect and screen for variety of diseases and
conditions (Figure 1.11).
7. Positron Emission Tomography (PET scan) is an imaging technology device used to
check for diseases or information in areas with cancer in the human body. It uses a special
dye containing radioactive tracers that is swallowed, inhaled, or injected into an arm vein
conditionally. It visualizes and measures changes in metabolic processes and physiological
activities like blood flow, chemical composition, and absorption (Figure 1.12).
Figure 1.11 CT scan
Figure 1.12 PET scan
8. Geographical Position System (GPS) is a device used to collect biogeographical
information (biological data) on landscape mapping, plants, animals, and human movements
(Figure 1.13).
9. Handheld Body fat calculator device used to measure body fat (Figure 1.14).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
10
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
19.5
0.6%
357:
23.6
1
I
Figure 1.13: GPS
Figure 1.14: Handheld Body fat calculator
Lab activity 1.3 Uses of technological tools
Objectives: To practice the uses of technological tools in learning biology
Materials
Thermometer
Procedure
Measure the body temperatures of 10 students and record them on a
table.
Make a graph showing the highest and the lowest temperature.
Visit a nearby health center and discuss the uses of pregnancy tests,
diabetic tests, and HIV tests with the class
1.3 Impacts of biology and technology on society and the
natural world
After the successful completion of this
section, the student will be able to:
Self-questioning
Describe the impacts of biology and
Before starting this section, ask
technology on society and nature
yourself this question 'What do
Explain the relationships between
I know about the impacts of
biology and technology
biology and technology, and
Determine the negative and positive
what do I want to learn from
impacts of biology and technology on
this section?'
the society and on nature
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
11
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
The impacts of biology and technology refer to factors that pose
What are the impacts of
positive or negative effects on the society and the natural world.
biology and technology?
The advancements of biological information and technological
devices can highly influence or control the societal and natural world.
1.3.1 Impacts of biology on the society and the natural world
The impact of biology refers to the effects arising from the advancement of biological knowledge
and innovations.
Examples:
Ensuring food security as a result of an increase in productivity
Medicine and disease treatments have resulted in improved health and longevity.
Achieving better supply of energy and clean water.
An increase in industrial production due to microbial action
Creating antibiotics to treat bacterial infections
Technological devices made from biological materials by biological information
advancements to provide services that influence, treat, and control the society and the
natural world negatively or positively.
Biological weapon production and use destroy the natural world.
Practicing a predetermined limit to have only boys (XY males) and avoid (XX females) of
child sex chromosomes affects the society and the natural world will lead to the loss of
females
1.3.2 Impacts of technology on the society and the natural world
Technology is part of everyone's life. Technological products and their applications in various fields
of study have solved societal problems and had significant societal and environmental impacts.
However, industrialization and subsequent technological advancements have resulted in the misuse
and destruction of our natural environment. These technologies have damaged our world in two
main ways through pollution and the depletion of natural resources.
Examples:
1. Industrial emissions and effluents pollute clean air and drinking water.
2. Biochemical agents, pesticides, and fertilizers cause toxicity and biohazards.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
12
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Inquiry activity 1.4 Learning biology from professionals
Invite professionals from the health and agricultural offices to
participate in the discussion.
The impacts of biology on society and the natural world
The impacts of technology on society and the natural world
Determine the positive and negative effects of technology and
biology.
1.4 Ethical issues in biology
After the successful completion of
this section, the student will be able to:
Self-questioning
Define ethical issues in biology
Before starting this section, ask
Explain ethical issues in
yourself this question: "What
medicaments
do I know about ethics in
Respect ethical issues in biology
biological studies and what do I
want to learn from this
section?"
Ethical
Why do sciences have ethical
dilemmas?
issues
in
Inquiry activity 1.5 Invite
biology are
forester and discuss
those issues that arise concerning the rightness or
Learn from foresters
wrongness of using biological discoveries for the
The unethical treatments of plants
health and wellbeing of humans. Ethical issues in
being practiced by human beings
biology deal with a variety of concerns related to
Respecting the physical and
biotechnology, medicine, and the environment
biological materials of plants
including, the rightness or wrongness of using
Unethical uses of seeds, leaves,
biotechnological information, products, or devices
roots, twigs, or barks of plant
on human health and lifestyles and livelihood
species
systems.
Trees give shadow even for an axe-
man; everyone is responsible to
plant trees
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
13
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
1.4.1 Ethical treatment of plants and animals during biological studies
Ethical treatment of plants and animals during biological studies is
What are treatments?
the process of subjecting animals and plants to various
experiments and rigorous tests.
1.4.1.1. Ethical treatment of plants
Plants are primary producers and feeders for all living organisms. Trees are living organisms that
properly function in decentralized forms without any centralized order-providing unit (brain).
Subjecting plant species to severe life-treating conditions leads to a total disappearance of plant
species. Collecting seeds, berries, roots, leaves, bark or flowers for personal uses, medicaments,
and other purposes (tooth brushing) affect the survival of the plant species and the community that
depends on the plants
Unethical treatment of plants:
Testing seeds or berries through destructive rays
Cutting tree terminals for experiments
Consumption of all seeds and fruits without conservation
Unplanned cutting of trees or deforestation
Burning forests and seedlings for farmlands
Restructuring the shapes of trees for aesthetic appeal
Care for plants is an ethical treatment and important for saving the jeopardized species and
conserve for our common future. It is ethical to plant trees and it is a national responsibility.
1.4.1.2. Ethical treatment of animals in experiments
In biological studies, researchers use animals to gain scientific understanding of the world. The
ethical treatment of animals is a moral question of whether it is acceptable to harm animals for
scientific research. Animals are sentient creatures that have a nervous system, feel painful feelings,
emotional stress, and have interests and values. Given this, it is unethical to harm animals during
experiments or rigorous testing.
Unethical treatments of animals in research include approaches which expose animals to rigorous
experiment that may injure or cause pain to animals.
Researchers must reduce impacts of unethical treatments of animals through the three Rs
principles described below (Reduction, Refinement, and Replacement).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
14
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
A.
Reduction aims to minimize the number of animals used in experiments by improving
experimental techniques and sharing information with others.
Journal
Sharing results
Sharing results
(published)
(presented)
Reduction
Careful design
Imaging
and analysis
Figure 1.15 the principle of reduction reduces animals used in research
B. Refinement is cleansing experiments in a way that enables to reduce suffering of animals
using less invasive techniques, better medical care, and better living conditions
Imaging
Refinement
Shorter experiments
Better housing
Better handling
Better pain relief
Figure 1.16: Proper handling safeguards experimental animals
C.
Replacement is substituting experiments on animals with alternative techniques using cell
cultures instead of whole animals, biosynthesis, and computer simulated models.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
15
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Using mathematical models
Humans
experiments
Replacement
Using computer programs
In vitro
experiments
Using fruit flies/worms
Figure 1.17: There are always alternatives
Inquiry activity 1.6 learn from zoologist
Invite zoologists to participate in a group discussion about:
Conservation of animals as sentient creatures
Reduction of suffering of research animals
Habitat, species, and ecosystem balance
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
16
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Unit one summary
the discovery of more information in the
course of biological studies.
Human beings learn powerful lessons from
The benefits of biology to technology are
nature like the technologies of flight,
biological information on biological systems
submarine, bullet train, flipper and other
helpful to derive technological systems,
engineering and architectures.
working mechanisms and related products.
The impacts of biology and technology on
Biology is a natural science studying living
society and the natural world are positive and
organisms from the simplest to the most
negative influences of using biologically
complex ones. Technology is the sum of
derived technologies. Uses of technology in
techniques, skills, methods and processes
biology deal with technical applications in the
used in the production of goods or services to
biological study process to investigate
accomplish objectives.
biological information.
Biology is dependent on technology in terms
Ethical issues in biology are concerned with
of using devices likewise; technology is
respecting the values for all life forms,
dependent on biology in terms of identifying
particularly the determining the right or wrong
scientific information and imitating
values that may affect human rights to
biotechnological devices from nature.
equality to live freely and naturally.
Biology and technology are tightly blended
Ethical issues in biology deal with questions
and form biotechnology, which is useful in
related to unethicality, immorality, illegality,
designing various devices and engineering
inequality, injustice, and disrespectful acts to
systems to solve complex human problems.
the values and rights of someone. It also
Biotechnology is the use of biology to develop
includes the commercialization and
new products, methods and organisms
commodification of human organs; assisted
intended to improve human health and
reproduction techniques; and manipulation of
society.
basic biological organ systems.
Biotechnological devices are tools used to
solve day-to-day biological tasks and support
Unit one review questions
Part I. True or false items
Instructions: Write "true" if the statement is correct and "false" if it is not correct.
1. Humans started house building from swallows.
2. Blending of biology and technology make biotechnology.
3. The East Gate Center building in Harare is designed by imitating termites mound.
4. Nature is a reliable source of knowledgeable ideas.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
17
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
5. Modern technological instruments have learnt from nature by imitation.
6. Animals are sentient creatures with the capacity to feel pain.
7. Care for plants is unethical treatment of plant species.
8. Replacing experimental animals with the use of biosynthetic tissues is an ethical treatment of
research animals
Part II. Multiple-choice Test Items
Instructions: Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
1.
Biotechnology is a technology that utilizes
to develop different products.
A. Biotech
C. A and B
B. Biological systems
D. All
2.
The system of manufacturing biological elements is
.
A. Synthetic biology
C. Environmental biology
B. Plant biology
D. Animal biology
3. The device used to collect geographical data or information is
A. CIT scans
C. Microscope
B. GPS
D. X-ray
4. The sum of techniques, skills and processes used in the production or delivery of services is
A. Biology
C. Technology
B. Biochemistry
D. Genetic engineering
5. The influences of biological and technological products against on society and nature are
A. Benefits of biology and technology
B. The advantages of biology and technology
C. Development of biology and technology
D. Impacts of biology and technology
6. An instrument used to measure human body temperature is
A. Microscope
C. Barometer
B. Thermometer
D. CT scan
7. What are industrial wastes?
A. Effluents
C. Air pollution
B. House wastes
D. Vehicle wastes
8. Soil fertilizers can cause
A. Toxicity B)
C. A and B
B. Biohazards
D. All
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
18
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
9. Designing technologies from the nature is through
A. Sketching
C. Drawing
B. Imitation
D. Photographing
10. Plants have
A. Centralized function systems
C. Decentralized function systems
B. Brain led functional systems
D. All system units are not functioning
Part III. Essay questions
Direction: Write a short answer to each question
1. Explain what and how humans learn from nature.
2. Describe the importance of biological systems to design technologies.
3. What are the ethical issues of biology?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
19
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Unit Two: Animals
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
20
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Unit learning outcomes
After the successful completion of this unit, the student will be able to:
Describe the characteristics of animals.
Differentiate between vertebrates and invertebrates
Compare and contrast reproduction in vertebrates.
Evaluate the economic importance of animals (insects) in agriculture, food,
industry, health, and medicine
Explain animal behavior
Discuss the types and patterns of animal behavior
Discuss homeostasis in animals: thermoregulation, osmoregulation and sugar
balance
Appreciate the work of a renowned zoologist in Ethiopia or in your locality
2.1.
Characteristics of animals
After the successful completion of this
Self-questioning
section, the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask yourself this
List the characteristics of animals
question: "What Characteristics of animals do I
Explain the common characteristics of
know and what do I want to learn from this
animals
section?"
Think about all the animals in your environment. They may be domestic animals, wild animals, or
animals in ZOOS and sanctuaries. There are diverse groups of animals in the world.
In previous grades, you have learned about the
What are the characteristics of animals?
types of cells (prokaryotes and eukaryotes) and the
Mention it as much as you can.
characteristics of animals and plants. Do you
remember? We hope that you do. This unit provides you with a review of the characteristics of
animals and details of reproduction in some sampled animals.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
21
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Animals are eukaryotic, multicellular, heterotrophic, and sensitive to stimuli; and they reproduce,
protect themselves, move, respire, excrete, grow, and have different body symmetries.
Inquiry activity 2.1 Studying characteristics of animals
Think of the characteristics of animals. What are the most common characteristics
of animals? Share your experience with a classmate near to you. Be in a group,
search from library and the internet about the characteristics of animals, discuss
and present it to the class in relation to the following characteristics.
Eukaryotic
Respiration
Protection
Body symmetry
Excretion
Reproduction
Multicellularity
Sensitivity
Motility
Nutrition - heterotrophs
Growth
Although animals have such common characteristics, they also have characteristics that distinguish
one group from another. Animals can be categorized into two major groups based on the presence
or absence of a backbone: vertebrates and invertebrates. Vertebrates are further classified into
homeothermic (warm-blooded) animals that include mammals and birds, and poikilothermic (cold-
blooded) animals that include fish, reptiles, and amphibians. Invertebrates are also classified into
porifera, platyhelminthes, cnidaria, arthropoda, Annelida, echinidermata, and mollusca. Arthropods
are again classified into crustacea, spiders, insects, and many-legs as shown below (Figure 2.1).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
22
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Animals
VERTEBRATES
INVERTEBRATES
With Backbone
Without Backbone
Warm-blooded
Cold-blooded
Porifera
Cnidaria
Annelida
Mollusca
Mammals
Fish
Platyhelminthes
Echinodermata
Arthropoda
Birds
Reptiles
Amphibians
Crustacea
Arachnida
Insects
Myriapoda
Figure 2.1 Classifications of animals
In this unit we are not able to discuss all of these groups in detail. We will focus on the general
characteristics and reproductive cycles of the two major groups, invertebrates and vertebrates,
using some examples from mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and insects.
2.2. Invertebrates and Vertebrates
After the successful completion of
Self-questioning
this section, the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask
yourself this question: "What do I
List the main characteristics of
know about vertebrates and
invertebrates and vertebrates.
invertebrates and what do I want
Compare invertebrates with
to learn?"
vertebrates' characteristics.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
23
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
2.2.1 Invertebrate Animals
Invertebrates are animals that do not have a backbone or vertebral column. This group of animals
How do invertebrates differ from
is the most diverse group of animals in the world.
vertebrates? Explain.
They are found almost everywhere, from the hottest
deserts and the deepest seabeds to the darkest caves and the highest mountains.
Invertebrate animals lack a rigid internal skeletal
system. Many invertebrates are soft-bodied.
Inquiry activity 2.2 Studying
However, some of them have an external
invertebrates
skeleton called an exoskeleton, usually made of
Observe your surroundings and identify
chitin, which protects their soft inner bodies.
invertebrate animals. Discuss other
Invertebrates are cold-blooded, and hence, do
common/unique characteristics they have
not regulate their body temperature. This group
other than the lack of backbone you
includes earthworms, insects, spiders, snails,
observed.
sponges, jellyfish, lobsters, crabs, sea stars, and
squid.
Vertebrate Animals
How do invertebrates differ from
Vertebrates are the most advanced groups in the animal
vertebrates? Explain.
kingdom. They are a highly advanced group of animals.
These groups of animals possess a well-defined internal
skeleton system with cartilage and a backbone or vertebral column separated into an axial skeleton
(skull, vertebrae, ribs and sternum) and appendicular skeleton (girdles and appendages). The skull
and vertebrae protect the highly developed brain and the
nerve cord respectively.
Inquiry activity 2.3
Vertebrates have more complex and specialized organ
Studying vertebrates
systems such as the circulatory systems, respiratory systems,
Observe your surroundings and
nervous systems, and excretory systems. The circulatory
identify vertebrate animals.
system is a closed circulatory system with a ventral heart
Discuss what other common or
having 2-4 chambers and a median dorsal artery. The
unique characteristics they have
respiratory system consists of either gills or lungs. They have
other than the backbone.
a centralized nervous system with a brain and sensory
organs (eyes, ears, nostrils).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
24
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
The excretory system of vertebrates consist of paired kidneys. They have bilaterally symmetrical.
This group includes mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, and amphibians.
Vertebrates such as fish, reptiles, and amphibians are cold-blooded abimals, whereas birds and
mammals are warm-blooded animals (see homeostasis in the next section) All vertebrates are
chordates, but not all chordates are vertebrates. Why? What are chordates?
Inquiry activity 2.4 Comparing invertebrates and vertebrates
Based on the result of your study in activities 2.2 and 2.3 above, discuss the
difference between vertebrate and invertebrate animals using the following
features such as backbone, exoskeleton, body symmetry, circulatory system,
nervous system, mode of nutrition, and reproduction with examples. Use a
table to compare and contrast.
2.3 Reproduction in Animals
After successful completion this section,
Self-questioning
the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask
yourself this question: "What do I
Examine reproduction in invertebrate and
know about reproduction in animals
vertebrate animals.
and what do I want to learn from this
Discuss complete and incomplete
section?"
metamorphosis.
Describe how rats, birds, frogs, and
crocodiles reproduce.
Compare and contrast reproduction in rats,
birds, frogs, and crocodiles.
Reproduction is one of the common characteristics of animals that enable them to ensure the
continuity of their species. Thus, reproduction is the process by which living organisms duplicate
themselves.
There are two types of reproduction in animals. These are
What is reproduction? How do
asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction.
animals reproduce? What is its
Although the majority of animals undergo sexual
significance?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
25
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
reproduction and have similar forms of development, a few groups of animals also undergo asexual
reproduction.
Inquiry activity 2.5 Studying asexual reproduction
Be in groups and search from the library or internet and
1. Discuss in class the following forms of asexual reproduction: budding,
fragmentation, parthenogenesis, etc. with specific examples of animals that undergo
this type of reproduction.
2. What common features have you observed in budding, fragmentation and
parthenogenesis as a form of asexual reproduction?
2.3.1. Asexual reproduction in animals
As you have learned in previous grades, asexual reproduction is a type of reproduction that involves
a single individual and does not require the fusion of gametes from two parents. Asexual
reproduction in animals is more common among invertebrates than in vertebrates. Budding and
fragmentation are the most common forms of asexual reproduction especially in aquatic animals.
The other form of asexual reproduction in animals is parthenogenesis. In this type of reproduction,
unfertilized eggs develop into new offspring as in some insects and vertebrates
2.3.2 Sexual reproduction in animals
In previous grades, you learned that sexual reproduction is a type of reproduction that involves two
individual parents and requires the fusion of gametes from two parents (male and female). It
produces offspring that have genetic material from both parents. The parents are diploid organisms
with a complete set of chromosomes (2n).
Sexual reproduction involves different male and female reproductive structures with different
functions. One of the most important functions is the production of haploid cells called gametes (n)
for the transmission of genetic information from parents to offspring.
In sexual reproduction, males produce sperm and haploid cells (n) in the testes where sperm cells
are stored in the epididymis until ejaculation. On the other hand, females produce
an ovum or egg haploid cell (n) that matures in the ovary and the fusion of sperm cells with female
gametes produces a zygote through the process of fertilization. There are two types of fertilization:
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
26
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
external and internal. In the next section, we shall see the similarities and differences between
external and internal fertilization.
In animals that use internal fertilization, the eggs are released from the ovary into the uterine
tubes for fertilization, but eggs are released into the aqueous environment in animals that use
external fertilization. The fertilization of an egg by sperm produces a single-celled diploid fertilized
egg called a zygote (2n), which develops into an embryo and then into an individual organism. The
general animal life cycle in sexual reproduction is shown below (Figure 2.2).
Фо
Adult
Adult
Meiosis
female
male
Meiosis
00
Egg
Mitosis
Sperm
zygote
Fertilization
Figure 2.2 Sexual reproduction and life cycle of animals
After fertilization, a series of developmental stages occur in embryonic development (Figure 2.3).
The first stage is cleavage, which involves a series of mitotic cell divisions of the fertilized egg
(zygote). This cell division results in an eight-celled structure. The second stage is another cell
division and rearrangement of cells into hollow structures called blastulae. Then, the blastula
undergoes further cell division and rearrangement with the process called gastrulation.
The process of gastrulation produces a gastrula that has different cell layers called "germ layers".
By the process of organogenesis, these germ layers later develop into different tissue types, organs,
and organ systems. Organogenesis is the formation of organs during embryonic development. The
embryo eventually develops into an adult with all tissue types, organs, and organ systems.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
27
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Cleavage
Cleavage
Gastrulation
Zygote
Blastula
cross section
Blastopore
Gastrula cross
Eight-cell stage
section
Figure 2.3 Embryonic development
Inquiry activity 2.6 Investigating reproduction in animals
Be in groups and search from library or the internet about reproduction in
animals and:
1. Compare and contrast asexual and sexual reproduction in animals.
2. Compare internal and external fertilization in animals with sexual
reproduction
3. Why internal fertilization is more advantageous for land animals as
compared to aquatic animals?
4. What major features are associated with internal fertilization in animals?
5. Compare the advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual
reproduction
6. Define zygote, cleavage, blastula and gastrula
7. How tissues, organs and organ systems develop from germ layers,
discuss and present it to the class.
The next section deals with sexual reproduction in animals some sampled animals. We shall focus
on the sexual reproduction of insects from invertebrate animals and frogs, crocodiles, birds and rats
from vertebrate animals.
2.3.3 Reproduction in insects (complete and incomplete metamorphosis)
Insects that constitute the most diverse groups of animals are the largest class of the phylum
Arthropoda (the animal phylum). They have segmented bodies, jointed legs, and external skeletons
(exoskeletons).
Insects include flies, grasshoppers, lice, butterflies, bees, and beetles, to mention some of them.
They undergo sexual reproduction and have their own life cycle. The following figure shows an
example of the male and female reproductive structure of the honeybee (Figure 2.4).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
28
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Testis
Vas deferens
Ejaculatory
Ovary
Accessory
duct
gland
Oviduct
Spermatheca
Seminal
Penis
Accessory
vesicle
gland
Vagina
(a) Male honeybee
(b) Female honeybee
Figure 2.4 Reproductive structures of the honeybee
Inquiry Activity 2.7 Examining reproductive structures of the
honeybee
Be in groups and search from the library or internet about the function of each male
and female reproductive structures as indicated in Figure 2.4 above.
During sexual reproduction, eggs are usually fertilized internally. However, some insects undergo
parthenogenesis, a process in which an individual develops from unfertilized eggs.
In sexual reproduction, the male produces
sperm and fertilizes the egg produced by the
Egg
female during mating. After fertilization, the
Adult
(day 21)
female insect lays eggs and hatches them
after completing their development.
Pupa
After hatching, insects undergo a series of
Larva
(day 21)
(day 6)
major changes in body structure as they
develop. This series of changes is called
metamorphosis. Chemical substances in the
insects control the process of metamorphosis.
Pupa
(day 14)
Larva
There are two types of metamorphosis:
(day 10)
Figure 2.5 Complete metamorphosis in honeybees
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
29
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
complete
metamorphosis
and
adult
incomplete metamorphosis (Figures
5th moult
2.5
and
2.6).
Complete
metamorphosis has four stages
5th stage
nymph
whereas in complete metamorphosis
4th moult
has three stages. For instance, in
eggs
4th stage
honeybees, the four stages of
nymph
complete metamorphosis are egg,
3rd moult
hatching
larva, pupa, and adult and in
3rd stage
nymph
grasshoppers, the three stages of
1st stage
nymph
incomplete metamorphosis are egg,
2nd moult
1st moult
2nd stage nymph
nymph, and adult.
Figure. 2.6 Incomplete metamorphosis in grasshoppers
Inquiry activity 2.8 Examining reproduction in grasshopper and
metamorphosis
Be in groups and search for information about:
1. Reproductive structures and functions of grasshopper
2. The definition of each stage, as well as the similarities and differences
between the two types of metamorphosis.
3. Which chemical substance controls metamorphosis? How?
4. After discussion, use a table to help you compare and contrast
incomplete metamorphosis and complete metamorphosis.
2.3.4 Reproduction in Frog
The common frog (Rana temoraria) is the most common in Europe. The grass frog genus
Ptychadena goulenger is found throughout sub-Saharan Africa, including Ethiopia. Frogs such as
Ptychadena harenna and Leptopelis ragazzi are found in the Bale Mountains and Shoa forests,
Ethiopia.
Frogs undergo sexual reproduction and have male and female reproductive structures. The
following figure shows the male and female reproductive structures in frogs (Figure 2.7).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
30
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Vasa
Oviduct
efferentia
Ovary
Testis
Kidney
Ureter
Adrenal
gland
Urogenital
tract
Rectum
Cloaca
Cloaca
Cloaca aperture
Cloaca aperture
Urinary bladder
Urinary bladder
Figure 2.7 male (left) and female (right) reproductive structure in frog
Inquiry activity 2.9 Examining reproductive structure of frog
Be in a group and search from the library or the internet about the function of the
male and female reproductive structures of frogs indicated in Figure 2.7 above.
Unlike birds, frogs do not produce amniotic eggs.
Rather, they are usually covered in a jelly-like
Inquiry
activity
2.10
substance (Figure 2.8). What is the function of the
Investigating external fertilization
jelly-like substance in frogs? They must lay their eggs
Be in groups:
in water to protect them from drying out. Frogs have
Investigate the disadvantages of
external fertilization. However, internal fertilization
external fertilization in frogs. How do
also occurs in a few species of frogs. Unlike internal
they overcome this disadvantage? What
fertilization, in external fertilization, the female
is the advantage of laying a large
releases eggs from her body into the water and the
number of eggs?
male releases his sperm to fertilize the eggs.
Usually, frogs lay a large number of eggs in the same place at the same time.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
31
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Figure 2.8 Frog Eggs surrounded by "jelly"
Inquiry
activity
2.11
Investigating metamorphosis
In a process called metamorphosis, after the
Be in groups:
fertilization of an egg by sperm, frogs go through a
Investigate metamorphosis in frog. How
larval stage that is very different from the adult
does it occur? What controls the process?
form. The fertilized eggs develop into a larval stage
What is the difference between a tadpole
called a tadpole that is different from the adult frog
and an adult frog?
(Figure 2.9).
Adult frog
Young frog
Sperm
Tadpole
develops
Sexual
into frog.
reproduction
Tadpole
Eggs
Fertilized egg
Egg hatches
developmengan formation
Figure 2.9 The life cycle of a frog
2.3.5 Reproduction in Crocodiles
Crocodilians are large semi-aquatic reptiles that live in different parts of the world. Crocodiles
reproduce sexually involving both male and female parents. The male and female reproductive
structures of crocodiles are shown in the figure below (Figure 2.10).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
32
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Testes
Ovary
Ciliated
funnel
Wolf's
Muller's
Kidney
duct
duct
Egg
Ureter
Urinary
Ureter
bladder
Urinary bladder
Cloaca
Cloaca
Figure 2.10 male and female reproductive structure in crocodile
Inquiry activity 2.12 Examining reproductive structures of crocodiles
Be in group and search from library or internet about the function of each male and
female reproductive structures as indicated in the Figure 2.10 above.
The mating season for crocodiles usually begins in
Inquiry
activity
2.13
July or August and mating takes place under water.
Investigation
During mating, the sperm fertilizes the egg and
Be in groups and investigate to find
develops in the female. They have internal
answers to these questions.
fertilization. They lay their eggs and bury them in
1. Do you think that all of the eggs of
sand or deposit them in mound vegetation.
the crocodile can be hatched and will
The number of eggs a crocodile deposits varies from
survive? If not, why?
10 to 100, which generally depends on the type of
2. What advancements or adaptations do
species (Figure 2.11). Unlike frogs, crocodiles have
crocodiles' reproductive systems have
hard, leathery eggs that enable them to protect their
over frogs?
young.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
33
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Eggs hatching
Life Cycle of a Crocodile
Juveniles eating to grow
Adults lay eggs
Adults live in the water
and on the land
Figure 2.11 The life cycle of a crocodile
2.3.6Reproduction in Birds
At your home, you know that chickens lay eggs. Chickens are one
How does the male transfer
group of birds. Similar to other animals, reproduction in birds is
the sperm to the female for
one of the key processes
fertilization can occur?
that enables birds to
produce new individuals and perpetuate their species. Birds
Inquiry activity 2.14
reproduce sexually and have internal fertilization. Most bird
Be in groups and discuss the
species are monogamous but there are also polygamous
following question
species. Monogamous is usually a mating system between a
What is the significance of the
single adult male and a single adult female for entire
difference between monogamous
breeding seasons, whereas polygamous is a mating system
and polygamous species in
with several partners during a single breeding season.
birds?
The male and female reproductive structures of birds are shown below (Figure 2.12).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
34
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Infundibulum
Ovary
testis
kidney
Magnum
Oviduct
Isthmus
Shell Gland
ureter
Uterus
Intestine
vas
deferens.
cloaca
vagina
Right
Oviduct
cloaca
Figure 2.12 The reproductive structures of Male and female birds
Inquiry activity 2.15 Examine reproductive structures of birds
Be in groups and search from the library or internet about the function of the male
and female reproductive structures of birds indicated in Figure 2.12 above.
Unlike other animals, male birds do not have external genital organs whereas females have a single
ovary. Reproduction in birds starts by the joining of an egg or ovum with a sperm cell in the
oviduct. The ovum which is produced in the ovary and travels down through the oviduct for
fertilization to occur. The oviduct consists of the infundibulum, magnum, isthmus, uterus, and
vagina (Table 1).
Table 2.1 Parts of oviduct and functions
Parts of the
Nature and Functions
oviduct
Infundibulum
A funnel-shaped upper portion of the oviduct
Its purpose is to search out and engulf the yolk, causing it to
enter the oviduct.
Magnum
It is the longest part of the oviduct.
Secretion of albumen: nearly all the egg white is deposited in
the magnum.
Isthmus
It is the relatively short portion of the oviduct
Formation of shell membrane-inner and outer shell
membranes
The glands of the isthmus produce sulfur-containing amino
acids that are important for shell membrane formation.
Uterus
Developing an egg takes a longer period of time.
Formation of eggshell-shell is formed over shell membranes.
Vagina
The final section of the oviduct is the vagina, which is
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
35
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Parts of the
Nature and Functions
oviduct
separated by a sphincter presents in between the uterus and
the vagina
During oviposition, relaxation of the muscles allows the egg
to leave the uterus, and it is almost immediately laid through
the cloaca.
Both male and female birds have a structure called the cloaca. During mating, the male brings its
sperm to the female cloaca, and the sperm from the male cloaca fertilizes the egg. The fertilized
egg travels down to the uterus, forming a layer of albumen around it, which is followed by the shell
membranes in the uterus (Figure 2.13). Then, the hard-shelled egg develops within the female with
a fluid-filled amnion, a thin membrane forming a closed sac around the embryo.
Ovulation
Ovary
containing ova
Sperm are stored in sperm
storage tubules until the ovum
is released into the infundibulum.
Sperm then travel up to
Infundibulum
the infundibulum where
Ovum
fertilisation occurs
Ovum
Magnum
Albumen added
25 hours
Isthmus
Shell membrane added
Uterus
Shell added and hardens,
Utero-vaginal junction
colour deposited
(sperm storage tubules)
Vagina
Cloaca
Sperm
Laying
Complete egg
Figure 2.13 Structure of the oviduct and egg development in bird reproduction
Birds lay eggs after the egg completes its development. The number of eggs a bird lays varies from
a few to more than 10, depending on its species. For example, penguins and albatrosses lay few
eggs, but chickens and ducks can lay more than 10 eggs. The egg of a bird has different parts. The
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
36
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
major parts of the egg of a bird are the yolk, the chalaza, the albumen, the membranes, air sac and
the shell (see Figure 2.14).
Inquiry activity 2. 16 Investigating reproduction in chickens
Be in groups,
1. Describe reproduction in chickens; count the number of eggs chickens can
lay at your home (if any) or visit nearby poultry farm and report to your
classmate. Is there any difference in the number of eggs you counted from
different chickens or among your classmates? What factors, do you think,
determine the number of eggs? Why hens do lay eggs without rooster?
2. Bring an egg into a laboratory, and examine its structures and functions.
Albumen
Germinal
Shell
Spot
Air
Sac
Membrane
Chalaza
Yolk
Figure 2.14 The egg structure of a bird
Incubation: incubation or brooding is the process of keeping eggs warm with body heat while the
embryos inside continue to develop after birds lay their eggs (Figure 2.15). In most cases, the
female parent incubates the eggs, although males sometimes participate. When a breeding season
approaches, the female will develop a brood patch to help transfer heat effectively. This brood
patch has an area of skin with densely packed blood vessels that produces more heat and facilitates
heat transmission to the egg. The brood patch will disappear at the end of the breeding season.
Birds rotate their eggs periodically to ensure an even distribution of warmth. This helps the embryo
to finish its development inside the egg (Figure 2.16).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
37
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Yolk
Albumen
Allantoic fluid
Amniotic liquid
Embryo
Eggshell
Air cell
Figure 2.15 An incubation in birds
Figure 2.16 Developing embryo
Hatching: After incubation, the embryo completes its development and hatching occurs. During
hatching, the chick develops a tooth-like structure at the beak's tip to break the eggshell. Moreover,
the chick also communicates with its parents a day or two before hatching, with parents with some
vocal sounds. The chick then starts to use the hard tip of its bill, a tooth-like structure called an egg
tooth, to break out of the egg, and the young lose the egg tooth after hatching (Figure 2.17).
Figure 2.17 Hatched eggs
Parental Care in Birds: One of the methods
Inquiry activity 2.17
bird use to protect their young is by building
Discuss in your group to answer this
nests. Birds make nests in areas that are hidden
question: Why do you think are eggs laid in
in order to avoid predators. Some birds do not
so many different colors? What are
use nests. They simply lay their eggs on bare
camouflaged eggs? How does this help to
cliffs. Birds that make nests in an open area have
protect the eggs?
camouflaged eggs.
While the parental care of offspring lies on one or both parents, the length and type of parental
care varies widely amongst different species of birds (Figure 2.18). In some species, parental care
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
38
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
ends at hatching. Accordingly, the newly hatched chick digs itself out of the nest mound without
any parental help and can take care of itself right away. Other species care for their young for an
extended time.
Figure 2.18 African Paradise Flycatcher caring for chicks
2.3.7 Reproduction in rat
Rat (genus Rattus) is the name generally applied to numerous members of several rodent families.
The black rat (Rattus rattus) and the brown rat (Rattus norvegicus) are among the most common
types of rats species. They live virtually everywhere that human populations have settled; the black
rats is predominantly live in warmer climates, and the brown rats are dominantly found in the
temperate regions. Giant Mole rat (Tachyoryctes macrocephalus), also known as the giant root rat,
is endemic to Ethiopia where it is confined to high altitude shrub and grasslands in the Afro-alpine
habitat such as the Bale Mountains.
Reproduction in rats is representative of mammalian sexual reproduction. The male reproductive
structure of a rat consists testes (singular testis), scrotum seminiferous tubules, epididymis,
vasdeferens and penis with bacula (Figure 19a). Similarly, the female reproductive structure of a rat
consists of two ovaries, oviducts, uterine horns and vagina with vulva (Figure 19b)
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
39
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Adrenal gland
Adrenal Gland
Kidney
Kidney
Ureter
Ovary
Bladder
Seminal vesicle
Oviduct
Uterine Hom
Prostate gland
Urinary Bladder
Urogenital
Vas deferens
orifice
Epididymis
Urethra
Penis
Vagina
Testis
Anus
Primord
Scrotal sac
Figure. 2.19 Reproductive system in rat, male (left) and female (right)
Inquiry activity 2.18 Examine reproductive structures of rats
Be in groups and
1. Search from library or the internet about:
2. The function of the male and female reproductive structures of rat as
indicated in Figure 2.19 above.
Like in other mammals, fertilization of the egg occurs inside the female, and the fertilized zygotes
develop in the mother during a gestation period known as pregnancy.
Pregnancy and Development: The average pregnancy time or gestation period of a rat varies
depending on the species. The gestation period for a brown rat is 22 to 24 days, whereas the
gestation period for black rats is usually 22 days and the gestation period for giant mole rats is 37-
49 days. As shown above (Figure 2.3), after fertilization, each zygote divides and forms a hollow
ball of cells that further develops into a blastocyst called a blastula. The blastulas travel down the
oviducts, implant in the uterine horns, and begin to differentiate into embryonic tissue and extra-
embryonic tissue.
The umbilical cord, a complex system of connecting blood vessels nourishes the embryo from the
mother. The placenta transports oxygen from the mother to the embryo and removes waste from
the embryo's environment, and the amniotic sac protects the embryo during pregnancy.
Gradually, the embryo forms a neural plate, which later develops into brain and spinal cord, the arm
and leg buds become visible, the nervous system pathways develop and the rat gives birth to
hairless, deaf with sealed eyelids offspring. Rats normally give birth from 7 to 12 offspring per litter
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
40
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
on average (Figure 2.20), but the number is fewer than this for giant mole rats. The mother feeds
milk and, after 45 days, the young rats are fully weaned and are actively foraging and feeding.
The age of sexual maturity also vary depending on species. In brown-black rats, the age of sexual
maturity is 3-4 months old. Giant mole rats become reproductively mature when they are 4-6
months old.
Fertilized egg
Adult
polar bodies
zona pellucida
CLEAVAGE
Blastocyst
0
BIRTH
50
2
IMPLANTATION
4
Days after
Embryo
18
fertilization
6
implanted
into uterine
wall
16
8
FETAL GROWTH
14
10
&
12
DEVELOPMENT
GASTRULATION
& TURNING
ORGANOGENESIS
Figure 2.20 Pregnancy and development in rat
Parental care in rats: Parental care in mammals is often critical for the survival and development
of the offspring. Rats build nests to rear their young, called pups or kittens. The pups stay in the
nest built by their mother until they are weaned. The female rats care pups regardless of which
their true mothers are. If a mother dies, the other females will take over nursing her pups. Male
rats do not participate in the parental care.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
41
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Figure 2.21 Parental care in rat
Inquiry Activity 2.19 Comparing reproduction in animals
The animals discussed above have some similarities and differences in their
reproduction.
Be in groups and
Search for information from a library or the internet and Compare and contrast
reproduction in frogs, crocodiles, birds, and rats and the advancement from frogs
to rats in reproduction, for instance, in terms of reproductive structure, fertilization
and development, etc. (hint- fertilization, egg laying with internal development).
2.4 The economic importance of animals (insects)
After the successful completion of
Self-questioning
this section, the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask yourself
this question: "What do I know about the
Describe the economic importance
economic and other importance of insects
of insects in agriculture and food
and what do I want to learn from this
production
section?"
Explain the economic importance of
insects to industry
Explain the economic importance of
insects in health and medicine
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
42
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Insects have plenty of economic importance in the world. You may think that most insects are
harmful to us simply because they are pests, but they have very important benefits for human
beings and the ecosystem. Insects are the most diverse animals in the world. They have both
positive and negative impacts on our economy, our lives, and the ecosystem. While there are
many harmful pests, there are also beneficial insects.
The following section provides some
Inquiry activity 2.20 Investigation
descriptions of the beneficial, or useful and
Be in groups, visit agricultural institutions,
harmful aspects of insects in agriculture,
industries, health institutions and medical center in
food, industry, health, and medicine.
your surroundings, and collect evidence with
examples of beneficial and the harmful insects.
2.4.1
Beneficial aspects of insects
A. Agriculture
One of the major activities of agriculture is crop production.
What are the benefits of
Regarding this, insects provide services to agriculture through
insects in your locality?
pollination and regulation of pests.
Pollinators: insect pollinators are flower-visiting insects that forage on flowering plants to
obtain plant-provided food (nectar, pollen). They have the potential to transfer male gametes
(contained in pollen) to the female
Inquiry activity 2.21 Investigation
gametes, resulting in pollination.
Refer to internet sources or library books or consult
with the nearby by experts or offices of agricultural
Pollination by insects is an essential
bureaus to search about the role of insects in
activity for the reproduction of the
increasing agricultural productivity and the
majority of the world's flowering plants,
economic value in terms of money (dollar or birr).
including numerous cultivated plant
species.
Many plants depend on
Remember the lesson on plant reproduction from
pollination for seed and fruit
your previous grade. What is pollination? What is
production.
the commercial benefit of pollination? What is the
For instance, an estimated 35% of crop
advantage of pollination by insects over artificial
production yielded in the world is a
pollination?
result of insect pollination.
This has huge economic value in the
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
43
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
world as well as in the country.
Pest regulation: Insect predators and parasitoids that attack and feed on other insects,
particularly on insect pests of plants are used in pest control. This type pest regulation is
known as a natural biological control, which destroys harmful insects that infect both animals
and plants. This natural biological control plays an important role in limiting potential pest
populations.
Important insects in pest regulation include mantis, lady beetles, ground beetles, rove beetles,
flower bugs, lacewings and hover flies. For example, Stagmomantis insects, species of mantis
feed on grasshoppers and caterpillars that damage crops. Chilomenes, a ladybird beetle, feed
on aphids that damage cotton plants and destroys scale worms that are pests of orange and
lemon trees respectively. Epicauta, a blister beetle, eat up masses of the eggs of locusts
(Figure 2.22)
Figure 2.22 Stagmomantis(left), Cheilomenes sulfurea(middle), Epicauta, Blister beetle(right)
Insects also play a great role in feeding on unwanted weeds, creating channels for smaller
organisms water, air, and roots to travel through to improve soil aeration. Their activities can
enhance the nutrient cycle and physical properties of the soil, such as soil structure and tilt, and
decomposers can help in the biochemical cycling of nutrients.
B. Food
Many species of insects are being used as a food for people in many countries. Evidence suggests
that edible insects have potential to become a valuable protein source for addressing the global
food demand. They are widely recognized as a sustainable source of animal protein. There are over
1,462 recorded species of edible insects in the world. Most insects are consumed in Asia and
Central America. Usually crickets, grasshoppers, beetle and moth larvae and termites are eaten
there.
Being rich source of protein, grasshoppers have been eaten in many parts of the world. Moreover,
insects are important sources of food for many vertebrates, including birds, amphibians, reptiles,
fish and mammals. One of the many ways to address food and feed security for the over
increasingly growing world population is through insect farming. Insects are everywhere and they
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
44
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
reproduce quickly, and they have high growth and feed conversion rates and a low environmental
footprint over their entire life cycle. They are nutritious, with high protein, fat and mineral contents
and can be reared easily.
What is your attitude towards using insects as a food
in Ethiopia, particularly in your community?
C. Industry
One of the benefits of insect related to industries is their role in commercial products. Insects are
being used to produce different materials at home and in industries. The following are some of the
examples.
Production of Honey and Bee Wax: Honey and
wax production are considered some of the
Inquiry activity 2.22
commercial benefits of insects. For example, the
Investigation
honeybees (Apis meliffera L.) produce millions of
Is there silkworm in your area?
tons of honey and wax every year around the
Investigate the production of silk
world.
fiber in Ethiopia. How are silk fibers
Production of Silk: The other commercially
produced from silkworm?
beneficial insects are silk worms (Bombyx mori and
other silk worms). Silkworms produce silk fibers, which are woven into the delicate, smooth
material used for luxurious textiles and for different purposes in the textile industry (Figure
2.23).
Figure 2.23 Silkworm (Left) Silk threads (Right)
Production of shellac: shellac is a resin secreted by Lac insects. Among the many species of
lac insects, Laccifer lacca, is the commercially cultured lac insect. Shellac is still in use as
dyes, inks, polishes, sealing waxes, and as stiffening agents in the fabrication of felt hats. It
is an animal originated commercial resin.
Production of Cochineal: Cochineal pigment is extracted from scale insects such as
Dacylopius COCCUS. The cochineal pigment was important for the intensity and permanency
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
45
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
of colors in painting. The cochineal pigment is still giving the colors in foods, beverages,
cosmetics (lipsticks) and art product.
Production of Tannic Acid: Tannic acid is a chemical compound used in dyeing goods made
of leather in leather industries, for tanning and in manufacturing some inks. Tiny wasps in
the family Cynipidae secrete some chemical and in response to this, the tree produces gall
tissues that contain tannic acid.
D. Health and medicine
Inquiry activity 2.23
Some insects have medicinal value in treating different
Investigation
human and animal diseases. Since ancient times,
In your community, what insects
insects and insect-derived products have been used as
have medicinal value? Ask the elders
medicinal agents in many parts of the world. For
in your community and come up with
instance, honey is applied to treat burns, chronic and
insects or products of insects used to
post- surgical wounds. Bee and ant venom are used to
treat different types of human and
treat joints pain. Recent research confirms that bee
animal diseases.
products promote healthy immune systems, improve
circulation and decrease inflammation
Blister beetles secrete cantharidan, which acts as a powerful protein blocker in the human body
and is effective in treating severe viral infections because it prevents the reproduction of some viral
cells. Researchers subsequently discovered that cantharidan reacts with genetic material of hostile
cells, and therefore may be useful in the treatment of cancerous tumors most resistant to radiation
and chemotherapy. Several African cultures use poultices made from ground grasshoppers as pain
relievers, especially for migraines.
2.4.2 Harmful aspects of insects
What are the harmful
Although most insects are beneficial, they can also be harmful
to humans and animals. Some insects are pests of plants, fruits,
insects in your locality?
and grains in a store. They feed on several parts of green plants
and crops, such as leaves, stems, buds, flowers, fruits, and seeds on fields and in stores at home
thereby damaging crops and reducing production.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
46
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
These insects include locusts, caterpillars, bugs,
hoppers, aphids etc.
Inquiry activity 2.24
Have you seen desert locust
Locusts are among the most destructive of all insect
destroying crops in different parts of
pests. Countries have faced threats of swarms of
our country? What modern,
desert locusts. Consequently, regional and
biological and traditional methods,
international organizations have started to monitor
do you think, can be used to control
desert locust populations and launch control
insects that damage crops? Consult
measures when necessary. Locusts are particularly
any agricultural professionals in your
destructive in hot and dry regions when there is a
area and calculate the loss of
sudden increase in their numbers. The prevalence
productivity of crops because of
of food shortage has further forced them to
locust damage (if it appeared in your
migrate. They migrate in huge swarms, for several
area).
kilometers away devouring virtually every green
plant in their path.
Some insects are also regarded as serious pests for stored cereal grains. The most common insect
pests of stored cereal grains are: Rice Weevil (Sitophilus oryzae); Lesser Grain Borer (Rhyzopertha
dominica); Rust Red Flour Beetle: ( Tribolium spp.); Sawtooth Grain Beetle: (Oryzaephilus
surinamensis); Flat Grain Beetle: (Cryptolestes spp.)
C State vide Project
of Californis
Figure 2.24 Crops destroyed by desert locusts (left) and other insects (middle and right)
Moreover, several insects serve as vectors for transmitting diseases from one organism to another
or serve as intermediate hosts for several pathogens and transfer disease from one to another. For
example, Anopheles mosquitoes transfer malarial parasites, "Plasmodium," from one person to
another. Culex mosquitos spread filariasis and transmit filarial worms from infected to healthy
people. The tsetse fly, Trypanosoma gambiense, also spreads the African sleeping sickness to the
human population. The housefly (Musca domestica) spreads food and water-borne diseases to
human populations.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
47
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Figure 2.25 Anopheles mosquitoes (left) Culex mosquitoes (middle)
Tsetse fly (right)
2.5 Animal Behavior
After the successful completion of this
section, the student will be able to:
Self-questioning
At the end of this section, the student will be able
Before starting this section, ask
to:
yourself this question: "What do I
Define animal behavior
know about animal behavior and
Describe the differences between innate and
what do I want to learn from this
learned animal behaviors.
section?"
Identify patterns of behavior in animals
Animals have different behaviours and
behavioral patterns for survival and reproduction. Animal behavior means all
What is behaviour?
the ways in which animals interact with other organisms and the physical
environment. It includes the movements of animals, interaction of animals within and with the
environment and learning about their environment.
2.5.1
Types of Animal Behavior
Animals have different behaviors and behavioral patterns.
How can we differentiate
Animal behavior can be categorized into two main types:
between different types of
innate or inherent behavior and learned or acquired behavior.
animal behavior?
Innate or inherent behavior
Innate or inherent behavior is an inborn behavior that is determined by genes and independent of
experience and specific to a species. There are three types of innate or inherent behavior, and
these are instinctive, reflexive, and orientative.
The following examples are instinctive behaviours in animals.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
48
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Web making in spiders
Nest-building in birds
Swimming with dolphins and other aquatic species.
Opening of mouth in chicks of many bird species when their mother returns to the nest.
Honeybees dance when they return to the hive after finding a source of food.
The following examples are reflex behaviours in animals.
A simple reflex action is a sudden, involuntary response to stimuli. For example, when you
touch a sharp or hot object, you pull your hand away rapidly without even thinking about
the action. You blink when something gets too close to your eye and you close your eyes
when dust gets into them. These are simple reflex actions. During a reflex action, messages
about pain do not travel all the way to and from the brain. Instead, they travel only as far as
the spinal cord, and the spinal cord responds to the messages by giving orders to the
muscles. This allows you to respond to pain more quickly.
The following examples are orientation behaviours in animals.
Taxis is directed in relation to a given stimulus. It is the orientation of an animal
(directed either towards or away) in response to the source of
stimulus. If the orientation is towards the stimulus, it is called as a positive taxis, and
if it is away from the stimulus, it is known as a negative taxis.
Example: The movement of cockroaches away from the source of light.
What is the difference between phototaxis,
chemotaxis, thigmotaxis and geotaxis? Explain with
examples.
Kinesis is undirected, random movement. Kinesis is a type of locomotory behavior in
relation to the source of stimulus. The animal responds to the variation in the intensity
of the stimulus and not the source or direction of the stimulus.
Example: The movement of woodlice in relation to the temperature around them.
Learned or acquired behavior
Learned or acquired behavior is not inherited
individual organism to adapt to changes in the
and not determined by genes. It is the type of
environment that are modified by previous
animal behavior acquired during the lifetime
experiences. Examples of simple learned
of an individual. Learned behavior allows an
behaviors include habituation, classical
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
49
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
conditioning,
operant
conditioning,
Stage 2. During conditioning. During this
sensitization, latent and insight learning
stage, a stimulus that produces no response is
(Figure 2.26).
associated with the unconditioned stimulus,
due to what it is known as a conditioned
Habituation is a simple form of learning in
stimulus (CS). For learning to take place, the
which an animal stops responding to a
UCS must be associated with CS on a number
stimulus, or cue, after a period of repeated
of occasions, or trials at this stage
exposure. This is a form of non-associative
learning, in which the stimulus is not linked
Stage 3: After conditioning. This conditioning
with any punishment or reward. For example,
happens once the conditioned stimulus (CS)
you were reading a book when someone
has been associated with the unconditioned
turned on the television in the same room. At
stimulus (UCS) to create a new conditioned
first, the sound of the television might have
response.
been annoying. After a while, you may no
Operant conditioning is a result of
longer have it noticed. Accordingly, it mean
associative learning in which a bit different
that you have become accustomed to the
from classical conditioning because it does not
sound.
rely on an existing stimulus-response pair.
Classical conditioning is a result of
Instead, whenever an organism performs a
associative learning in which a response
behavior or an intermediate step on the way
already associated with one stimulus is
to the complete behavior, the organism is
associated with a second stimulus to which it
given a reward or a punishment. It was
had no previous connection. Classical
discovered by B.F. Skinner. Based on the
conditioning was discovered by Ivan P.
theory of operant conditioning, behavior will
Pavlov, a Russian physiologist. There are
likely be repeated when the organism is
three stages of classical conditioning.
reinforced (rewarded), and behavior will occur
less frequently when it is punished.
Stage 7: Before conditioning. This stage
states that an unconditioned stimulus (UCS)
Skinner identified three types of responses or
produces an unconditioned response (UCR) in
operant behavior.
an individual, which means that a stimulus in
the environment has produced a behavior or
Neutral operants are responses
from the environment that neither
response which is unlearned (i.e.,
unconditioned), and therefore it is a natural
increase nor decrease the probability
response which has not been taught. In this
of a behavior being repeated.
case, no new behavior has been learned yet.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
50
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Reinforcers are responses from the
repeated are called punishers.
environment that increase the
Punishment weakens behavior.
probability of a behavior being
Insight learning is learning which is based
repeated are called reinforcers.
on past experience and reasoning and is a
Reinforcers can be either positive or
hallmark of the human behavior. Humans
negative.
have used insight learning to solve problems
Punishers are responses from the
ranging from starting a fire to traveling to the
environment that decrease the
moon
likelihood of a behavior being
Sensitization, also referred to as reverse tolerance, is a non-associative learning process in which
repeated administration of a stimulus results in the progressive amplification of a response. It
occurs when a stimulus is presented above the tolerance threshold. For example, repetition of a
painful stimulus may make one more sensitive to a loud noise.
Inquiry activity 2.25 Examining animal behavior
Be in groups and find explanations of learned behaviors such as habituation,
classical conditioning, operant conditioning, insight learning, and sensitization with
examples of scientists who discovered the behavior and how. (hint: Pavlov
experiment, Skinner experiment, etc.) Look at the following figures (Figure 2.26) and
identify the type of learned behavior each figure shows and report to your teacher.
Loudspeaker
Lights
Response lever
Electrified
Food dispenser
grid
Conditioning: every time the dog sees
Conditioned response: the dog salivates
food, a bell is rung.
in response to a bell being rung.
Figure 2.26 Different types of animal behevior
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
51
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Inquiry activity 2.26 Identifying animal behavior
Critically observe animals in your area. What type of behavior do they show?
Classify them into innate or acquired animal behaviors. Share your observation
with your classmates
2.5.2
Patterns of Behavior
There are different behavioral patterns in animals. Although the
What are the behavioral
behavioral patterns are different due to the diversity of species,
patterns of animals?
there
are also common patterns of behavior
Inquiry activity 2.27 Studying behavioral
exhibited by many species. Examples of
patterns
behavioral patterns in animals include
Observe behavioral patterns of animals in your locality
behavioral cycles, reproductive behavior,
such as behavioral cycles, reproductive behavior,
social behavior, competition, territory
social behavior, competition, territory and
and communication.
communication with examples and present to your
classmates.
Behavioral cycles are behavioral
pattern in which animals respond to periodic changes in the environment. It can be daily or
seasonal cycles. For example, seasonal migration (movement) and Circadian rhythms (sleep and
wake).
Seasonal migration refers to the movement of various species of birds, insects, and mammals from
one habitat to another during different times of the year because of seasonal fluctuations in factors
such as the availability of food, sunlight, temperature, and breeding difficulty. An example is the
migration of various whale and bird species from their summer habitats in the Arctic or Antarctic to
the tropical waters near the equator and warmer
latitudes, respectively
12
Circadian rhythms, also referred as biological clocks, are
24-hour cycles that are part of the body's internal clock,
3
running in the background to carry out essential
functions and processes. One of the most important and
well-known circadian rhythms is the sleep-wake cycle.
Figure 2.27 Circadian rhythms
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
52
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Inquiry activity 2.28 Biological clock
Let us say that you usually go to bed and sleep at 3:00 o'clock local time at
night, and wake up at 12:00 o'clock local time in the morning. If you
unfortunately sleep at 6:00 o'clock local time at night one day, what do you
feel the next day? Why? Discuss this with classmates.
Reproductive behavior: it is a behavioral pattern of animals to
meet the needs of reproduction. It the coordination of the timing
and patterning of reproductive activity. Reproductive behavior is
vital for locating and selecting suitable mates, producing
offspring, and rearing them successfully to independence. For
example, courtship that involves sounds visual displays or
chemicals and paradise dance.
Figure 2.28 A Courtship in
Pigeons
Social behaviour. it is the behavioral pattern of animals
commonly observed in that live in groups. Insects such as ants, termites, bees, exhibit some of the
most well developed social behavior and wasps are social
behaviors. One benefit of social behavior for these insects is
that different individuals perform better in certain activities
or division of labor as workers and soldiers. Other examples
of social behaviour are observed in elephants, penguins,
human beings and other primates.
Figure 2.29 Elephants pay homage to dead relatives
Competition it is a behavioral pattern of animals
observed during competition such as for resources.
Inquiry activity 2.29
Example of the competition includes the competition
What is the difference between
between animals for space, territory, water, mates
intraspecific and interspecific? Discuss in
and food. Competition occurs naturally between
groups and write your answers with
living organisms that coexist in the same
examples
environment. There are two basic types of
competition: intraspecific and interspecific.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
53
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Territoriality. it is abehavioral pattern that involves protecting spaces by an animal from others.
The territories of animals contain all of the resources and conditions they need to survive. Many
animals defend their area by using display behavior instead of fighting. The behavior gives signals
for other animals to stay away. Displaying behavior is
generally safer and uses less energy than fighting. For
example, Male dogs and lions use pheromones in their
urine to mark their territory. It means that they are
signaling other dogs or lions to stay out of their yard. Male
gorillas use display behavior to defend their territory by
pounding on their chests and thumping the ground with
their hands, robin by displays his red breast to warn other
Figure 2.30 Lion keeping territory
robins to stay away.
Communication behaviour. it is a behavioural patter vital for the interaction of animals. Animals
can communicate with the aid of sight, sound, tactile (with body touch), and chemical cues (they
produce special chemicals called pheromones). For example, birds sing and frogs croak to
communicate with each other. Ants communicate with chemicals called pheromones to mark trails
to food sources so other ants can find them.
Figure 2.31 Communication in ants
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
54
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
2.6 Homeostasis in animals
After the successful completion of this
Self-questioning
section, the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask you self
this question: "What do I know about
Define homeostasis, homeotherms,
homeostasis and what do I want to learn
poikilotherms, and thermoregulation.
from this section?"
Describe thermoregulation in homeothermic
animals with examples.
Animals are directly affected by the
Explain thermoregulation in poikilothermic
environmental situations. A change in these
animals with examples.
situations may negatively affect the
Explain osmoregulation and sugar regulation.
physiological functions of their bodies.
Discuss the mechanisms of controlling
Hence, they need to have a controlling
homeostasis.
mechanism for these factors in order to
Discuss the physiological methods of
maintain stability in their body. Despite
thermoregulation with examples.
environmental changes, most animals
Discuss the behavioral methods of
maintain almost constant internal body
thermoregulation with examples.
conditions through homeostasis.
Discuss the behavioral methods of
Homeostasis is the self-regulatory process
by which animals maintain stable internal conditions in their
What happens to you during a
bodies regardless of external condition. Homeostasis helps
cold day and a hot day? Why
animals to maintain equilibrium in the internal conditions of
do you feel thirst? How do you
their bodies or cells at a set point (normal conditions). Animal
respond? Why?
body systems constantly adjust to internal and external
changes in order to maintain this normal condition. A change
in the internal or external environment (stimulus) is detected by receptors in the animals' bodies,
which sends information to a control center (the brain). As a result, the body system responds to
the stimulus and by returning the value back or toward the set point. Generally, homeostasis
involves four component: stimulus, receptor, control center, and effector.
Stimulus: is a change in the environment that forces the organism to response. It can be a
change in body condition, such as an increase or decrease in body temperature, glucose, or
water.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
55
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Receptor: It detect the change in the environment or body condition and send signal to
control center to counteract it, returning the internal condition to the normal. For example,
thermoreceptors (the end of sensory neurons)
Control center: This receives messages from receptors and sends commands to the
effector to counteract the change. The hypothalamus, a region of the brain, is a control
center for homeostasis.
Effector: It acts on the stimulus based on the command control center, counteracting the
change and returning the internal body condition to normal. Organs or tissues such as the
kidney, liver, or heart are effectors.
For example, if the animal's body becomes too warm and the blood glucose rises, adjustments are
made to cool the animal and lower the blood glucose level, respectively, by effector organs. This
enables animals to function in the changing external and internal conditions that surround them.
2.6.1
Thermoregulation
Thermoregulation is the process of maintaining the
Inquiry activity 2.30
internal body temperature constant. Many
What
is
the
difference
between
organisms use behaviour, physiology, and
poikilothermic animals and homeothermic
morphology to keep their body temperatures within
animals? Interpret the graph below
optimal level. Based on temperature regulation,
50
animals can be divided into two groups:
40
Homeotherm
Body temperature
Temperature
30
Poikilotherm
1. Poikilothermic animals: These are animals
20
Body temperature
that have a body temperature that is the
10
Environmental
temperature
same as their environment where their
Midnight
Sunrise
Noon
Sunset
Midnig
temperature varies with the environmental
temperature are called poikilothermic animals.
2. Homeothermic animals: Animals that keep their body temperature constant in the face of
changing environmental temperatures.
A. Poikilothermic Animals
Poikilothermic animals, also known as ectothermic animals, lack internal control over their body
temperature. The body temperature of these organisms is generally similar to the temperature of
the environment. However, individual organisms may burrow themselves into the ground on a hot
day or rest in the sunlight on a cold day to keep their bodies temperature slightly below or above
the environmental temperature. Some poikilothermic animals seek cooler areas during the hottest
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
56
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
time of the day or may climb onto rocks to capture heat during the coldest time of the day. Some
animals swim in water to cool their body. Some also use burrows to keep their bodies warm
(Figure 2.32), and still others such as bees use group activity or stay in a hive to survive in cold
seasons.
Figure 2.32 Temperature regulation in poikilotherms
B. Homeothermic Animals
Homeothermic or endothermic animals are those animals that can generate internal heat to
maintain a constant internal body temperature. Their cellular processes operate optimally even
when the environment is cold and loses heat when the environment is hot. They use morphological,
physiological and behavioral methods of temperature regulation.
Homeothermic animals can retain heat in a variety of ways when the environment is cold. Some of
the ways of insulation used to conserve the body heat in these animals include fur, fat and feathers.
For example, the arctic fox uses its fluffy tail as extra insulation when it curls up to sleep in cold
weather (Figure 2.33). Homeothermic animals also use vasoconstriction in response to the coldest
environment. Vasoconstrictionis the narrowing of blood vessels to the skin by the contraction of
their smooth muscles to reduce blood flow in the peripheral blood vessels and retain heat. Shivering
is another way of maintaining body temperature in cold. Shivering is caused by involuntary
contractions of your muscles. Muscle contractions require energy from respiration that releases heat
to warm the body.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
57
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Figure 2.33 Temperature regulation during cold weather by puffing up feathers in birds (left),
raising hair in human (middle) and fur in fox (right)
Homeothermic animals can loss heat in a
which is produced by the sweat glands
variety of ways when the environment is hot.
travels up the sweat duct and out of the
Some of the ways of losing heat in response
sweat pore onto the skin surface.
to the hottest environment include
The processes of coordination occur in the
vasodilation which is the opening up of
part of the brain called hypothalamus. When
arterioles to the skin through the relaxation
the temperature of the environment changes
of their smooth muscles and by bringing more
(decreases or increases), signals are sent to
blood and heat to the body surface to loss
the brain to alert the hypothalamus. The
heat and thereby cool their body through
hypothalamus then responds by activating the
radiation and evaporation. Vasodilation is the
process of vasodilation, vasoconstriction,
widening of blood vessels at the skin surface
shivering and sweating to maintain the body
to increase heat loss through the surface of
temperature constant (Figure 2.34).
the skin.
Sweating is another way of maintaining body
temperature during a hot season. Sweat,
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
58
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
Hypothalamu
Body temperature falls
Body temperature rises
Blood vessels constrict
Blood vessels dilate,
so that heat is conserved.
resulting in heat loss to the
Sweat glands do not
environment. Sweat glands
secrete fluid. Shivering
secrete fluid. As the fluid
(involuntary contraction of
evaporates, heat is lost
muscles) generates heat,
from the body.
which warms the body.
Normal body
temperature
Heat is lost to
Heat is retained
the environment
Figure 2.34 The body temperature regulation
In controlling the body temperature, there are four mechanism of heat exchange between an
animal and its environment. These are radiation, evaporation, convection and conduction.
Inquiry activity 2.31 Investigating thermoregulation
Search from the library or the internet and discuss the following questions with a
classmate.
1. How vasodilation, vasoconstriction, shivering, sweating, hibernation and estivation
help to maintain normal level of the body temperature?
2. How does sweating cool the body? Relate this with the concepts in property of
water.
3. Take one of the heat exchange mechanisms (radiation, evaporation, convection and
conduction) and discuss in relation to the concept you learned in physics and
present it to the class.
The body structure of animals also helps to maintain their body temperature. For instance, large
ears in hot areas help to lose heat and cool their body, whereas small ears and fur in cold areas
help to minimize heat loss and keep their body warm. The size of the animals also affects regulation
of body temperature. As animals grow in size, their inside volume increases and the outside surface
area decreases. This affects the surface-area-to-volume ratio or the surface-to-volume ratio of
animals, which consequently affects heat loss. Look the following example (Figure 2.35).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
59
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
3 cm
2 cm
1 cm
2 cm
3 cm
1cm
1 cm
2 cm
3 cm
Surface area
6 cm²
24 cm²
54 cm²
Volume
1cm3
8 cm³
27 cm3
Surface area:
6:1
3:1
2:1
volume
Figure 2.35 As size increases the surface area: volume ratio decreases
For example, since the size of an elephant
Inquiry activity 2.32 Investigating
is high, the surface area to volume ratio
thermoregulation
becomes smaller than the surface area to
Form in groups of four and
volume ratio of a rabbit. The greater the
1. Identify which of the information given in
surface area-to-volume ratio an animal
this textbook (section 2.6.1) is
has, the more heat loss it will have, and
physiological,
behavioral
and
the smaller the surface area- to- volume
morphological methods of temperature
ratio an animal has the less heat loss it will
regulation in animals and discus the
have. The smaller the animal, the higher
difference between them.
the surface area-to-volume ratio it will
2. What do you think the reason for peoples
have, so it will have the higher heat loss.
living in desert/semi desert regions
Example: a rabbit. On the other hand, the
commonly drink hot tea/drinks and wear
larger the animal, the smaller the surface
different clothing styles in low and high
area-to-volume ratio it will have, SO it will
land areas?
have the lower the heat loss. Example an
elephant.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
60
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
Inquiry activity 2.33 Examining effect of animals size on
thermoregulation
1. Why do smaller animals have higher surface area-to-volume ratio and loss the
higher amount of heat and larger animals have smaller surface area-to-volume
ratio and loss lower amount of heat?
2. What is the significance of surface area to volume ratio in controlling body
temperature?
Animals also maintain their body temperature by searching out cold or hot habitats that allow them
to alter its rate of heat loss or gain, making nests or digging burrows, huddling with conspecifics,
and in human like wearing clothes or turning on an air conditioner as human do.
2.6.2 Osmoregulation
Osmoregulation is a process that regulates the osmotic pressure of fluids and electrolytic balance in
organisms to maintain homeostasis. About 60% of the human body is composed of fluids.
Approximately 2/3 of our body's water content is in our intracellular fluids and the remaining 1/3
forms our extracellular fluid. Extracellular fluid consists of the fluid between cells (interstitial fluid)
and the blood plasma. A disruption in the osmotic pressure can result in an imbalance in the
movement of water between them and hence alter the concentration of their electrolytes. Hence,
osmoregulation is important to balance osmotic pressure of fluids and electrolytes.
In humans and other animals, this process is brought about by osmoreceptors, which can detect
changes in osmotic pressure. Humans and most other warm-blooded organisms have
osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, part of the brain and in the kidneys.
There are two major types of osmoregulation:
Osmoconformers organisms that try to match the osmolarity of their body with their
surroundings are called osmoconformers. In other words, these organisms maintain the same
osmotic pressure inside the body as outside water. Examples are invertebrates like starfish, jellyfish
and lobsters.
Osmoregulators. organisms that actively regulate their osmotic pressure, independent of the
surrounding environment are called osmoregulators. Examples are many vertebrates, including
humans.
The kidney is the main organ responsible for osmoregulation in humans. When the water level in
the body is high, the kidney releases a large amount of hypotonic urine. When the water level is
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
61
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
low, it retains water and produces a low amount of hypertonic urine. Thus, the kidneys maintain the
electrolytic balance of the body. The hypothalamus of the brain and Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
secreted from pituitary gland controls osmoregulation (Figure 2.36).
Why does your urine sometimes become yellow and sometime not?
Water content
Water content
of the blood
of the blood
HIGH
LOW
Too much water drunk
Too much salt
or sweating
Brain
Brain
produces
Water content
More
produces
of the blood normal
ADH
Less ADH
High volume of water
Low volume of water
reabsorbed by kidney
reabsorbed by kidney
Urine output
Urine output
LOW
HIGH
(small volume of
(large volume of
Concentrated urine)
dilute urine)
Figure 2.36 Osmoregulation in human
2.6.3
Blood Sugar Regulation
Glucose is the main source of energy for the normal functioning of our body systems including the
brain. The body requires volumes of glucose in order to generate energy during respiration. Hence,
the body regulates the availability of glucose in our body to maintain its concentration at constant
level in order to supply energy continuously.
Two hormones produced from pancreas are responsible for controlling the concentration of glucose
in the blood. These are insulin and glucagon.
When blood glucose level is high and the glucagon level is low, more insulin is released by
the pancreas into the liver. Insulin promotes the conversion of glucose into glycogen SO that
the excess glucose can be stored for a later use in the liver.
When blood glucose level is low and glucagon level is high, more glucagon is released by
pancreas into the liver. Glucagon promotes the conversion of glycogen into glucose SO that
the lack of glucose can be compensated for by the new supply of glucose.
Glycogen is stored in the liver and converted in to glucose when the glucose level decreases. The
effects of insulin and glucagon on the liver functions are as follows (Figure 2.37):
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
62
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
High blood sugar
Raises blood sugar
Promotes
insulin
release
Stimulates glycogen
breakdown
Glucagon
Glycogen
Glucose
Pancreas
Liver
Stimulates
Insulin
glycogen formation
Stimulates
glucose
uptake
Tissue cells
from
Promotes
Lowers blood sugar
blood
glucagon
release
Low blood sugar
Figure 2.37 Blood glucose level Regulation
Inquiry activity 2.34 Investigation
Form in groups of four and investigate what happens if:
Salt and water balance is not maintained in our body.
The concentration level of glucose in the blood is not maintained. Have
you ever heard about diabetic patients? What is the cause? How can we
maintain blood glucose level?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
63
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
Negative and positive feedback
mechanisms
Control of homeostasis
Negative feedback mechanism is a
When there is
homeostatic process that reverses the
How do negative and
any change in
direction of the stimulus or any deviation from
positive
feedback
the environment,
the normal. This means that if the level is too
controls homeostasis?
an animal must
high from the normal, the body brings it
make an adjustment to balance the situation.
down, and if the level is too low from the
To do this, animals have feedback
normal, the body lifts it up. In contrast to
mechanisms for the stimulus (change in the
negative feedback mechanism, positive
environment) A feedback mechanism is a
feedback mechanism accelerates a change in
physiological regulation system to return the
the body's physiological condition rather than
body to its normal internal state. In the
reversing it. The positive feedback takes you
feedback mechanism, the receptor senses the
further away from homeostasis while the
change in the environment (stimulus) and
negative feedback brings you back to it.
sends a signal to the control center (the
A negative feedback system has three basic
brain) which in turn generates a response that
components. These are sensor (receptor),
is signaled to an effector in muscles to
control center and effector. The sensor
contract or relax or glands to secrete
(receptor) monitors the physiological value
hormones. There are two types of feedback
not to deviate from the normal (receives
mechanisms.
stimulus) and reports to the control center if
To maintain homeostasis, animals types of
there is any deviation. The control center
feedback mechanisms: Negative and positive
compares the value of the deviation from the
feedback. Negative feedback occurs when a
normal and activates the effector if there is
change in a variable triggers a response that
any deviation. An effector causes a change to
reverses the initial change. In other words,
reverse the situation and returns the value to
negative feedback occurs when the activation
the normal set point (Figure 2.38).
of one component results in the deactivation
There are numerous examples of negative
of another. Positive feedback occurs when a
feedback mechanisms that aid in maintaining
change in a variable triggers a response that
a constant internal body condition. One of the
causes more change in the same direction.
examples in humans is the feedback
Unlike negative feedback, positive feedback
mechanism in temperature regulation. This
occurs when the activation of one component
mechanism works by promoting either heat
causes the activation of another.
loss or heat gain. For instance, when the
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
64
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
sensor (receptor) receives a stimulus that
brain's temperature regulation center, where
indicates an increased body temperature from
the control center stimulates a cluster of brain
the normal range, it sends its message to the
cells.
Then, the control center causes vasodilatation SO that the more blood flows to the surface of the
skin allowing the heat to radiate into the environment, activate sweat glands to increase their
output through diaphoresis (excessive sweating) to remove heat through evaporation across the
skin surface into the surrounding environment.
The reverse occurs when the body temperature
Vasodilation
drops from the normal range. It means that
Hypothalamus
Cooling
vasoconstriction and deactivation of sweat glands
Diaphoresis
External
Negative
occurs. However, if heat loss is severe, the brain
factors
Fedback
External
(control center) causes skeletal muscles to contract
factors
Vasoconstriction
and produce shivering to release heat while using up
Warming
Hypothalamus
ATP for muscles contraction.
Shivering
Figure 2.38 Negative feedback mechanism of thermoregulation
Inquiry activity 2.35 Examining feedback mechanisms
Be in groups and investigate the feedback mechanism in blood glucose level regulation
and osmoregulation from library or the internet sources.
In the above example, as soon as your body has cooled off, negative feedback halts the signaling
process to stop the process of sweating. In the opposite process, a positive feedback loop would
continue to cause the body to sweat even though it was no longer hot.
2.7 Renowned zoologists in Ethiopia
After successful completion of this
Self- questioning
section, the student will be able to
Before starting this section, ask
yourself this question: "What do I
Mention renowned zoologists in
know about Ethiopian zoologists and
Ethiopia
what do I want to learn from this
Describe the work of these scientists
section?"
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
65
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Zoology is the study of animals in relation to their evolution, anatomy, physiology, behavior,
habitats and health. Many zoologists from various Ethiopian universities have studied animals found
though the country. Some researchers have invested their time and energy in studying animals in
Ethiopia throughout their lives. This has a great contribution not only to the development of
zoological science but also for the economic development of the country. Such researchers are
patriots for their country because, as indicated in the general curriculum framework stipulates,
"Patriotism is not only in showing love to the country and defending it in times of difficulties but
also in exhibiting the diligence to successfully carry out a wide-range of duties and tasks which
epitomize hard work" (p.20).
Inquiry activity 2.36
Do you know any renowned Ethiopian zoologists in your area, who grew up or came from
your home town/village or from any other place? Describe the works of these professors
and the lessons you learned from them. Describe their work. Reflect on what you could
learn from their work.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
66
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
internal fertilization and the development of
Unit two summary
embryo is inside the female rat.
Animals are diverse groups of organisms in
Insects have plenty of economic importance
the world. They have their own characteristics
in agriculture and food production health and
related to reproduction, cellular organization,
medicine. Insect are important organisms for
mode of nutrition and energy generation.
commercial products such as honey, wax,
There are two major groups of animals:
dyes and silk production and have medicinal
invertebrates and vertebrate animals.
value in treating different human and animal
Invertebrates are animals that do not have a
diseases.
backbone/vertebral
column
whereas
vertebrate animals possess a well-
Animals have different behaviours that can be
defined internal skeleton system with cartilage
grouped into innate or inherent behavior and
and a backbone/vertebral column.
learned or acquired behavior. Animals also
have different behavioral patterns such as
While the majority of animals undergo sexual
behavioral cycles, reproductive behavior,
reproduction, a few groups of animals
social behavior, competition, territory and
undergo asexual reproduction. Asexual
communication.
reproduction is a type of reproduction that
involves a single individual, which is more
Homeostasis is a self-regulatory process by
common among invertebrates than
which animals maintain stable internal
vertebrates. Sexual reproduction is a type of
conditions in their body. Thermoregulation is
reproduction that involves two individual
the process of maintaining the internal body
parents to produce offspring by having
temperature constant. Homeothermic animals
genetic materials from both parents through
maintain a constant body temperature
fertilization.
regardless of differing environmental
temperatures, whereas poikilothermic animals
Insects undergo sexual reproduction and a
have a body temperature that is the same as
series of major changes undergone in their
their environment, and thus, their
body structure called metamorphosis:
temperature varies with the environmental
Complete metamorphosis and incomplete
temperature.
metamorphosis. Frogs undergo external
fertilization and develop through
Osmoregulation is the process of controlling
metamorphosis. Birds undergo internal
the amount of water and electrolytes by the
fertilizations and lay eggs with external hard
help of osmoreceptors in order to retain
cover in nest or ground where they hatch
homeostasis. The kidney plays an important
after incubation. Reproduction in rats involves
role in the process of osmoregulation in
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
67
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
humans by producing large amount of urine
Homeostasis is maintained by negative
when there is excess water and small amount
feedback mechanisms that control the internal
of urine when the amount of water in our
body change by reversing the direction of the
body is low.
stimulus. The feedback mechanisms involve
the receptor that senses the change in the
Our body needs continuous supply of energy.
environment (stimulus), the control center
The major source of energy for normal
(the brain) that generates a response and an
functioning of our body is glucose. Insulin
effector in muscles that contract 0 relax or
and glucagon are the two hormones produced
glands to secrete hormones to respond to the
from pancreas to regulate glucose level.
stimuli.
Insulin decreases the glucose level and
glucagon increases the glucose level to
maintain sugar balance in our body.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
68
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
Unit two review questions
I.
Multiple-choice questions
Directions: Choose the correct answer for each questions
1. Which of the following is not a characteristic of animals?
A. Autotrophs
C. Multicellular
B. Reproduce
D. Heterotrophs
2. In the body organization patter of an animal, if the left and right sides of the body are mirror
images of each other, it is called:
A. Radial symmetry
C. Bilateral symmetry
B. Asymmetry
D. All of the above
3. Which of the following developmental processes develop into germ layers?
A. Cleavage
C. Gastrula
B. Blastula
D. A and B
4. Which one of the following is a common characteristic of all vertebrates?
A. The division of the body into a head, neck, trunk and tail
B. Their bodies are covered with an exoskeleton
C. The possession of two pairs of functional appendages
D. The presence of a well-developed skull.
5. Why is sexual reproduction useful?
A. It completes in a very short period of time
B. It results in the rapid production of many offspring
C. It increases genetic diversity, allowing organisms to survive in an unpredictable
environment
D. It needs less energy and leads to genetic variation in the offspring
6. The phenomenon by which a female gamete develops into a new organism without fertilization
is called
A. Syngamy
C. Gametogenesis
B. Parthenogenesis
D. Embryogenesis
7. Metamorphosis of insects is regulated through hormone
A. Pheromone
C. Ecdysone
B. Thyroxine
D. All of the above
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
69
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
8. Animals that have external fertilization produce a large number of gametes. What is the
reason?
A. They are small in size and want to produce more offspring.
B. To increase chance of fertilization in water.
C. Sufficient food is available in water to feed offspring.
D. Water promotes production of large number of gametes
9. Which mating system involves a male mating with multiple females during a reproductive
season?
A. Androgeny
C. Polygamy
B. Monogamy
D. Polygyny
10. The site of fertilization in the chicken is
A. Uterus
C. Infundibulum
B. Magnum
D. Ovary
11. Which of the following is called the resting and inactive stage in the insect life cycle?
A. The egg stage
C. The pupa stage
B. The larva stage
D. The adult stage
12. Insects are considered to be beneficial because they/are
A. Effective pollinators
B. Sources of useful products and potential protein
C. Biological control agents
D. All of above
13. When laying eggs, a female insect returns to her larval host plant, even though she has not fed
upon this plant during her adult life. This is an example of:
A. Conditioning
C. Instrumental learning
B. Habituation
D. A and C
14. Behavior patterns that change drastically over the lifetime of an insect are probably:
A. Learned
C. Afferent
B. Innate
D. None of the above
15. A certain insect usually becomes active each day at dusk. If kept in the dark all day, it will still
become active around sunset even though it cannot see the sun. This behavior is an
example of:
A. Transverse orientation
C. Diurnal behavior
B. A circadian rhythm
D. Exogenous entrainment
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
70
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 2: ANIMALS
16. Given these terms related to negative feedback: 1. control center, 2. effector, 3. receptor, 4.
response, 5. stimulus, arrange the terms in the correct order as they operate to maintain
homeostasis.
A. 1,2,3,4,5
C. 3, 2, 1, 5, 4
B. 2, 3, 5, 1, 4
D. 5, 3, 1, 2,
17. The mechanism of regulation of solutes and the loss and gain of water in human is known as
A. Homeostasis
C. Osmoregulation
B. Thermoregulation
D. Poikilotherms
18. What does glucagon promote in the liver?
A. Hydrolysis of glycogen
C. Glycogen production
B. Hydrolysis of glucose
D. Release of insulin
19. What is the reason why smaller mammals have higher metabolic rates?
A. Higher SA:V ratios
C. Lower Lifespans
B. Lower SA:V ratios
D. More Frequent Exposure to Predators
20. What happens when blood sugar levels become too high?
A. Insulin is secreted, causing the conversion of glucose to glycogen
B. Glucagon is secreted, causing the conversion of glucose to glycogen
C. Insulin is secreted, causing the conversion of glycogen to glucose
D. All of the above
21. Why do the hairs on our skin sometimes stand up when we are cold?
A. to know when we are frightened
B. to trap air under them in order to keep us warmer
C. to release air order to cool us down
D. to trap air under them to keep us cooler
22. What happens if the core body temperature is too high?
A. the blood vessels supplying the capillaries constrict
B. the body decreases sweating
C. the blood vessels supplying the capillaries dilate
D. the body shivers to produce heat
23. When an animal is placed in a hot environment, it loses heat through sweating whereas when
to cold environment, it increases muscular activity to produce more heat. The animal in this
thought is:
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
71
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
A. Homeothermic
C. Ectothermic
B. Poikilothermic
D. None of these
24. An increase in blood sugar level causes the pancreas to release of the hormone insulin; insulin
lowers blood sugar level, restoring the body to its original blood glucose level by converting
glucose to glycogen. This is an example of
A. Positive feedback
C. Homeostatic imbalance
B. Negative feedback
D. None of these
Short answer
Direction: Write a short answer to each question
1. How does reproduction differ in rats, birds and crocodilians?
2. What is the difference between vertebrates and invertebrates
3. What is the difference between poikilothermic and homoeothermic animals?
4. Explain why mammals living in the tropics as compared to similar species living in the
polar regions have generally large protruding structures?
5. How surface area to volume ratio is related with temperature regulation and metabolism?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
72
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
Unit Three: Enzymes
ENZYMES
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
73
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT THREE ENZYMES
Unit learning outcomes
After the successful completion of this unit, the student will be able to:
Explain enzymes; their properties, factors affecting their activities, functions,
mechanisms of action, regulation, their industrial applications and kinetics
Demonstrate proteins and their structures
3.1. What are enzymes?
At the end of this section, students
will be able to:
Self-questioning
Define enzymes and activation
Before starting this section, ask yourself
this question: "What do I know about
energy
enzymes, their properties and functions,
Explain how enzymes work
and what do I want to learn from this
Describe the catalysis reaction of
section?"
enzymes, activities and substrates
Enzymes are protein molecules that act as biological catalysts (biocatalysts) and accelerate rate of
chemical reactions by lowering activation energy. Activation energy is the minimum amount of
energy required for the reactant to be converted to products. All enzymes are proteins made up of
chains of amino acids linked together by peptide bonds.
All cells contain different enzymes depending on the type of the living cell, which engage in
tremendous biochemical activity called metabolism. Metabolism is the process of chemical and
physical changes, including the breakdown (catabolism) and synthesis (anabolism) of molecules.
The metabolic processes in the cells require enzymes to catalyze many biochemical reaction types
at a rates fast enough to sustain life.
Enzymes act upon molecules (substrates), convert them into products of different molecules, and
remain unchanged (Figure 3.1).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
74
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
