UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Substrate
Product
Catalysis
Enzyme + Substrate
Enzyme-Substrate
Enzyme-Product
Enzyme + Product
Complex
Complex
Figure 3.1 Enzymatic reactions
Lab activity 3.1 Classroom experimental activities
Objectives: investigate the enzyme Salivary Amylase in mouth
Material
White bread
Procedure
1. Pieces of bread are prepared for each student who will chew.
2. All students chew the pieces of bread in mouth slowly.
3. Each student notices the changing flavor of the mush in his/her mouth while
chewing.
4. Each student realizes that the mush in the mouth slowly tastes sweeter.
Control experiment:
Mix some pieces of bread in a glass of water and wait for five minutes
Let the students taste the mush (water + bread) and compare with flavor of
mush of bread and saliva.
How is the taste?
Assessments
What did you recognize from the changes in the mush?
How does the saliva convert starch into maltose?
Where did the enzyme amylase come from?
What do you conclude from the activity?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
75
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
3.2 Properties and functions of enzymes
After the successful completion of this section, the student will
be able to:
Identify the properties of enzymes
Explain the action of each property
Describe the functions properties
What are the enzyme properties?
Enzyme properties are reactions demonstrated through
physical and chemical properties.
3.2.1 General properties of an enzyme
The general properties of enzymes are the nature of both their physical and chemical properties.
Enzymes accelerate the reaction rates. They neither affect the nature of products formed nor
undergo any changes by the reaction catalyzed.
A. The physical properties of enzymes
The physical properties of enzymes include denaturation, solubility, colloids, biocatalysts,
precipitation, molecular weight, and enzyme activity (Figure 3.2).
Denaturation is the process of breaking the intra and inter-molecular non-covalent bonds that
distort the shape and active site of the enzymes. Enzymes are denatured by high heat (above
40°C), alternation in the pH (too low or too high), heavy metals and high salt concentrations,
solvents and other reagents.
Solubility is the property of enzymes that allow them to be dissolved in water, salt (NaCI), diluted
glycerol and alcohol causing denaturation.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
76
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Precipitation
Precipitation
Molecular weight
Colloids
Enzyme physical
Enzyme activity
properties
Solubility
Biological catalyst
Denaturation
Figure 3.2 Physical properties of Enzymes
The colloidal nature of enzyme is the tendency of having little or no dialysis cross the
semipermeable membrane due to the large size or high molecular weight.
The biocatalyst property is the activity of enzymes in which very small quantities or a small
amount of enzyme is enough to convert a large quantity of substrate and remain unchanged after
the reaction.
Enzyme precipitation is the separation of enzymes for analysis using different aqueous or
ethanol solvents.
Molecular weights of enzymes are large protein biomolecules that hold polypeptide chains of
various amino acid sequences in enzymes having a high molecular weight.
Enzymatic activity is the general catalytic properties of an enzyme. It depends on factors such as
temperature, pH, and enzyme concentration and substrate concentration. Enzymes show the
highest activity at optimum temperature and pH that a low concentration of enzymes and
substrates slows down the enzymatic reaction.
B. Chemical properties of enzymes
Enzyme chemical properties are sensitivity, regulations, specificity, catalysis and reversibility
reactions (Figure 3.3).
Enzyme
reversibility
Enzyme
Enzyme
specificity
regulation
Enzymes
chemical
properties
Enzyme
Enzyme
sensitivity
catalyst
Figure 3.3 Chemical properties of enzymes
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
77
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Heat and PH Sensitivity is an enzymatic reaction to heat (temperatures) and pH (acidity and
basicity) activated at optimum levels.
Regulation is the process of controlling the activity of enzymes by activator and inhibitor
molecules.
Catalysis is the process of the acceleration of a chemical reaction by a catalyst. Enzymes are
biological catalysts that possess high catalytic efficiency. They can transform about 100-10,000
substrates per second. The reactions catalyzed by the enzymes show a 10³-10⁸ times faster reaction
rate in comparison to the non-catalyzed reactions.
Reversibility is the ability of enzymatic biomolecules to catalyze various metabolic (anabolic and
catabolic) reactions. It is the reaction to synthesize (build up new molecules or products) and
decompose (breaks down different products) in which enzymatic reactions catalyze biochemical
reactions in both forward and reverse directions.
Enzyme specificity is a property of the enzyme that describes
What is enzyme specificity?
how restrictive the enzyme is in its choice of substrate. A
completely specific enzyme would have only one substrate.
Specificity of enzymes:
Bond specificity is a relative specificity of enzymes, which indicates that enzymes are
specific for a bond.
Group specificity is a structural specificity of enzymes, which describes that enzymes are
specific for a group.
Substrate specificity is the feature of enzymatic activity where an enzyme acts only on
a particular substrate.
Optical specificity is when enzymes act on the substrate optical configuration.
Co-factor specificity is the enzymatic specificity to the substrate and co-factors.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
78
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Inquiry activity 3.2 Group discussion
Discuss the following properties of enzymes:
Differences in physical and chemical properties
Catalytic property
Specificity property
Reversibility property
PH sensitivity property
Heat sensitivity property
3.2.2 The function of enzymes
Enzymes help speed up chemical
Which enzymes convert carbohydrates, proteins,
lipids and nucleotides into their monomers?
reactions in the human body. They are
essential for respiration, digesting food,
the liver, muscle, and nerve function. Each cell in the human body contains thousands of enzymes
that provide help in facilitating chemical reactions within each cell. The turn over number of
molecules is the number of substrates converted by one enzyme molecule per second at saturated
(fully occupied) active sites.
Enzymes are markers of the states of various diseases like myocardial infraction, jaundice,
pancreatitis, cancer and neurodegenerative disorders etc. Each enzyme has an active site with a
unique shape that speeds up metabolism or chemical reactions in our bodies and builds substances
in all living things.
Examples of enzymes:
Sucrase breaks down a sugar called sucrose.
Lactase breaks down lactose, a kind of sugar found in milk products.
Carbohydrase breaks down carbohydrates into sugars.
Lipase breaks down fats into fatty acids.
Protease breaks down protein into amino acids
Enzyme acting on a substrate to produce product releasing enzyme for further use through steps 1-
4 (Figure 3.4).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
79
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
1
The substrate, sucrose,
Glucose
consists of glucose and
Fructose
fructose bonded together.
2
The substrate binds to the
enzyme, forming an
enzyme-substrate complex.
Bond
4
Products are released,
H2O
and the enzyme is free
to bind other substrates.
Active site
3
The binding of the
substrate and enzyme
places stress on the
Enzyme
glucose-fructose bond
and the bond breaks.
Figure 3.4 Enzyme functions
Enzymes perform their function by lowering a reaction's activation energy. Activation energy is
the energy required to start a reaction. The lower the activation energy, the faster a reaction
happens (Figure 3.5).
Without enzyme
Activation
energy
without
With enzyme
enzyme
Activation
energy with
Energy
enzyme
Substrates
Products
Reaction progress
Figure 3.5 Enzymatic reactions between glucose and oxygen
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
80
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Table 3.1 Some of enzymes in the body and their functions
Enzyme
Function
Lipases
Split fats found in the blood, gastric juices, pancreatic
secretions, intestinal juices adipose (fatty) tissues and
participate in digestions.
Amylase
Amylase exists in saliva and helps in changing starches
into sugars.
Maltase
Maltase exists in foods such as potatoes, pasta and beer
and saliva breaks the sugar maltose into glucose.
Trypsin
Found in the small intestine, breaks proteins down into
amino acids.
Lactase
Found in the small intestine, breaks lactose, the sugar in
milk, into glucose and galactose.
Helicase
Unwinds DNA
DNA Polymerase
An enzyme responsible for forming new copies of DNA in
the form of nucleic acids molecules
Acetyl
Breaks down the neurotransmitter acetylcholine in
cholinesterase
nerves and muscles
Lab-based activity 3.3 Experiment on the functions of enzymes
Objectives: learning by doing
Materials and chemicals
Knife, Potatoes and Hydrogen peroxide
Procedure
Cut potatoes into two slices.
Drop hydrogen peroxide on the potato slice and observe.
Students observe that it starts bubbling as a result of enzymatic
reactions.
Assessments
1. What causes the bubbling in the potato slices?
2. How does metabolic decomposition take place?
3. Identify which one is the enzyme, substrate, and product.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
81
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
3.3 Protein structures
After the successful completion of this
section, the student will be able to:
Self-question
Explain the structure of proteins.
Before starting this section, ask yourself this
question: "What do I know about protein
Determine the protein's primary,
structure and what do I want to learn from
secondary, and tertiary structures.
this section?"
List the levels of protein function
You have learnt about proteins in grade ten. In the above sections, we have discussed that
enzymes are proteins. Proteins have different structures. Protein structure is a polymer of amino
acids joined by peptide bonds with three-dimensional
What is protein structure?
arrangements of atoms in amino acid chain molecules. The protein
complex macromolecules have four structural levels:
1. Primary structure
2. Secondary structure
3. Tertiary structure
4. Quaternary structure
1. The primary structure of proteins
The primary structure of proteins makes up amino acid sequences based on the side-chain
substituents that differ by the chemical, physical, and structural properties. It is the sequence of
amino acids linked together to form a polypeptide chain through peptide bonds created during the
protein biosynthesis process (Figure 3.6).
Proteins with fewer than 50 sequences are peptides, and proteins with longer than 50 sequences
of amino acids are polypeptides.
Humans require 20 amino acids out of which 10 amino acids are synthesized in the human body,
and the rest 10 amino acids are obtained from diets.
Cells use 20 different standards of L-a-amino acids containing basic amino acids and acidic
carboxyl groups for protein construction.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
82
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
+
HN
Amino acid
Peptide bond
COO
PRIMARY STRUCTURE
Figure 3.6 Primary structures of proteins
2. The secondary structure of proteins
The secondary structure of a protein is a folded structure formed within a polypeptide due to
interactions between atoms of the backbone based on hydrogen bonding and containing a-helix
and ß-sheet types of strands.
2.1 The a - Helix
The a-helix is a right-handed coiled strand and the side-chain substituents of amino acid groups
extend to the outside and form hydrogen bonds with oxygen (C=O) in the strand with the hydrogen
of each (N-H) group of four amino acids to make the structure stable.
The a-Helix structure is one of the most common ways in which a polypeptide chain forms all
possible hydrogen bonds by twisting into a right-handed screw with the NH group of each amino
acid residue hydrogen-bonded to the CO of the adjacent turn of the helix.
2.2 ß-pleated sheet
The hydrogen bonding in the ß-sheet is
between the inter-strands and intra-strands
in which the sheet conformation of the ß-
sheet consists of pairs of strands lying side-
a helix
by-side.
Hydrogen bond
All peptide chains stretch out to nearly
ß pleated sheet
maximum extension, laid side by side and
ß strand, shown as a flat
arrow pointing toward
held together by intermolecular hydrogen
the carboxyl end
bonds forming pleated folds of drapery
Hydrogen bond
(Figure 3.7)
Figure 3.7 Secondary structures of a proteins
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
83
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
3. The tertiary structure of proteins
The tertiary protein structure is the three-
Hydrophobic
dimensional shape of protein molecules
interactions
CH
CH2
that bend and twist to achieve the
H3C
CH3
0
H2C
CH3
Hydrogen
H
CH
bond
maximum stability or the lowest energy
O
C=OH
CH2-S-S-CH₂
state. It is fashioned by many stabilizing
CH2
Disulfide bridge
forces due to the bonding interactions
0
between the side-chain groups of amino
CH₂-CH₂-CH₂-CH₂-NH]-O-C-CH₂
Ionic bond
acids (Figure 3.8).
Types of side chain interactions
Overall 3D shape (3° Structure)
Figure 3.8 Tertiary structure of protein
4. The quaternary structure of proteins
ß₂
ß₁
A protein quaternary structure is the
arrangement of multiple folded protein
subunits in a multi-subunit complex. It is the
association of several protein chains or
heme
group
subunits into closely packed arrangements
with their own primary, secondary, or
tertiary structures and held together by the
hydrogen bonds (Figure 3.9).
α₂
α₁
Figure 3.9 Hemoglobin showing the quaternary structure
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
84
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Table 3.2 Summary on protein structures
Proteins
Structures
Primary
The basic linear sequence level of amino acids comprising one
polypeptide chain
Secondary
The next level up of proteins with folding regions into the specific
structural patterns within one polypeptide chain
Tertiary
The next level up is the three-dimensional arrangement of all the
amino acids in a single polypeptide chain.
Quaternary
All polypeptide chains are held together by a specific spatial
arrangement and interactions.
Inquiry based activity 3.4 Drawing a big protein structure
poster
Learning by drawing
Procedure
1. Draw a large poster of the primary, secondary, tertiary and
quaternary protein structures and post it on the wall
2. Discuss in groups of five students the poster and present to your
class
Assessments
1. Describe the differences in protein structural levels
2. What are the subunits of protein structures?
3. How do protein subunits hold together?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
85
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
3.4 Enzyme substrate models
After the successful
completion of this section, the
Self-questioning
student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask
Identify enzyme substrate
yourself this question: "What do I
models
know about models of enzyme actions
Explain the active site of
and what do I want to learn from this
section?"
enzymes
Enzyme substrate models are models for enzyme substrate interaction describing that the shapes
of the active site and the substrate complement to fit into the binding active site perfectly.
3.4.1 Enzyme-substrate binding models
There are two different of enzyme-substrate binding
How do enzyme substrate models fit?
models that we will look at in this section: the lock and
key model and the induced fit model.
1. Enzyme lock and key model
The lock and key model is when enzyme active
Substrate
sites fill-in with a substrate to interact through
Active site
non-covalent interactions.
Key (substrate)
Lock (enzyme)
Enzyme
The model explains on how the enzymes must bind
to substrates before they catalyze a chemical
reaction. Once the reaction progresses to the
transition state and forms products, the active
Lock-key complex
Enzyme-substrate
site will not be able to accommodate changes
complex
(Figure 3.10).
Figure 3.10 Lock and Key model
2. Enzyme induced fit model
An enzyme induced fit model is the active site of an enzyme that elicits responses to the binding
substrate by inducing the substrate to take up transition even when the active site is not perfect
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
86
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
to perform the required product. Enzymes change shapes by induced fit upon substrate binding to
form enzyme substrate complexes. The amino acid side chains that make up the active site mold
into the precise positions enable the enzyme to perform its catalytic functions. The concept of
induced fit states that when a substrate binds to an enzyme, it brings about a change in the shape
of the enzyme, which either enhances or suppresses the activity of the enzyme.
Upon binding, the inducing process enables to elicit required energy for the reaction to move by
putting the active site under strain and making the transition stable (Figure 3.11).
Enzyme changes shape
Products
Substrate
slightly as substrate binds
Active site
Substrate entering
Enzyme/substrate
Enzyme/product
Products leaving
the active site of
complex
complex
the active site of
the enzyme
the enzyme
Figure 3.11 Induced fit enzyme model
3.4.2 Enzymatic transition state
An enzymatic transition state is the reaction rates of elementary chemical reactions and assumes
chemical equilibrium between reactants and activated transitions. It describes how the chemical
reactions are taking place qualitatively in the activated enzyme-substrate complex of absolute
reaction rates. The reactive state of substrate binding catalysis is corresponding to the maximum
reaction activated and its state of transition (Figure 3.12). Where:
E = Enzyme
S = Substrate
ES = Enzyme substrate combined
ES* = Enzyme substrate complexes
EP = Enzyme product,
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
87
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Transition
state
Energy
ES⁺
Substrates
ES
Binding
EP
Products
Catalysis
Reaction coordinate
Figure 3.12 Enzymatic transitional states
Inquiry based activity 3.5 Practical activities
Learning enzyme-substrate models by doing
Construct the shapes of the enzyme "Lock and Key" and "Induced
Fit" substrates.
Models from locally available materials and post them on the walls of
your class.
3.5
Enzyme regulation
After the successful completion of
Self-Questioning
this section, the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask
Explain enzyme regulation
yourself this question: "What do I
Distinguish activator and inhibitor
know about types of enzymes and
enzymes
how their action is regulated? What
Describe substrate and bonding
do I want to learn from this section?"
Enzyme regulation is a control system for enzymatic activities in which enzymes are turned "on" or
"off" depending on the organisms need. It is adapting enzymatic activities by other molecules or
metabolic cells to either increase or decrease the activities.
What are the enzyme regulations?
A regulatory enzyme is the one in a biochemical pathway
through which it responds to the presence of certain other
biomolecules and regulates the pathway activity. It requires an extra activation process to pass
through some modifications and functions. Regulatory enzymes are of two types, allosteric enzymes
and covalently modulated enzymes, and we will look at these in more detail in this section.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
88
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
1. Allosteric enzymes
Allosteric enzymes are enzymes that have additional binding sites for effector molecules other than
the active site that cause conformational changes, leading to changes of catalytic properties.
Allosteric enzymes contain two binding sites called active site/catalytic site and allosteric
site/regulatory site for binding effectors and substrates respectively. Effectors are small
molecules (inhibitor or activator) modulating the enzyme activity and function through reversible
non-covalent binding of a regulatory metabolite in the allosteric site or non-active site.
Effectors lead to conformational changes in a concrete part of the enzyme that affect the overall
conformation of the active site, causing modifications in the activity of the reaction.
Active site/Catalytic
site
Substrate
Allosteric
enzyme
Allosteric
effector
Allosteric site/Regulatory
site
Figure 3.13 Allosteric enzyme
2. Genetic and covalent modification
The genetic and covalent modification modifies the protein surface and facilitates intracellular
delivery. Genetic modification of enzymes is to improve the properties of enzymes and gain active
and inactive forms.
Covalent modulated enzymes are active and inactive forms of the enzymes altered due to covalent
modification of structures catalyzed by other enzymes. Covalent modifications are enzyme-catalyzed
alterations of synthesized proteins by the addition or removal of chemical groups.
Modifications can target a single type of amino acid or multiple amino acids and will change the
chemical properties of the site. Enzyme regulation occurs by the addition or elimination of some
molecules attaching to the enzyme protein.
Examples:
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
89
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Phosphorylation is the addition of phosphate groups to proteins. It is the most frequent
regulatory modification mechanism in our cells (Figure 3.14).
Phosphorylase b
Phosphorylase a
R State
2 ATP
2 ADP
Really ON
OFF
PP1
2
ATP
2 ADP
T State
ON
Really OFF
PP1
=
active site
= phosphorylation
Figure 3.14 Enzyme phosphorylation
3. Enzyme inhibition
Enzyme inhibition is a decrease in enzyme activity by enzyme inhibitors. Enzyme inhibitors are
molecule that binds to an enzyme and blocks its activity. There are two types. These are reversible
inhibitors and irreversible inhibitors (Figure 3.15).
Irreversible inhibitor: is a substance that permanently blocks the action of an enzyme.
Reversible inhibitor: inactivates an enzyme through noncovalent easily reversed interactions.
Reversible inhibitors can be competitive and uncompetitive.
Competitive
Inhibition
Reversible
Inhibition
Uncompetitive
Inhibition
Enzyme
Inhibition
Non
Irreversible
competitive
Inhibition
Inhibition
Figure 3.15 Enzyme inhibition
1. Competitive inhibitor is a molecule that blocks the binding of the substrate to the active
site (Figure 3.16).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
90
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Inhibitor binds to
the active site
+
+
NO
REACTION
enzyme
substrate
inhibitor
enzyme-inhibitor
Directly blocks
complex
the active site
Figure 3.16 Competitive inhibition
2. Noncompetitive inhibitor binds to the enzyme already bound the substrate and
decreases the efficacy of the enzyme.
3. Uncompetitive inhibitor binds only to the enzyme substrate complex, but not to the free
enzyme. It occurs in reactions with two or more substrates or products and slows enzyme
reactions by binding the substrate to each other (Figure 314).
Inquiry based activity 3.6 Discuss in pairs and
present to the class
Learning enzymes through discussions
1. Enzyme active site, passive site, allosteric site
2. Enzyme activators
3. Enzyme inhibitors
4. Binding and blocking of molecules
3.6
Types of enzymes
After the successful completion of this section, the
student will be able to:
List types enzymes
Describe the function of each type of enzyme
Define activities of each type of enzyme
Enzymes that catalyze chemical reactions can be classified into various types. Enzyme types are
based on how enzymes that bind specific molecules together to form new molecules and enzymes
that break specific molecules apart into separate molecules.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
91
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
3.6.1 Enzyme structural classification
The structural classification of enzymes deals with the separation of an enzyme into simple
proteins (active) and conjugated proteins (holoenzymes).
Then, the conjugated protein part (holoenzyme) is divided into the non-protein part (cofactor) and
the protein part (apoenzyme: inactive) groups.
How do you classify enzymes?
Finally, the non-protein part (cofactor) separates into the firmly
attached metal ion (prosthetic group) and the loosely attached
vitamin B complex (coenzyme) groups (Figure 3.17).
Enzyme
Simple protein
Conjugated protein
(Active)
(Holoenzyme)
Non-protein part
Protein part
(Cofactor)
(Apoenzyme: Inactive)
Firmly attached
Loosely attached
(usually metal ion)
(usually vitamin B
(Prothetic group)
complex)
(Coenzyme)
Figure 3.17 Structural classifications of enzymes
3.6.2 Basic classification of enzymes
Enzymes are composed of six classes based on what and how they react, the types of reactions
they catalyzed, and the end suffix "-ase". The followings are basic classes of enzymes.
1. Oxidoreductases are a class of enzyme that catalyzes oxido-reduction reactions. It
catalyzes the transfer of electrons from one molecule (oxidant) to other molecule
(reductant) reactions in the following pattern: AT + B A+B where A is the
oxidant and B is the reductant.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
92
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
2. Transferase is an enzyme that transfers functional groups like methyl from one
donor molecule to acceptor molecule.
3. Hydrolases are enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of various bonds.
4. Lyases are enzymes that cleave bonds by other means rather than hydrolysis or
oxidation in which two or more substrates are involved in one reaction.
5. Isomerases are a general class of enzymes that convert molecules from one isomer
to another isomer.
6. Ligases are enzymes that catalyze the joining of two molecules with concomitant
hydrolysis of the di-phosphate bond in ATP.
Lab activity 3.7: tests for enzyme reactions
Objectives: test the reaction of enzymes in apples
Materials: an apple or banana fruits and a knife
Procedures:
Cut an apple into two slices and wait for about 10 minutes and
observe
Observe until it turns into brownish showing pigmentations
Control experiment:
Cover the other half cut slice of the apple by plastic sheet immediately
Compare the color change of covered apple slice with the exposed one
Does the covered slice change its color?
Assessments:
1. What gives it the brownish color?
2. What is enzyme catalyzing?
3. What is the name of the enzyme found in apples?
4. Why the covered slice did not change pigments?
5. What is the difference between the covered and exposed apple
slices?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
93
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
3.7
Factors affecting enzyme action
After the successful completion
Self-Questioning
of this section, student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask
List factors affecting enzyme actions
yourself this question: "What do I
Describe how each factor affects
know about factors that affect
enzyme action
enzyme actions, enzyme kinetics,
Discuss on how to optimize the
enzyme application, and what do
factors
I want to learn from this
section?"
Enzymes work best within specific temperature and pH
What are the factors that affect
enzyme action and how?
ranges and at optimal conditions (the condition under
which particular enzyme is most active), an increase or
decrease in the conditions of these factors affects the functions of enzymes.
There are varieties of factors that affect the activity of enzymes: temperature, pH, inhibitors,
activators, radiation, water, enzyme, substrate, and end-product concentrations (Figure 3.18).
Radiation
Temperature
Activators
Water
Factors Affecting
End- products
Enzyme Activities
pH
Inhibitors
Substrate
Enzyme
concentration
concentration
Figure 3.18 Factors affecting enzymes' activity
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
94
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
3.7.1 Description on factors affecting enzymatic actions
Temperature: while all enzymes work best within the specific ranges of optimum temperatures,
low or high temperature causes an enzyme to lose its activity and ability to bind a substrate and
denatured. Once enzymes denatured, they cannot be renatured.
Initial Rate of Reaction
inactive
denatured
optimum
0
10
20
40
50
60
Temperature (°C)
Figure 3.19 Enzyme reactions to temperature
1. PH: enzymes function at optimum pH (the potential of hydrogen ions) that ranges from too
low (strong acid) to too high (too alkaline) pH. Such extreme temperatures cause an
enzyme to lose its ability to bind into a substrate.
Initial Rate of Reaction
optimum
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
pH
Figure 3.20 Enzyme reactions and pH
Substrate concentrations: enzymes require a maximum limit of substrate concentration to
bind.
1. Radiation damages enzyme activities by reducing in enzymatic efficiency and creating
disorders in the macromolecules.
2. Water: affects the performance of enzymes' activity beyond its optimum level.
3. End product (Feedback) inhibition is a cellular control mechanism in that the end
product inhibit enzyme's activity. In feedback inhibition, the endproduct binds to the
allosteric site of the enzyme and change the structure of the active site. This prevents the
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
95
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
enzyme to perform its activity. Due to feedback inhibition, a cell is able to know whether the
amount of a product is enough for its subsistence or not.
Inhibition of the pathway
Substrate
Intermediate
Intermediate
End
substrate
substrate
product
A
B
Enzyme 1
Enzyme 2
Enzyme 3
Figure 3.21 Feedback inhibition
Example: The drug Tipranivir used to treat HIV blocks the activity of a viral genome enzyme to
make more copies as a reversible inhibitor.
Lab activity 3.8: tests for the functions of enzymes
Objectives: test for enzyme sensitivity to heat
Materials: hydrogen peroxide (H202), Potatoes, a knife and cooking
utensils
Procedure:
Take two slices of potatoes, boil hard one slice and leave raw the other one
Drop hydrogen peroxide on boiled and raw potato slices
Observe and compare the enzyme reactions of both potato slices
Assessments:
1. Identify reaction differences between the boiled and raw potato slices
2. In which of the potato slices is, enzymes denatured?
3. Did high temperature affect the activity of enzymes?
3.8
Enzyme kinetics
After the successful completion of this
section, students will be able to:
Explain enzyme kinetics
Describe the steps enzyme kinetic
How enzyme kinetics works?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
96
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Enzyme kinetics describes the rates of chemical reactions that
How do you measure the
are catalyzed by enzymes and the binding affinities of
enzymatic rates of reactions?
substrates, inhibitors and the maximal catalytic rates
achieved. Enzyme kinetics explains that enzymes speed up reactions by lowering the activation
energy of the reactants and turning them into products. Hence, the concentration of enzyme and
substrates determines the rate of the reactions or production volumes per unit time.
One of the most known models of enzyme kinetics is the Michaelis-Menten formula that takes
a form of equation describing the rate of enzymatic reaction by relating the reaction rate, rate of
formation of product to the concentration of substrate.
The model explains the relationship between the rate of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction [V₁], the
concentration of substrate [S] and two constants, Vmax and Km with the following equation.
Vₘₐₓ[S]
V₁ =
{Kₘ + [S]}
Where:
4
V,
max
V₁ = the initial velocity/rate reaction
3
Vmax = the maximal velocity/maximum rate of reaction
Rate
2
½ V max
[S] = the substrate concentration
1
KM = substrate concentration at half-maximal velocity
Kₘ
0
0
1
2
3
4
(Michaelis constant).
Concentration
Figure3.22 Enzyme kinetics as a function of concentration
Inquiry activity 3.9 investigating effect of inhibitors
Be in groups and find what happens to the rate of reactions and the graph in the
presence of inhibitors (competitive and non-competitive inhibitors) from the library or
the internet, discuss and present it in class.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
97
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Lab-based activity 3.10 Experiment on enzyme reaction rates
Objectives: test for enzyme reactions
Materials: beef liver, Potato, Carrot, 3 Test tubes, H2O2 and Knife
Procedures:
Label the test tubes as A for beef liver, B for potato C for Carrot
Chop the beef liver, potato and carrot into small pieces and put the chopped
sample of beef liver in (A), Potato in (B) and in Carrot (C) test the tubes
Add about 2ml of hydrogen peroxide to each test tube equally ml)
Observe the rate of enzyme kinetic reactions of each test tube and measure the
height of bubbles and speeds (time rate)
Assessments:
1. What were the reaction rates in test tubes A, B, and C?
2. Which of the reaction was the fastest?
3. Why was the reaction in A the highest?
3.9 Application of enzymes in industries and their
benefits
After the successful completion of this section, the
student will be able to:
Explain applications of enzymes
List areas of enzyme applications
Identify and discuss locally applied enzymes
Application of enzymes is the use of enzymatic
What are the uses of enzymes?
biochemical reactions for chemical conversion process
that are driving forces of great change for productivity of various industries. Enzyme protein
catalytic activity is efficient enough (100s to 1000s) of times higher than that of inorganic catalyst.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
98
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
3.9.1 Uses of enzyme application
The application of enzymes are widely used in food, feed, textile, papermaking, leather and
detergents, pharmaceutical and other industrial productions.
Examples:
1. Enzymes break down larger complex molecules into simpler molecules in our body where they
can be used to fuel our digestive systems and cellular respirations.
2. Most enzymes used for food industry were extracted from the internal organs of animals and
plants, but now most enzymes are obtained by microbial fermentation.
3. Enzymes cause billions of chemical reactions to happen at lightning speed inside the cells of our
body.
4. Enzymes improve the utilization of feed rate of starch, protein, and minerals and degrade the
anti-nutritional factors in animal feed, prevent animal indigestion and improve feed digestibility.
5. In the pharmaceutical industry, enzymes are used in drugs, antibiotics, household products to
speed up chemical reactions and synthesis.
6. Enzymes are powerful tools in sustaining a clean environment in several ways.
7. Washing powders are enzymes used to break down protein, starch and fat stains on clothes
Table 3.3 the applications and functions of enzymes
Cellulases
Biofuel industry
Breakdown cellulose into sugars and
ferment to produce cellulosic ethanol
Ligninase
Biofuel industry
Pre-treatment of biomass for biofuel
production
Protease,
Biological
Protease removes protein, amylase
Amylase, Lipase
detergent
removes starch, and lipase removes fat
or oil stains from laundry and dishware
Mannanase
Biological
Remove food stains from the common
detergent
food additive guar gum
Betaglucanase
Brewing industry
Improve beer filtration
Papain
Culinary uses
Tenderize meat for cooking
Rennin
Dairy industry
It hydrolyses protein in the manufacture
of cheese
Trypsin
Food processing
Manufacture hypo-allergenic baby foods
Cellulases,
Food processing
Clarify fruit juices.
Pectinase
Nuclease,
DNA
Molecular biology
Uses
restriction
digestion
and
Ligase,
polymerase chain reaction to create
Polymerase
recombinant DNA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
99
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Activity 3.11: Discussion
Discuss the applications and uses of enzymes and fill-in the table
Enzymes
Enzymes and substrates
Potential application
Arginase
Ligninase
Lipase
Mannaninase
Papain
Proteinase
3.10 Malting in Ethiopian tradition
After the successful completion of this section, the student will
be able to:
Explain the what and why of malting for alcohol drinks
List some of the locally prepared types of malting
Define the nature and function of malting for alcoholic production
Malting (sprouting) is a widely applied traditional technology.
How do you make malt?
It is the process of steeping, germinating and drying grain to
convert it into malt.
Malting is the limited controlled germination of grains in moist air, which results in the mobilization
of amylases, proteases and other enzymes that hydrolyze and modify the grain components and its
structure.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
100
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
3.10.1 Steps of modern malting
There are three steps to modern malting,
temperature and moisture levels with
steeping, germinating and kilning, and these
regulated airflow and the uniformity of water
will be discussed in this section.
spray enables achieve a high quality and
consistent germination process.
1. Steeping
Malting is partly an art and partly a science
Steeping is the process of cleaning the grain
that can be gauged in the degree of
kernels and bringing it to life with water and
modification with the eyes, sense of smell and
oxygen by immersing it in the water and air
hands.
for a specified time period. The water
activates naturally the existing enzymes in
3. Kilning (Heating)
grains and stimulates the production of
enzymes in which water temperature and
Kilning is the heating treatment of germinated
aeration are vital for producing high quality
grain to dry the green malt and prevent from
malt. Although the process can vary
further germination. If germination continued,
depending on the grain type and size, malting
the kernel would keep growing and the
occurs over a period of 24-48 hours.
growing plant would use all of the starch
reserves needed by the brewer. Removing
The steeping will be complete when the
moisture from the germinated grain is initially
barley has reached a sufficient moisture level
for withering. Additional drying further
to allow a uniform breakdown of starches and
reduces the moisture content and prepares
proteins. So starch and protein hydrolyzing
the malt for flavor and color development.
enzymes are activated during steeping
The kilning process achieves enzymatic
activity and friability, a wide ranges of malt
2. Germinating
colors and flavors and distinctive ales and
Germinating is to continue the process with
lagers.
the growth and modification of the grain.
3.10.2 Why is malting for?
Rootlets emerge from the kernel to the
outside of the grain and within the outer husk
Malting aims to convert or modify the physical
and a shoot or acrospires grows.
structure of the barley grain and allow
Modification is the breakdown of protein and
synthesis or activation of a series of enzymes
carbohydrates, resulting in the opening up of
to produce malt for uses in the subsequent
the seeds' starch reserves within four to six
purposes (brewing, distilling or food
days as Green Malt. The control of
production).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
101
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Barley is the most common cereal used for
amylase, protease (breaks down proteins)
the production of malt because of its high
and beta-amylase.
starch-to-protein ratio and adhering
The main purpose of malting is to produce
husk that contribute to the economic yield,
enzymes such as the α-amylase and ß-
ease of processing and production.
amylase useful for modifying and converting
grains' starches into simple sugar
Barley malting in Ethiopia is practiced for the
(monosaccharide),
complex
sugar
production of traditional beer (Tella) and uses
(disaccharides) and malt sugar (maltose) and
as in ingredient in porridge making or drinks.
higher sugars called maltodextrines. Then
after, the yeast uses these monosaccharides
The most common enzymes used in the
to to produce alcohol by alcoholic
malting process are beta-glucanase, alpha-
fermentation.
3.10.3 Traditional malting for local alcohol production
Traditional malting is the process of sprouting barley grains
How do people produce malt?
for the production of enzymes (a-amylase and ß-amylase)
to process fermentation drinks such as Tella.
The steps of traditional malting process include:
1. Soaking barley grains (steeping)
2. Germinating (sprouting)
3. Kilning (Heating) the malt
The most commonly used grains for malting are
barley, maize, millet, sorghum and the like. However,
barley is the most preferable grain to produce local
drinks in local malting (Figure 3.23).
Figure 3.23 Malted barley
The main purpose of malt production is to produce alcoholic beverages drinks for consumptions and
income generation to support the livelihood of the people. Malting requires raw materials like barley
for fermentation of alcoholic drinks like Tella.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
102
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
People in Ethiopia produces local drinks like Booka, Cheka, Keribo, Korefe, Shameta, Borde and Teji
in different occasions (holidays, wedding ceremonies, and celebrations).
Do people in your area use malting to produce
such types of local drinks?
Inquiry based activity 3.12 Malting practices in the
classroom with groups of five students
Exercise malting practices
Materials
Barley seeds and Water
Procedure
Make a malt of barley seeds
Present the steps of malting to the class
Assessment
1. What happened to the barley seeds?
2. How did you halt the malt's from further sprouting?
3. What is the purposes of malting?
3.11 Renowned Biochemists in Ethiopia
After the successful completion of this section, students will
be able to:
Explain what a biochemist is
Describe the work of a biochemist
List renowned Ethiopian biochemists
A biochemist is a scientist who studies the chemical processes transformations in living organisms
including DNA, proteins and cell parts. A biochemist also conducts research on how certain chemical
reactions happen in cells, tissues and organisms and record the effects of products in food additive
and medicines.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
103
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
The study of biochemistry deals with all aspects of the immune systems, expressions of genes,
isolation, analysis and synthesis of products. It also concerned with studying mutations that leads
to cancers, scientific procedures used to manage and monitor laboratory works.
Biochemists also conduct research in the field of agriculture, in the interactions between herbicides
with plants. They also examine the relationships between or among compounds that determine the
ability to inhibit growth and evaluate the toxicological effects.
Inquiry based activity 3.13 Group discussion
List any renowned biochemists you know with pertinent biography
Discuss the roles of biochemists in research and take notes
Unit three summary
Enzymes are protein biochemical catalysts that speed up chemical reactions to keep up metabolisms
without affecting the products and the nature of the catalyst itself. An enzyme is a substance that
acts as a catalyst in living organisms, regulating the rate at chemical reactions and proceeds
unaffected in the process.
Enzyme active site increase reaction rates by lowering energy activations. However, some enzyme
reactions convert substrates to products in millions of times faster speeds. In contrast, enzymes are
inactive, destroyed or denatured at very low and higher temperature and PH.
Enzyme substrate complex is a temporary molecule formed in perfect contact of enzymes with
binding substrate active sites to converts into products. Substrate concentrations, enzyme
concentrations and inhibitors are also factors affecting the properties enzymes.
Many enzymes require cofactors (coenzyme) to become complex holoenzyme with apoenzyme
before exerting catalytic activities (apoenzyme + coenzyme = holoenzyme). Cofactors are non-
protein molecules that make enzymes active on binding to none-proteins. Enzymes require dietary
minerals, vitamins and cofactors to function, make products that act as the substrate for the next
side-product and remove wastes from cells. The entire active complex of an enzyme is a
holoenzyme made up of apoenzyme (protein portions), coenzyme (cofactor) and prosthetic
groups of metal-ion activators.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
104
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT 3: ENZYMES
Most enzymes are proteins and not all proteins are enzymes whereby the non-protein parts
attached to the protein as apoenzyme (cofactors).
Molecules that increase the activity of enzymes are activators and molecules that decrease the
activity of enzymes are inhibitors. Both activators and inhibitors of enzymes are molecules that
turn up or down the activity of enzymes by binding with molecules of enzymes.
Regulatory enzymes exist at high concentrations and their activity increases or decreases depending
on changes in substrate concentrations.
Unit three review questions
Part I. True or false items
Instructions: write true if the statement is correct and false if the statement is not correct.
1. Enzymes are biocatalyst proteins.
2. The rate of enzymatic reaction increases with increased rate of substrate concentration.
3. Inhibitor is a molecule that reduces the rate of enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
4. If you drop H2O2 on slice of boiled potato, enzymatic reactions are very active.
5. The suffix "ase" indicates that a molecule is an enzyme.
6. All enzymes are protein molecules, but not all proteins are enzymes.
7. Our saliva contains an enzyme amylase.
8. Enzymes can react beyond the optimum pH.
9. Activators are molecules that increase the activity of enzymes.
10. Enzymes are drugs in the pharmaceutical industry.
Part II. Multiple-choice test Items
Instructions: Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
1. What is the optimum temperature of enzyme activity in human body?
A. 5- 30 °C
C. 25 45
B. 35 75 °C
D. 37 °C
2. What is the first discovered enzyme?
A. Lactase
C. Diastase
B. Ligases
D. Hydrolase
3. An enzyme acts best at a particular pH called
A. Catalytic pH
C. Optimum pH
B. Abnormal pH
D. None
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
105
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
4. The two enzyme specificity models are
A. Lock and Key
C. A and B
B. Induced fit model
D. All
5. Which of the following statement is incorrect?
A. Enzymes are protein in nature
C. Enzymes are thermo-labile
B. Enzymes is colloidal in nature
D. Enzymes are inorganic catalyst
6. What is enzyme kinetics?
A. The rate of reaction
C. Acidic reactions
B. Base reactions
D. Heat reaction
7. What is the molecular weight of enzymes?
A. Large protein biomolecules
C. A and B
B. 200 to 300 peptide bonds
D. all
8. Enzymes that have additional binding sites
A. Allosteric enzymes
C. Transition state
B. Enzyme rates
D. None
9. Enzyme activity is dependent on
A. The folding of a proteins
C. Sensitivity to the pH and salt concentration
B. Sensitivity to the temperature
D. All
10. What is the formula for the rate enzyme kinetic mechanism?
A.
S
TI
ES
TI
ES*
TI
EP
TI
E+P
C.S TV ES TJ ES TV EP TV E+P
B. S + ES
TI
ES*
EP TV E + P
D.
S
TJ
ES
TI
ES*
EP TV P
11. The three steps of malting are
A. Germinating, Steeping and Kilning
C. Steeping, Germinating and Kilning
B. Kilning, Germinating and Steeping
D. None of the steps is correct
12. An enzyme that carries and transfers methyl groups from one compound donor
(Cofactor) to another compound (acceptor) is
A. Transferase
C. Isomerases
B. Lyases
D. Translocases
Part III. Short answers
Instruction: give short answer for the following questions
1. What are the five types of enzymes and their applications (uses)
2. How does the function of the active site of an enzyme differ from that of an allosteric site?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
106
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
