Unit Five: The human body systems
Immune
Digestive
Nervous
system
system
system
Cardiovascular
system
Musculoskeletal
system
Human
body
systems
Integumentary
system
Excretory
system
Respiratory
system
Endocrine
Reproductive
system
system
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
174
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
Unit learning outcomes
After the successful completion of this unit, the student will be able to:
1. Explain the structure and function of the musculoskeletal system.
2. Identify the structures and functions of the male and female reproductive
systems.
3. Explain ways to prevent or reduce the spread of STIS/ HIV.
4. Explain family planning strategies.
5. Examine the effect of alcohol use, chewing Khat, cannabis and other drug
uses on the normal functioning of the musculoskeletal and reproductive
systems.
6. Identify harmful practices that affect human reproductive health.
The human body is a biological machine made of body systems and groups of organs that work
together to produce and sustain life. The human organ systems include the integumentary system,
skeletal system, muscular system, lymphatic system, respiratory system, digestive system, nervous
system, endocrine system, cardiovascular system, urinary system and reproductive systems.
However, in this unit, we shall discuss only the musculoskeletal and reproductive systems.
5.1. Human Musculoskeletal Systems
At the end of this section, the
Self-Questioning
student will be able to:
Explain the musculoskeletal systems
Before starting this section, ask
List the muscle and skeletal systems
yourself this question: "what do I
Explain
the
function
of
know about the musculoskelal
musculoskeletal systems
system and what do | want to
learn from this section?'
The human musculoskeletal systems are organ systems that give humans the ability to move.
Muscles and skeletal systems are musculoskeletal systems that provide the human body with
shapes and forms and protect the vital organs of musculoskeletal systems. Musculoskeletal systems
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
175
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
bind organs together, support stability, allow bodily movements and produce blood cells for the
body (bone marrow) and stores minerals (Figure 5.1).
Musculoskeletal system is a body structure made up of bones of the skeletons, muscles, cartilages,
tendons, ligaments, joints and connective tissues
Musculoskeletal system is a body structure made up of bones of the skeleton, muscles, cartilage,
tendons, ligaments, joints, and connective tissues.
The human musculoskeletal system comprises:
1. Muscles keep bones in place and enable movements.
2. Joints and cartilages connect bones to bones and prevent them from rubbing against
each other.
3. Tendons connect muscles to bones.
4.
Connective tissues: internal skeletal system parts favoring positions and movements
5. Ligaments are fibrous connective tissues that attach bone to bone.
Cartilage
Muscles
Bones
Tendons
Joints and
Ligaments
Figure 5.1 Human musculoskeletal structures
5.1.1. Types of muscles
The human muscular systems include about 700 muscles
What are the functions of muscles?
that make up half of the human body weight and are
responsible for the movement of the human body.
Human muscles are discrete organs made of skeletal muscle tissues, blood vessels, tendons and
nerves found attached to the bones of the skeletal system.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
176
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE: THE HUMAN BODY SYSTEMS
The human body is composed of three types of muscles:
1. Cardiac muscles
2. Skeletal muscles
3. Smooth muscles
1. The Cardiac muscles
T he cardiac muscle (heart muscle) forms a thick middle layer between the outer layer of the heart
wall (pericardium), and the inner layer (endocardium) with blood supplied to circulate via the
coronary circulation.
The cardiac muscle is an involuntary striated
muscle composed of tissues of the wall of the
heart called myocardium.
Individual cardiac muscle cells are joined
together by intercalated discs and are encased
Cardiac Muscle
by collagen fibers to form the extracellular
Mitochondria
matrix (Figure 5.2).
Cardiac muscle
cells
Myofibrils
Intercalated
disc
Figure 5.2 Cardiac muscles
2. The Skeletal Muscle
The skeletal muscles arranged in opposing systems around joints are attached to bones and are
composed of 30 to 40% of total body mass (Figure 5.3). They allow the body to perform a wide
range of movements and functions such as voluntary controlled systems on works. The skeletal
muscle fibers innervated by a single motor axon are called a motor unit.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
177
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Fascicle
Sarcolemma
Perimysium
Muscle fiber (cell)
Tendon
Epimysium
Myofibril
Motor
neuron
Deep fascia
Blood vessels
Endomysium
Blood capillary
Figure 5.3 Skeletal muscles
3. The Smooth Muscles
The smooth muscles are involuntary, non-striated and unconsciously controlled muscles that control
the flow of substances within the lumens.
The Smooth muscles are muscles found in the walls of hollow organs: the stomach, intestine,
bladder, uterus and walls of passageways of the blood and lymph vessels, respiratory tracts, urinary
and reproductive systems, in the eyes and the ciliary muscles (Figure 5.4). The smooth muscle cells
of the skins are the erector of pili causing hair to stand erect in response to cold, heat or fear.
stomach
smooth muscle cells
Figure 5.4 Smooth muscles
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
178
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE: THE HUMAN BODY SYSTEMS
Lab-based activity 5.1: Laboratory works
Objectives: observe and identify three cell types
Materials
Microscopes, cardiac, skeletal, and smooth muscles specimens, and Knives.
Methods
Prepare specimen for all the three muscle types
Set a wet mounting of each specimen taken from each muscle cell
Observe the specimen samples under the microscope
Write a lab report on the protocol.
Assessments
What are the differences among the three types of muscles?
Draw a diagram of each type of muscle
Explain the relationships between the structures and functions of muscles.
5.1.2. Mechanism of actions of skeletal muscles
What are mechanisms of action?
Mechanisms of action of muscles are the process of
activations of muscle cells to generate tension
work together to generate muscle
or contract for movements.
contractions and movement.
Skeletal muscles are bundles of muscle fibers
Myosin is a type of molecular motor that
with single large cells formed by the fusion of
converts chemical energy released from ATP
many individual cells during development.
into mechanical energy used to pull the actin
Most of the cytoplasm consists of myofibrils of
filaments along causing muscle fibers to
cylindrical bundles of two types of filaments of
contract and generate.
thick filaments of myosin and thin filaments of
Actin filaments, together with myosin
actin where each is each organized as a chain
are responsible for many types of cell
of contractile unit called sarcomeres.
movements. The most noticeable form of
Actin and myosin are both proteins found in
movement is muscle contraction, which has
every type of muscle tissue where the thick
provided the model for understanding actin-
myosin filaments and thin actin filaments
myosin interactions and the motor activity of
myosin molecules.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
179
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Troponin is a complex system of three
preventing contraction. The binding of myosin
regulatory proteins integral to muscle
to actin causes cross bridge formation and
contraction in skeletal muscles (Figure 5.5).
contraction of the muscle.
In a relaxed muscle, tropomyosin blocks the
attachment site for the myosin cross bridge
Figure 5.6 Types muscle contractions
Tropomyosin
Troponin
Actin
Relaxation: relaxation
occurs
when
Isometric contraction
Myosin
Muscle contracts
but does not shorten
Myosin filament
Image from Sigma-Aldrich
No movement
Figure 5.5 Actin and myosin in action
(a)
Concentric contraction
Mechanism of actions in muscles:
1. Muscle activation: the motor nerve
Movement
stimulates an action potential (impulse)
to pass down a neuron to the
(b)
neuromuscular junction and stimulates
Eccentric contraction
the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release
calcium into the muscle cell.
2. Muscle contraction: Calcium floods
Movement
into the muscle cells bound with
(c)
troponin allowing actin and myosin to
bind, in which the actin and myosin
stimulation of the nerve stops and pumps
cross bridges bind and contract, using
Calcium back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum
ATP as energy that all cells use to fuel
breaking the link between actin and myosin.
activity.
Actin and myosin return to unbound state
3. Recharging: ATP is re-synthesized (re-
causing the muscle to relax, but relaxation
manufactured), allowing actin and
failure
myosin to maintain a strong binding
state.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
180
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
occurs if ATP is no longer available. In natural movements, the activity of locomotors and muscle
contractions is multifaceted to produce changes in length and tension in a time-varying manner.
Muscle contraction occurs when the two-inter-digitizing filaments, the thin actin and the thick
myosin filaments, slide pass each other.
There are three types of muscle contractions:
1. Isometric: does not change the length (Figure 5.6a).
2. Concentric: shortening the muscle (Figure 5.6b).
3. Eccentric: lengthening the muscle fibers (Figure 5.6c).
5.1.3. The human axial and appendicular skeletons
The human skeletal system is a complex structure with two
What are human skeletons?
distinct divisions composed of fused and individual bones
supported by ligaments, tendons, muscles, and cartilage.
Humans are born with over 300 bones, but many of the bones fuse between birth and the end of
maturity and remain with the average number of 206 bones in an adult skeleton.
Bones have three different layers made from three different kinds of cells. The general structure of
bones is a combination of a protein called collagen and a molecule called calcium phosphate that
weave together to form a strong and lightweight structure.
Bones are composed of four types of cells. These are:
Osteoblasts involve in new bone formation.
Osteocytes are mature bone cells that help to mature bones of newborns.
Osteoclasts break down bones and help them to form into correct shapes.
Osteoprogenitor are important in repair of fracture.
Based on their shapes, there are four different types of bones in the human body:
1. Long bones have long and thin shapes.
2. Short bones have squat and cubed shapes.
3. Flat bones have flattened and broad surfaces.
4. Irregular bones have shapes that do not conform to the above three types.
5. Sesamoid bones are small, flat bones and are shaped similarly to a sesame seed
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
181
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Table 5.1 General classifications of bones
Types of bones
Names and parts
Long bones
Femur and tibia (bones longer than wide)
Short bones
Carpus (bone of wrists)
Flat bones
Cranium (skull), ilium (pelvis), sternum, and ribs
Irregular bones
Vertebrae, sacrum, coccyx / temporal, mandible, palatine,
nasal, etc.
Sesamoid bones
Small sesame seed-like bones that are embedded in the
muscles
Functions of bones:
1. Support body and helping move: bones hold up body stability, keep from collapsing to the
ground, movement and body posture.
2. Protecting the internal organs: bones keep organs to be safe from hard impacts, punctures,
and other forms of injury (ribs protect the heart and lungs, and the skull protects the brain)
3. Producing blood cells: certain types of bones make platelets, red blood cells, and white blood
cells inside bones.
4. Storing and releasing fat: certain bones store fat and release when body needs energy.
5. Storing and releasing minerals: bones store necessary minerals when the levels are too
high in the blood and release minerals when the body needs them (calcium, phosphorus,
and vitamin D).
Inquiry based activity 5.2 Discussion
Visit a traditional bone healer (Wogesha), discuss the following and
present them to the class.
Traditional healing process, techniques and experience of bone fractures
Local materials used and cares
Compare the indigenous knowledge and orthopedic practices of healing.
Present the results to the class, being in a group of five students.
1. The axial skeleton
The axial skeleton is the one that consists of the skull, trunk, and pelvis bones of the medial core of
the body.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
182
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
The skull is composed of the cranium bones fitting together at joints (sutures) and the facial bones
forming the lower front part, consisting of the eye, the ear, the nose, and the mouth cavities. Axial
skeleton includes the jaw, or mandible, the upper jaw, or maxilla, the zygomatic, or cheekbone, and
the nasal bone.
The rib cage (thoracic cage) forms the thorax (chest) portion of the body and consists of 12 pairs of
ribs with costal cartilage and the sternum.
Table 5.2 Parts of the axial skeleton parts
Parts of the axial skeleton
Number
Functions
of
bones
Skull (Cranium 8 + Facial 14)
22
It holds and protects the brain.
Ossicles (both ears, 3+3)
6
Auditory
Hyoid (neck)
1
Holds the head
Thoracic (rib cage)
24
It protects the heart and lungs.
Thorax (sternum)
1
Bind and handle the abdomen
Vertebral column
26
Holds up human body
Total bones
80
2. The appendicular skeleton
An appendicular skeleton is the portion of the skeleton that consists of 126 bones out of a total of
206 bones and supporting appendages. It includes skeletal elements, limbs, shoulder-supporting
girdle, pectoral, pelvic girdle, and joined appendages. An appendicular skeleton is involved in the
locomotion of lower limbs and manipulation of objects in the upper limbs. It also consists of six
major regions (Table 5.3).
Table 5.3 Parts of the appendicular skeleton
Appendicular skeleton
Number of bones
parts
Shoulder girdles
4
Pelvis
2
Arms and forearms
6
Thighs and legs
8
Hands
54
Feet and ankles
52
Sum
126
Total number of bones in the human body = axial + appendicular = 80 + 126 = 206
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
183
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
The following figure shows both axial and appendicular skeleton (Figure 5.7).
Axial Skeleton
Skull
Appendicular Skeleton
Mandible
Clavicle
Sternum
Scapula
Ribs
Humerus
Vertebral column
Ulna
Radius
Sacrum
Carpals
Metacarpals
Phalanges
Coxa
Femur
Patella
Tibia
Fibula
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Phalanges
Anterior
Figure 5.7 Axial and appendicular skeletons
5.1.4. Joints
Joints are the parts of the body where two or more bones meet with
What are joints?
binding tissues and allow the body to produce movements.
5.1.4.1 Types of joints
1. The ball and socket joint: the rounded head of one bone sits in the cup of another bone
to permit movement in all directions (shoulder and hip joints).
2. Hinge joints: like a door, a joints that opens and closes in one direction along one plane
only (elbow and knee joints).
3. Condyloid joints: joints that do not rotate but allow movements (finger and jaw).
4. Pivot joints are rotary or trochoid joints in which one bone swivels in a ring (ulna, radius,
and neck).
5. Gliding joints: a plane joint that allows only limited movement by slipping smooth surfaces
over one another (wrist joint).
6. Saddle joint: enables movement back and forth, side to side, and cannot rotate (thumb
base).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
184
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Pivot Joint
Hinge Joint
Saddle Joint
Condyloid Joint
Plane Joint
Ball and Socket Joint
Figure 5.8 Major human joints
Inquiry-based activity 5.3 Project Work
1. Construct the human musculoskeletal system from locally available
materials.
2. Robotic system
3. Label each part using scientific terms and count the bones.
4. Define the following terms and present them to the class.
The muscular system
The skeletal system
The functions of the musculoskeletal system
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
185
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
5.2 The reproductive system
At the end of this section, the student
Self-questioning
will be able to:
Describe female and male reproductive
Before starting this section, ask
systems
yourself this question: "what do I
Explain gametogenesis
Explain menstrual cycle
know about the reproductive system
List types contraceptive mechanisms
and what do I want to learn from
and uses
this section?'
Describe infertilities in males and
females
Explain the spread, prevention or
The human reproductive system is the
treatments methods of STIS/ HIV
functional male and female reproductive organ
systems. The function of the human reproductive system is
Why is the human reproductive
to produce and deposit sperms in males and egg cells in
system necessary for the
females. Internal fertilization by sexual intercourse occurs
continuity of human species?
when the male inserts his penis into a female's vagina and
ejaculates sperm that pass through the cervix into the uterus and the fallopian tubes for the
fertilization of the ovum (egg)
5.2.1. Human reproductive system (Male and Female)
The male reproductive systems
The male reproductive system contains the external genital organs (penis, testes, and the scrotum)
and internal parts (prostate gland, vas deferens, and urethra) that work together to produce sperm
(male gametes), male sex hormones, and other components of the semen (Figure 5.9).
1. The penis
The penis is the male copulatory organ. The penis contains soft, spongy tissue as well as muscles,
fibrous tissue, veins, arteries, and the urethra. These allow the penis to perform its functions. It has
urinary and sexual functions. The sexual function of the penis can be described as two stages:
erection and ejaculation.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
186
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
An erection is the stiffening of the penis caused by sexual arousal and/or physical stimulation. It is
also normal for erections to occur during sleep and upon waking. An erection occurs when there is
an increased flow of blood into the corpus cavernosa and corpus spongiosum. During an erection,
arteries supplying the erectile tissues will dilate (widen), causing the penis to engorge (fill) with
blood. The engorgement compresses the veins through which blood usually exits the penis. This
"traps" the blood and helps sustain the erection.
2. Urethra
The urethra is a tube that connects the urinary bladder to the urinary meatus for the removal of
urine from the body. In males, the urethra allows for the passage of urine from the bladder to the
outside of the body (urination) and is also responsible for the expulsion of sperm during ejaculation.
3. The scrotum
The scrotum is a sack of thick skin that protects the testes and controls the temperature of the
testes for suitable sperm creation. It contains seminal vesicles, vas deferens, testicles (testes), and
prostate gland that constitute all the remaining components of the male reproductive system.
4. Testes
Testes are oval pair bodies found in the scrotum with two primary functions: Production of
testosterone or male sex hormones and sperm (spermatogenesis).
Table 5.4 summary of male reproductive structures and their function
Structure
Function
produce sperm cells
testes
produce the hormone testosterone
seminiferous
produce immature sperm cells
tubules
epididymis
matures and stores sperm cells in coiled tubules
carries sperm from the epididymis to its junction with the
vas deferens
urethra
seminal vesicle
secretes fructose into the semen, which provides energy for
the sperm
secretes an alkaline buffer into the semen to protect the
prostate gland
sperm from the acidic environment of the vagina
Cowper's gland
secretes mucus-rich fluids into the semen that may protect
the sperm from acids in the urethra
carries semen during ejaculation
urethra
carries urine from the bladder to the exterior of the body
deposits sperm into the vagina during ejaculation
penis
contains the urethra
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
187
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Pubic bone
Bladder
Seminal vesicle
Rectum
Corpus
cavernosum
Ejaculatory
duct
Corpus
spongiosum
Prostate
gland
Penis
Bulbourethral
Urethra
gland
Foreskin
Anus
Vas
Glans
deferens
Epididymis
Urethral
Testis
opening
Scrotum
Seminiferous tubules
Figure 5.9 Male reproductive systems
The Female Reproductive Systems
The female reproductive system includes the
Labia minora: The labia minora
ovaries,
fallopian
("small lips") can have a variety of sizes
tubes, uterus, vagina, accessory glands,
and shapes. They lie just inside the
and external genital organs (Figure 5.10). Its
labia majora, and surround the
functions include producing gametes called
openings to the vagina (the canal that
eggs, secreting sex hormones (such as
joins the lower part of the uterus to the
estrogen), providing a site for fertilization,
outside of the body) and urethra (the
gestating a fetus if fertilization occurs, giving
tube that carries urine from the bladder
birth to a baby.
to the outside of the body). This skin is
very delicate and can become easily
The internal reproductive organs include:
irritated and swollen.
Labia majora: The labia majora
Bartholin's glands: These glands are
("large lips") enclose and protect the
located next to the vaginal opening on
other external reproductive organs.
each side and produce a fluid (mucus)
During puberty, hair growth occurs on
secretion.
the skin of the labia majora, which also
Clitoris: The two labia minora meet at
contain sweat and oil-secreting glands.
the clitoris, a small, sensitive protrusion
that is comparable to the penis in
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
188
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
males. The clitoris is covered by a fold
Ovaries: The ovaries are small, oval-
of skin, called the prepuce, which is
shaped glands that are located on
similar to the foreskin at the end of the
either side of the uterus. The ovaries
penis. Like the penis, the clitoris is very
produce eggs and hormones.
sensitive to stimulation and can
Fallopian tubes These are narrow
become erect.
tubes that are attached to the upper
part of the uterus and serve as
The internal reproductive organs include:
pathways for the ova (egg cells) to
travel from the ovaries to the uterus.
Vagina The vagina is a canal that
Fertilization of an egg by sperm
joins the cervix (the lower part of the
normally occurs in the fallopian tubes.
uterus) to the outside of the body. It is
The fertilized egg then moves to the
also known as the birth canal.
uterus, where it implants into the
Uterus (womb): The uterus is a
uterine lining.
hollow, pear-shaped organ that is the
home to a developing fetus. The uterus
is divided into two parts: the cervix,
which is the lower part that opens into
the vagina; and the main body of the
uterus, called the corpus. The corpus
can easily expand to hold a developing
baby. A canal through the cervix allows
sperm to enter and menstrual blood to
exit.
Table 5.5 Summary of female reproductive structures and their function
Structure
Function
produce the hormones estrogen and progesterone
ovaries
site of ova (egg cell) development and ovulation
fallopian tubes
carry the ovum from the ovary to the uterus
(oviducts)
usually the site of fertilization
fimbria
sweep the ovum into the oviduct following ovulation
uterus (womb)
pear-shaped organ in which the embryo and fetus develop
involved in menstruation
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
189
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
separates the vagina from the uterus
cervix
holds the fetus in place during pregnancy
dilates during birth to allow the fetus to leave the uterus
extends from the cervix to the external environment
vagina
provides a passageway for sperm and menstrual flow
functions as the birth canal
Ureter
Fallopian tube
Ovary
Uterus
Cervix
Urinary bladder
Vagina
Pubic bone
Clitoris
Rectum
Urethra
Labium Minora
Anus
Labium Majora
Figure 5.10 Female reproductive system organs
The main external structures of the female reproductive system include:
Inquiry based activity 5.4 Model construction and
discussion
Construct models of the human reproductive systems
Label parts of the reproductive systems and organs
5.2.2
Gametogenesis
Gametogenesis is the process where of formation and development
What is gametogenesis?
of specialized generative cells, gametes (oocytes/sperm), from
bipotential primordial germ cells (Figure 5.11). Gametogenesis is a
process where a haploid daughter cell (n) is formed from a diploid mother cell (2n) through meiosis.
This process is called spermatogenesis in male that produces spermatozoa and oogenesis in female
that produces ova.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
190
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Spermatogenesis
Spermatogenesis is the process by which
spermatocytes which undergo meiosis to form
haploid (n) spermatozoa develop from germ
two haploid cells known as secondary
cells in the seminiferous tubules of the testis.
spermatocytes. Each secondary spermatocyte
Male gamete production starts at puberty and
has 23 chromosomes. Second meiotic division
takes place in the testis. The testes also
occurs in secondary spermatocytes, resulting
produce the male hormone called androgen
in production of four equal and haploid
(testicular hormone). Germinal epithelium
spermatids The spermatids are transformed
lines the seminiferous tubules. The majority of
into spermatozoa (sperm) by the process
cells here are cuboidal and called primordial
of spermiogenesis. These develop into mature
germ cells or PGCs. These immature male
spermatozoa, also known as sperm cells.
germ cells undergo successive mitotic and
Maturation of the sperm cells takes place in
meiotic divisions to produce sperms.
the epididymis where it is secreted in the form
The diploid primordial germ cells are present
of semen during puberty.
in the lining of the seminiferous tubules of
Oogenesis
testis. Some cells which are tall and somatic
Oogenesis is the development of female egg
are called Sertoli cells. They help in the
cells found in the outermost layers of the
nourishment of the developing sperms and
ovaries germ cell oogonium and ends with
are also called nurse cells.
one to two million cells in the embryogenesis.
At sexual maturity, the undifferentiated
It undergoes the primary oocyte development
primordial germ cells or PGCs of seminiferous
that begins with meiotic division. Oogenesis
tubules divide several times by mitosis to
arrests division as it develops in the follicle
produce large number of sperm mother cells
and gives rise to a haploid (n) cell oocyte of a
or spermatogonia. Spermatogonia are diploid
smaller polar body called oogenesis. The
and possess 46 chromosomes. They then go
following figure (Figure 5.11) shows
through mitotic division and generate primary
Spermatogenesis and oogenesis.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
191
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
2n
Spermatogonium
2n Oogonium
Mitosis
Mitosis
2n
2n
Meiosis I
Primary oocyte
Before birth
2n
(arrests in prophase I)
1n
1n
Secondary spermatocyte
After puberty
Meiosis continues
Meiosis II
Polar body
Secondary oocyte
1n
1n
1n
1n
1n
1n
Spermatid
(arrests in metaphase II)
Differentiation
Ovulation, sperm entry
Sperm
1n
Meiosis, fertilization
Polar body
1n
2n
Fertilized Egg.
Figure 5.11 Spermatogenesis and oogenesis
Gametogenesis = Spermatogenesis and Oogenesis
Inquiry based activity 5.5 Home Works
1. Draw a diagram of the gametogenesis structure
2. Describe the differences between spermatogenesis and oogenesis
3. Present the homework to the class and discuss
Phases of the menstrual cycle
The menstrual cycle is the process of discharge of blood and other things through the vagina of a
woman every month from puberty to menopause excluding pregnancy. It is a natural periodical
process that brings changes in the female reproductive system which is responsible for the
pregnancy.
It includes changes that occur in the ovary and the uterine walls simultaneously as a result of
changes in the level of hormones in the blood.
Two significant events occur within the female reproductive organs: the first is the release of
a single ovum from one of the ovaries and, the second is that the uterine endothelium is
prepared for the plantation of a fertilized ovum.
What are events of the
If the ovum is not fertilized, the lining is released which results in
menstrual cycles?
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
192
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
menstruation. Menstruation occurs when the uterine lining sheds, resulting in blood that exits the
body via the vagina. The duration of the cycles averages about 28 days. However, the period that
might differ in different women can range from 20 days to 45 days. The difference in the duration is
associated with decreased fertility.
Events of the menstrual cycles are phases of follicular, ovulation, luteal and menstruation. Phases
(events) of menstrual cycles are:
The follicular phase: is the event when the anterior pituitary produces and secret
estrogens called follicles stimulated hormones (FSH) that inhibit the secretion of
negative feedback to prevent the growth of other follicles.
The ovulation phase: an event when ovulation takes place in the midway through the
cycle (days 12-14) and estrogen stimulates the anterior pituitary to secret luteinizing
hormones (LH) as positive feedbacks to surge the release of an egg (secondary
oocyte) as ovulation.
The Luteal phase: rupture follicle develops into a slowly degenerating corpus luteum
to secret high levels of progesterone and lower levels of estrogen. Both estrogen
and progesterone act on the uterus to thicken the endometrial lining in preparation for
pregnancy and inhibit the secretion of FSH and LH to prevent any follicle from
developing.
The Menstruation phase: in the menstrual cycle, if fertilization occurs, the embryo
develops, implants in the endometrium and release hormones to sustain the corpus
luteum. If fertilization fails, the corpus luteum degenerates, estrogen and progesterone
levels drop and forms corpus albinos after two weeks. The endometrium is not
maintained longer and its layer is eliminated from the body as menstrual blood or
period (Figure 5.12).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
193
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Follicular Phase
Luteal Phase
Pituitary Hormones
LH
FSH
-
-
-
Endometrial Wall Ovarian Hormones Ovarian Follicle
Maturing Follicle
Corpus Luteum
Estrogen
Progesterone
1
5
10
15
20
25
28
- Day
Figure 5.12 Menstrual cycle
Feedbacks to menstrual cycle:
Estrogen hormone promotes the secretion of the ovulation of the menstrual cycle.
During days 12-14, estrogen provides positive feedbacks to the hypothalamus and pituitary
gland to accelerate the production of estrogen leading to ovulation.
Progesterone involves in the menstrual cycle and promotes gestation or the carrying of a
fetus to maintain the endometrium of the uterus.
The uterus walls dilation continue by contracting and stretching until the birth of a baby.
Table 5.6 Menstrual cycle
Phases
Days
Events
Menstrual Phase
1-4
Menstruation occurs
Follicular Phase
5-13
Follicle matures and endometrium develops
Ovulation phase
14
Ovary releases an egg
Luteal Phase
15-28
Follicle becomes the corpus luteum and
endometrium prepares for an egg
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
194
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Inquiry activity 5.6 Homeworks
1. How do positive and negative feedbacks control menstrual cycles
2. Why menstruation period is absent during pregnancy
3. Describe the roles of LH and FSH in cycling menstruation.
4. List the phases of menstrual cycles.
5. Explain the difference between menarche and menopause in menstrual cycles
5.2.2 Positive and negative feedbacks to control the menstrual cycle
What is feedback in
A feedback mechanism is a physiological regulation system in the body
menstrual cycle?
that works to return the body to its normal internal state, commonly
known as homeostasis. The "positive feedback" is the process in
which the end products of an action cause more of that action to occur in a feedback loop. In a
menstrual cycle, it is a period (days 12-14) during when estrogen stimulates the hypothalamus of
the brain to release Gonadotropin Releasing Hormones (GnRH) that stimulates the anteriori
pituitary gland to secrete Luteinizing Hormones (LH) and Follicle Stimulating Hormones
(FSH).
Hormones are chemicals that coordinate different body functions by carrying messages through our
blood to organs, muscles and other tissues.
1. Luteinizing Hormone (LH)
LH is a gonadotrophic hormone for regulating the function of the testes in men and ovaries in
women.
In men, it stimulates cells in the testes to produce testosterone to support sperm
production.
In women, it carries out different roles in the two halves of the menstrual cycle. In weeks
one to two of the cycle, the hormone stimulates the ovarian follicles to produce the female
sex hormone estradiol. Around day 14 of the cycle, a surge in LH levels causes the ovarian
follicle to rupture and release a mature oocyte (egg) from the ovary called ovulation. For the
remainder of the cycle (weeks three to four), the remnants of the ovarian follicle form
a corpus luteum to produce progesterone required to support the early stages of
pregnancy. The rise of the levels LH is a negative feedback and too much LH is an indicator
of infertility.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
195
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
2. Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH)
FSH is a hormone that plays a role in sexual development, reproduction and affects ovaries and
testicles.
Women are born with all the eggs and the ovarian reserve consists of one to two million eggs at
birth of which around 400,000 eggs reach puberty, 400 eggs mature and ovulate throughout our
reproductive years. The brain releases the hormone at the beginning of each cycle to stimulate
ovaries to grow follicles and eggs for ovulation. The progesterone maintains the uterine lining or
thickness of the uterus wall and lesser it for happening pregnancy.
The rise in FSH stimulates the growth of the follicle in the ovary, produces the increasing amounts
of estradiol and reduces the release of gonadotrophin hormone as negative feedback.
During each menstrual cycle, is a rise in FSH secretion in the first half of the cycle (follicular phase)
stimulates follicular growth in the ovary leading to ovulation. The ruptured follicle forms a corpus
luteum that produces high levels of progesterone (luteal phase) and at the end of the cycle,
the corpus luteum breaks down, progesterone production decreases and the next menstrual cycle
begins as follicle stimulating hormone levels start to rise again.
In negative feedbacks, the mechanism of biochemical pathway turns off, the egg fails of
fertilization, the corpus luteum dies, progesterone levels drop and the uterine lining breaks
down and the woman is having a period or menstruation. The positive feedback leads to ovulation
and the negative feedback leads to menstruation (Figure 5.13).
+
Hypothalamus
GnRH
+
Pituitary
Positive
Gland
Negative
Feedback
Feedback
Days 12-14
LH/FSH
Over Most
of Cycle
Ovary
Estrogen
Progesterone
Uterus
Figure 5.13 Positive and negative feedbacks schema of the menstrual cycle
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
196
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
5.2.3 Fertilization and pregnancy
1. Fertilization
Fertilization is the union of human egg and sperm cells in the
What is the advantage of
ampulla of the fallopian tube to produce a zygote (Figure 5.14).
having a large number of
sperm cells?
The process of fertilization occurs when 23 sets of chromosomes
from a spermatozoon and 23 sets of chromosomes from an egg
cell fuse together. The fertilized egg (zygote) divides repeatedly as it moves down the fallopian tube
to the uterus. About six days after fertilization, the embryo attaches to the lining of the uterus,
usually near the top. This process is called implantation and it is completed within nine or ten
days.
Fallopian tube
Sperm
Fertilized egg
Egg
Fertilization
Endometrium
Ovulation
Ovary
Uterus
Figure 5.14 Fertilization
2. Pregnancy
Pregnancy or gestation period is the period in which the fetus develops inside a woman's womb or
uterus. Pregnancy lasts about 40 weeks (280 days) to delivery counted from the last menstrual
period. A pregnancy with more than one fetus at a time is called a multiple pregnancy (twin or
triplet).
The followings are signs and symptoms of pregnancy:
Missed periods, tender breasts and morning sickness (nausea, vomiting)
Hunger and frequent urination
Pregnancy test confirms pregnancy
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
197
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Inquiry based activity: 5.7 Homeworks
Write short essays on the following concepts and present the to the
class
Unwanted pregnancy
Gestation age
Signs and symptoms of pregnancy
Twins (identical and fraternal)
5.2.4 Mechanism of action of contraceptives
What are contraceptives?
Contraceptio
Condoms (male and female) are the only
n refers to
contraceptive methods that helps prevent
the intentional process of preventing
sexually transmitted infections (STIs) (Figure
pregnancy through the use of various
5.15).
hormonal drugs, devices, sexual practices,
chemicals, and surgical procedures. People
HIWOT
TRUST
use contraception for a range of reasons such
heat
as to plan family size, reduce pregnancy-
related risk, reduce teenage pregnancies,
have healthy babies, prevent sexually
transmitted diseases like HIV/AIDS, and to
balance the population growth with economic
ЛФТ
Superior Protection Superior Pleasure
growth.
Based on their mechanisms of action,
contraceptives can be categorized as barrier
AIR 5
or non-barrier contraceptives.
1. Barrier mechanism of contraceptives:
male
Condom
fe2
Devices that provide a physical barrier
between the sperm and the egg.
Examples include the male condom,
Figure 5.15 Male and female condoms
female condom, diaphragm, and cervical
cap.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
198
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Diaphragm is a small and soft silicon dome
Figure 5.16 Diaphragm
placed inside the vagina to stop sperm from
entering the uterus where it forms a physical
2. Non-barrier contraceptives: Types of
barrier between the man's sperm and the
contraceptive methods such as chemical
woman's egg like a condom (Figure 5.16).
barriers or spermicides, oral contraceptive
pills, intrauterine devices (IUD), hormonal
Diaphragm
implants, hormone injections, post pill and
Barrier method of birth control
contraceptive ring.
Diaphragm blocks
sperm
Sperm
Chemical barriers or spermicides are sperm-killing substances, available as foams, creams,
gels, films or suppositories, which are often used in female contraception in conjunction with
mechanical barriers and other devices (Figure 5.17).
0
HERE
VAGINAL
CONTRACEPTIVE
Vaginal
GEL
Contraceptive
Film
SAFE
TOAIC
SPERMICIL
FOAM
Contraceptive film
CONTRACEPTIVE
Spermicidal jelly
Contraceptive inserts,
tablets, or suppositories
Spermicidal foam
Contragel
green
boml Gel
Contraceptive sponge
Spermicidal creams and gels
Figure 5.17 different spermicide contraceptives
Oral contraceptive pills are combined
important hormones: progesterone and
hormonal pills with Oestrogen and
estrogen. The pill prevents the ovaries from
progesterone. Oral contraceptive pill (COC) is
releasing an egg each month (ovulation). It
a type of birth control that is designed to be
also thickens the mucus in the neck of the
taken orally by women. The pill contains two
womb, SO it is harder for sperm to penetrate
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
199
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
the womb and reach an egg. It thins the
in the uterus as it thickens the cervical mucus
lining of the womb, so there is less chance of
and thins the uterine lining (Figure 5.19).
a fertilized egg implanting into the womb and
being able to grow.
Progesterone-only pills (POP) prevent
Hormone
Copper
pregnancy by thickening the mucus in the
cervix to stop sperm reaching an egg.
The progesterone-only pill can also stop
ovulation. The progesterone-only pill needs to
be taken every day to work.
IUD
Uterus
Strings
Cervix
Choice
Vagina
Choice
Oral
Figure 5.19 Intrauterine device (IUD)
19/2011
1
ALYSENA28
Contraceptive implant is a small flexible
plastic rod placed under the skin in your
upper arm by a doctor or a nurse and lasts for
Figure 5.18 Oral contraceptive pills
three years releasing the hormone
The copper-coated intrauterine device
progesterone into the bloodstream to prevent
(IUD) is a small T-shaped device made from
pregnancy (Figure 5.20).
material that contains (coated) progesterone
hormone or plastic and copper. The IUD fitted
inside a woman's uterus by trained healthcare
providers does not allow the sperm to fertilize
the egg and prevent pregnancy. It may also
Localization
Birth control
of implant
make it harder for a fertilized egg to implant
implant
Figure 5.20 Contraceptive implant
Contraceptive injection contains a synthetic version of the hormone progesterone DEPO Provera,
which is a well-known brand name for medroxyprogesterone acetate, a contraceptive injection. It
prevents the body from producing its own hormones and releasing eggs from the ovaries. However,
an estimated 6% of people using Depo-Provera will get pregnant (Figure 5.21).
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
200
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
emergency oral contraceptive pill (ECP) used
to prevent pregnancy after unprotected sex
(Figure 5.22).
Depo-Provera
Contraceptive
injection
20 PACKS
medroxyproom
mirctable
Postpill
150 mg
-
LNP
Levonorgestrel Tablets
Emergency Contraceptive pill
Figure 5.21 Contraceptive injection
NAARi
Post pill is a hormonal oral contraceptive
tablet used as an emergency contraceptive to
Figure 5.22 Emergency contraception pill
prevent pregnancy within 72 hours. It
Contraceptive ring (vaginal ring) releases
contains the hormone levonorgestrel, a
a continuous dose of the hormones estrogen
progestin that prevents ovulation, block
and progesterone into the bloodstream
fertilization or keep a fertilized egg from
to prevent pregnancy (Figure 5.23).
implanting in the uterus. Post pill is an
Uterus
Vaginal
Vagina
ring
Figure 5.23 Contraceptive Ring
Sterilization: is a permanent method of contraception, suitable for people who are sure they
never want children or do not want any more children. Sterilization procedures for women tubal
ligation. The procedure for men is called vasectomy (Figure 5.24). Tubal ligation prevents an egg
from traveling from the ovaries through the fallopian tubes and blocks sperm from traveling up the
fallopian tubes to the egg. Vasectomy blocks or cuts each vas deferens tube, keeping sperm out of
your semen. Sperm cells stay in the testicles and are absorbed by the body. Starting about 3
months after a vasectomy, the semen won't contain any sperm, SO it can't cause pregnancy.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
201
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Ovary
Fallopian
tube
Uterus
Vas
Vasectomy
Vagina
deferens
site
Epididymis
Testis
Cauterized
Banded
or Clipped
Tied
and Cut
Figure 5.24 Sterilization: Vasectomy (left), Tubal ligation (right)
Inquiry-based activity 5.8: Discussion and presentation
Visit your nearby health center professionals and discuss
Mechanisms of using contraceptives
Advantages and disadvantages of each contraceptives
Which of the contraceptive mechanisms are common in your area
and why?
Traditional systems of pregnancy control methods and compare
with the modern ones
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
202
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Table 5.6 Summary of contraceptives
Methods
Failure
Mode of action
Advantage
Disadvantage
rate
Oral
0.3-5
Inhibit ovulation;
Highly effective
Minor discomfort in some
Contraceptives
may affect
and regulate
women, should not be used
endometrium and
menstrual cycle
by women over age 35 who
cervical mucus and
smoke
prevent implantation
Injectable
About 1
Inhibit ovulation
Effective and
Irregular
menstrual
contraceptives
long-lasting
bleeding, fertility may not
Depo-Provera
return for six to 12 months
after contraceptive is
discontinued
Intrauterine device
1-1
Stimulates
Provides
Cramps, increased menstrual
(IUD)
inflammatory
continuous
flow and risks of pelvic
responses and
protection, highly
inflammatory diseases and
prevent implantation
effective for
infertility; not recommended
for women who have not
several years
had a child
Spermicides,
3-20
Chemically kill sperm
No known side
Messy, must be applied
foams, jellies and
effects; can be
before intercourse
creams
used with a
condom or
diaphragm to
improve efficacy
Diaphragm
3-14
Mechanically blocks
No side effects
Must be inserted prior to
Contraceptives
entrance to cervix
intercourse and left in place
for several hours afterward
Condom
2.6-14
Mechanically prevent
No side effects;
Slightly deceased sensation
sperm from entering
some protection
for male and could break
vagina
from STIs and
(torn)
HIV
Sterilization
Tubal ligation
0.04
Prevent ovum from
Most reliable
Requires surgery and
leaving uterine tube
method
considers permanent
Vasectomy
0.15
Prevent sperm from
Requires surgery and
Most reliable
leaving vas deferens
considers permanent
method
5.2.5 Causes of infertility in humans
Infertility is the inability of a person to reproduce by a natural way. Female infertility is the inability
to get pregnant (conceive) after unprotected sex. Male infertility refers low sperm production,
abnormal sperm function, or blockages that prevent the delivery of sperm and consequently protect
the ejaculation of adequate healthy sperm cells.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
203
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
5.2.6.1 Causes of infertility in women
Females are fertile for a natural fertility period before and during ovulation whereas they are
infertile for the rest of the menstrual cycle. The cause of female infertility is ovulatory problems
manifested by the sparse or absent menstrual periods (Figure 5.25).
Causes of infertility in females:
Thyroid problems: it prevents ovulation by making both overactive and underactive.
Pelvic surgery complications include fallopian tube damage and scarring, as well as cut
ovaries
Cervical mucus problems: harder mucus does not let sperms to swim into vagina.
Fibroids: non-cancerous growths in or around the womb affect fertility.
Endometriosis: growths in the womb lining the endometrium block the ovaries.
Pelvic inflammatory diseases cause infections of the upper female genital tract.
Sterilization is a choice not to have any more children.
Medicines and drugs: their uses and misuses have side effects that cause infertility.
Examples:
1. Drugs like marijuana, cocaine, and heavy cannabis use tobacco.
2. Medicines such as blood pressure medications, anti-depressants, and anti-psychotics.
3. Misuses of drugs and alcoholic drinks
Blockage of
Uterine
Adhesions
uterine tube
septum
Endometriosis
Polycystic ovaries
or endometrioma
Polyps
Fibroids
Possible causes
Infection
of infertility
Figure 5.25 Causes of female infertility
5.2.6.2 Infertility in men
Male infertility is the production of low, abnormal, and dysfunctional sperm and blockages that
prevent the adequate delivery of sperm. Chronic health problems, illnesses, injuries, inherited
disorders, hormonal imbalances, dilated veins around the testicle, or a condition that blocks the
passage of sperm and contribute to male infertility.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
204
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Symptoms of male infertility:
1. Immotile sperms facing harder to swim to the egg
2. Discomfort, pain and swelling or a lump in the testicle area
3. Surgery of the groin, testicle, prostate, penis, or scrotum
4. Lower sperm count (fewer than 15 million sperm per milliliter of semen or a total sperm
count of less than 39 million per ejaculate).
Risk factors linked to male infertility:
Smoking tobacco, using alcohol, and drugs
Being overweight and exposed to toxins
Having repeated past or present STD infections
Overheating and trauma to the testicles
The following figure shows causes of male infertility with percentage (Figure 5.26).
8%
5%
10%
Key
Immune system factors
Varicocele
17%
Sexual factors
34%
Undescended testicles
Hypogonadism
Systemic disease
3%
Urogenital infection
Unexplained
6%
8%
9%
Figure 5.26 Causes of male infertility
Inquiry based activity 5.9: Group discussion
Visit your nearby health center and discuss
Infertility in females and males
Causes of infertilities in females and males
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
205
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
5.2.6 The major sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in Ethiopia
How do we prevent STIs?
Sexually transmitted Infections are communicable diseases
primarily transmitted through sexual contact from a sick person
to a healthy person
5.2.7.1 Types of sexually transmitted infections and preventions
More than 20 types of sexually transmitted infections or diseases spread through unprotected
sexual intercourses. The major causative agents or pathogens, are bacteria, viruses, and parasites.
Bacterial infections diseases
A. Bacterial Vaginosis
Bacterial vaginosis is a type of vaginal inflammation caused by the overgrowth of bacteria naturally
found in the vagina. Bacterial vaginosis increases the risk of developing a post-surgical infection and
causes infections of the uterus, fallopian tubes, and infertility.
Causative agent: bacterial vaginosis
Means of transmission: sexual contacts
Symptoms: vaginal discharge (thin, gray, white or green), foul-smelling or fishy
vaginal odor, vaginal itching and burning during urination.
Prevention/treatment protective sexual contact and medical treatments
The prevalence of Bacterial Vaginosis in Ethiopia ranges from 2.8-19.4%.
B. Chlamydia
Chlamydia is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI) that's caused by a bacteria
called Chlamydia trachomatis (C. trachomatis).
Uterus
Chlamydia infections spread through sexual contact, when vaginal
Ovary
fluid or semen containing the bacteria that causes chlamydia travels
from one person to another.
Figure 5.27 Diseases of Chlamydia
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
206
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Inquiry activity 5.10 Investigating Chlamydia disease
Form groups and conduct research on the causative agent, mode of transmission,
symptoms, and treatments/preventions of Chlamydia disease from a library or by
contacting a physician in your area, then present your findings in class.
C. Syphilis
Syphilis is a life-threatening disease that affects the brain, nervous system, eyes, heart, and several
other organs and develops through four stages of symptoms (Table 5.7).
Table 5.7 Stages of syphilis development
Stages
Timing
Symptoms
Primary
3-4 weeks after exposure.
Formation of non-itchy and painless chancers
syphilis
on genital skin and mucosa.
Secondary
4-8 weeks after the appearance
Rash on hands and soles of feet.
syphilis
of a primary chancer.
Latent syphilis
Early (<1 year) after infection.
No symptoms (asymptomatic)
Late (>1 year) after infection
Tertiary/late
1-10 years after infection.
Gummatous lesions, cardiovascular syphilis,
syphilis
late neurological complications.
Causative agent: Treponema pallidum
Means of transmission: sexual contacts
Symptoms: form sores around the genitals, anus, rectum or mouth tend to last 3-6
weeks, appearing as a non-itchy rash of rough, brownish or red spots on the palms of
the hands, soles of the feet, lesions in the mucous membranes, the mouth, vagina or
anus.
Swollen lymph nodes, hair loss, headache, weight loss, muscle
fatigue, fever that appear around 21 days after infection.
Syphilis bacteria
Prevention/treatment: protective sexual contact
and medical treatments
Figure 5.28 Diseases of Syphilis
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
207
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
D. Gonorrhea
Gonorrhea is an infectious disease of the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhea. It is highly contagious and
can lead to life-threatening complications if not well treated. Its transmission is through touches of
an infected area of the body, thrives in warm, moist parts of the body (vagina, penis, mouth,
rectum and eye). It spreads during sexual contact.
Causative agent: the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhea
Means of transmission: spreads by sexual contacts
Symptoms: painful urination and abnormal discharge from the penis or
vagina. Men may experience testicular pain and women may experience pain
in the lower stomach. In some cases, gonorrhea has no symptoms.
Prevention/treatment: protective sexual contact and medical treatments
Infected kidneys
Urinary tract
infection
Abdominal pain
or pain with
Burning sensation
intercourse
with urination
Inflammation
of the penile
Vaginal
Swollen testicles
discharge
Discharge from
and bleeding
the penis
In female
In male
Figure 5.29 Diseases of Gonorrhea
E. Chancroid
Chancroid is a curable sexually transmitted disease caused by the infection of bacterial species
Haemophilus ducreyi. Chancroid is a highly contagious, painful necrotizing genital ulcer
accompanied by inguinal lymphadenopathy.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
208
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
dtop
Figure 5.30 Disease of Chancroid
Viral infections diseases
A. Genital herpes
Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection caused
Inquiry activity 5.11
by two types of the herpes simplex virus (HSV). These are
Investigating Chancroid disease
HSV-1 and HSV-2. Human Simplex Virus 1 (HSV-1)
Work in groups to investigate the
is a virus that affects the mouth and spreads through
causative agent, mode of
saliva or a herpes-related sore around the mouth.
transmission, symptoms, and
Human Simplex Virus 2 (HSV-2) affects the genital,
treatments/prevention of Chancroid
anal, and mouth
disease from a library or by
and is transmitted
contacting a physician in your area,
through sexual
and then present your findings in
intercourse.
class.
Figure 5.31
Genital herpes disease
B. Genital warts
Genital warts are sexually transmitted infections caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV). They
can cause pain, discomfort, and itching. The human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that
affect the skin, mucous membranes, throat, cervix, anus, and mouth. It increases the risk of
cervical and throat cancer and spreads through sex.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
209
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Inquiry activity 5.12 Investigation
genital herpes and genital warts disease
Work in groups to investigate the causative agent,
mode of transmission, symptoms, and
treatments/prevention of genital herpes and genital
warts disease from a library or by contacting a
physician in your area, and then present your
findings in class.
Figure 5.32 Disease of HPV
C. Molluscum contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum is a contagious viral skin infection caused by a poxvirus called Molluscum
contagiosum virus that affects both adults and children.
Causative agent: Molluscum contagiosum virus
Means of transmission: by skin to skin contacts
Symptoms: a small round bumps and indents on skin
disappearing soon
Prevention/treatment protective self-hygiene
Figure 5.33 Disease of Molluscum contagiosum
D. Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is a virus that attacks the human immune system cells
that fight against the body infections. HIV makes a person vulnerable to other infections and
diseases. Without treatment, HIV infection advances in stages, getting worse over time gradually
destroys the immune system and eventually causes acquired
What is HIV/AIDS?
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) belongs to a class of viruses known as retroviruses. It
attacks a specific type of immune system cell called CD4 helper cells or T cells and Ribosome, Golgi
apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum organelles. HIV weakens the body, makes the body harder to
fight off infections and destroys.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
210
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
HIV Envelope
Key
HIV RNA
HIV Capsid
HIV capsid: HIV's core that
contains HIV RNA
HIV Enzymes
HIV envelope: the outer surface of
HIV.
HIV Glycoproteins
HIV enzyme: proteins that carry
out steps in the HIV life cycle.
Figure 5.34 HIV structure
There are three stages of HIV infection:
1. Acute HIV infection is the earliest stage from 2 to 4 weeks after infection and people
show flu-like symptoms, such as fever, headache, and rash. At this stage, HIV multiplies
rapidly and spreads throughout the body. The virus attacks and destroys the infection-
fighting CD4 cells (CD4 T lymphocytes) of the immune system.
2. Chronic HIV infection is the second stage from 1 to 7 years. It is also called
asymptomatic HIV infection or clinical latency at which HIV continues to multiply in the
body and usually advances to AIDS.
3. AIDS is the final stage from 10 years and above. This is the most severe stage of HIV
infection in which HIV severely damages the immune system and the body cannot fight off
opportunistic infections such as tuberculosis and tumors, and the number of CD4 cells
decreases. People at AIDS stage have a CD4 count of fewer than 200 cells/mm3. Without
treatment, people with AIDS typically survive about 3 years (Figure 5.35). The healthy
immune system's CD4 counts are between 500 and 1600 cells/mm3.
Acute HIV syndrome
Symptoms of
Primary
Wide dissemination of virus
AIDS
1200
infection
Seeding of lymphoid organs
10'
1100
Death
CD4+ Lymphocyte Count (cells/mm3)
1000
Opportunistic
10°
900
Clinical latency
diseases
800
Constitutional
10°
700
symptoms
600
500
10⁴
400
300
10³
HIV RNA Copies per mL plasma
200
100
0
102
0
3
6
9
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Weeks
Years
Figure 5.35 HIV progress
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
211
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Inquiry activity 5.13 Investigating HIV/AIDS
Be in two groups, investigate the causative agent, means of transmission,
symptoms, and treatments/prevention of HIV/AIDS from a library or by
asking a physician in your area, and then present your findings in class. In
which stage of HIV, does the transmission to other person is highest?
Why?
E. Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B is a viral infection that attacks the liver and causes both acute and chronic liver
diseases. Once a person is infected with Hepatitis B, the virus remains in the semen, blood and
other bodily fluids.
People with acute hepatitis B develop liver cancer diseases cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma that causes liver failure leading to death. Vaccines prevent hepatitis B disease
effectively and make safe. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that about 296 million
people were living with chronic hepatitis B infections in 2019 with 1.5 million new infections each
year and 820 000 deaths from cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer).
Causative agent: viruses
Means of transmission:
Sexual contact with infected persons
Uses of non-sterile injections
Puncturing the skin with sharp objects infected with virus
Blood and bodily fluids
Symptoms: yellowing of the skin and eyes
HEPATITIS B
(jaundice), dark urine, extreme fatigue, nausea,
vomiting and abdominal pain
Prevention/treatment: protective sexual contact
and safe from any contact of bodily fluids or
contaminations
Figure 5.36 Disease of Hepatitis B
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
212
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Parasites
Among parasites, trichomoniasis and pubic lice are the most prevalent causative agents of sexually
transmitted infections
A. Crabs (Pubic lice)
Crabs are pubic lice attaching to pubic hair and sometimes
affect the hair in the armpits, moustache, beard, eyelashes or
eyebrows. Pubic lice spread during close physical and sexual
contact and are transmitted via shared towels or bed linen.
Figure 5.37 Pubic lice
Inquiry activity 5.14 Investigating crabs (Pubic lice) disease
Be in groups, conduct an investigation into the causative agent, means of
transmission, symptoms, and treatments/preventions of crabs (Pubic lice) from
a library or by asking a physician in your area, and then present your findings in
class.
B. Trichomoniasis
Trichomoniasis is a common sexually transmitted infection caused by the
parasite Trichomonas vaginalis (Figure 5.38).
Figure 5.38 Trichomoniasis vaginalis
Causative agent: Trichomonas vaginalis
Means of transmission: sexual contact
Symptoms: in women (a large amount of a thin, often foul-smelling discharge from the
vagina - which might be clear, white, gray, yellow or green; genital redness, burning and
itching; pain with urination or sex; discomfort over the lower stomach area). In men
(itching or irritation inside the penis, burning with urination or after ejaculation, discharge
from the penis).
Prevention/treatment protective sexual contact and medical treatments
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
213
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
C. Scabies
Scabies are contagious skin diseases that develop due to a mite (Figure 5.39). Scabies spreads
from person to person through direct skin-to-skin contact. It can also
be spread by using clothing, sheets, towels or furniture that has
touched an infected person's skin. Scabies is considered as STI
because it often spreads during sex.
Figure 5.39 Diseases of Scabie
Inquiry activity 5.15 Investigating scabies disease
Be in groups, conduct an investigation on the causative agent, means of
transmission, symptoms, and treatments/prevention of scabies disease from a
library or by asking a physician in your area, and present it in the class.
5.2.8. Epidemiology of STIs in Ethiopia
What is an Epidemiology?
Epidemiology is the study of the transmission causation, outbreak,
surveillance, monitoring of a disease and the application of this
study to the control and treatment of the disease..
Epidemiology of STIs is the systematic study of sexually transmitted infections, identify and
understand the causes, symptoms and ways of transmission.
Even though there is little information on the incidence and prevalence of STIs in Ethiopia, the
problem of STIs is generally believed to be similar to that of other developing countries. About 1.4
million people are infected with STIs every day. In Ethiopia, the highest reported rates of STIs are
found among 15-24-year olds.
5.2.8.1 Risks of STIs epidemic in Ethiopia
Risks of STIs epidemic include:
Anyone who is sexually active risks some degree of exposure to an STD or STI. Factors that may
increase that risk include:
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
214
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
Having unprotected sex. Having sex with an infected partner who isn't wearing a latex
condom significantly increases the risk of getting an STI. Improper or inconsistent use of
condoms can also increase risk.
Having sexual contact with multiple partners. The more people you have sexual
contact with, the greater your risk.
Having a history of STIs. Having one STI makes it much easier for another STI to take
hold.
Being forced to engage in sexual activity. Dealing with rape or assault is difficult, but
it's important to see a doctor as soon as possible to receive screening, treatment and
emotional support.
Misuse of alcohol or use of recreational drugs. Substance misuse can inhibit your
judgment, making you more willing to participate in risky behaviors.
Injecting drugs. Needle sharing spreads many serious infections, including HIV, hepatitis
B and hepatitis C.
Being young. Half the new STIs occur in people between the ages of 15 and 24.
Activities 5.16: Discuss in a group of five and present to class
Invite professionals from a nearby health center and discuss
STIs and Transmissions
Epidemic risks of STIs
Preventive cares of STIs
HIV/AIDS transmission risks
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
215
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
5.3 Harmful traditional practices
After the successfully completion
Self-questioning
this section, the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask yourself
Describe harmful traditional practices
this question: "what do I know about
Explain the harmful traditional
harmful traditional practices that affects
practices on reproductive systems
reproductive health and what do I want
Understand how harmful traditional
to learn from this section?'
practices affect women
5.3.1 Harmful traditional practices
Harmful traditional practices that affect the physical and mental health
What are harmful
traditional practices?
of individuals are actions against the rights of people. Both men and
women have the right to live free from harm, oppression,
discrimination and violence (harmful practices).
In Ethiopia, the currently recorded harmful traditional practices has accounted for about 20 of
which 50% deals with mutilation of skins and related parts, whereas the female genital mutilation
(FGM) alone has accounted for 73% of the practices.
5.3.1.1 Harmful traditional practices affect reproductive health.
1. Early marriage is forcing underage girls to get married based on cultural norms to
perpetuate poverty. It has a wide-ranging impact on girls, causing them to drop out of
school, become pregnant, and face long-term health risks.
2. Kidnapping or is abduction to make the girl a wife unwillingly.
3. Gender-based violence, or any form of unwanted sexual contact (sexual abuse or
harassment), or even violence within a relative or marriage.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
216
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
4. Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) is one of the harmful traditional practices that involve
the
partial
or
total
removal
of
external
female
genital
organs.
Inquiry based activity 5.17: Discussion
Visit a nearby health center, discuss the following and present to
the class
Female genital mutilation
Early marriage
Sex abuse
Massaging the abdomen of a pregnant woman
Marriage by abduction
5.4 Family planning
After the successful completion of this
Self-Questioning
section, the student will be able to:
Before starting this section, ask
Define family planning
yourself this question: "what do I
Explain the benefits of family planning
know about family planning and
Discuss the side effects of family
what do I want to learn from this
planning
section?"
Family planning is the ability to anticipate and attain a desired
What is family planning?
number of children, the spacing and timing of births, and the
materials of individuals and couples to establish a family. Family planning deals with issues related
to marital situation, career considerations, financial position and the number of children and a
choice of a woman wishing to have or no children.
Family planning is concerned with ensuring the resources required for raising the children, time,
social, financial, and environmental conditions.
5.4.1 Risks related to the lack of family planning
The risk of maternal health means that a mother requires care during pregnancy, childbirth,
and the postpartum period.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
217
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Both early and late motherhood have increased the risk that teenagers could face a higher
risk of life complications and deaths.
When mothers suffer from illness, get sick or have health problems, the whole family could
be threatened
Complications of pregnancy and childbirth
End
leads to abortions, disability and lower
Hunger
Support
and
Increase
Partnerships
Poverty
Education
incidence of deaths.
Save the
Family
Empower
Environment
Planning
Women
Decrease
Improve
HIV/AIDS
Improve
Infant
Maternal
Health
Health
Figure 5.40 Family planning schemes
5.4.2 Family planning actions
The family calendar includes:
Prevention of unwanted pregnancy
Safe family from STIs, counseling plans and fertility management
Adequate resources for couples to prevent unwanted pregnancy
Waiting at least 6 months after a miscarriage or abortion
Does your family have a
Adoption as another option used to build a family.
family plan calendar?
Birth control and assisted reproductive technology
Adjustment of the family plan calendar to the natural
menstrual cycle
28
1
2
27
3
26
Menstruation
4
Infertile
25
5
24
6
23
7
22
8
21
9
20
Menstrual
10
19
Cycle
11
18
12
17
13
16
15
14
Fertile
Figure 5.41 Menstrual cycle calendar
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
218
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
5.4.3 Family planning services
Pregnancy testing and counseling
Pregnancy- achieving services (preconception health)
Basic counseling on infertility
Counseling on sexually transmitted diseases
Breast and pelvic examinations
Breast and cervical cancer screening
Inquiry based activity 5.18: Discussion and presentation
Visit a nearby family planning unit or health office and discuss
Family planning
Family plan calendar
Reproductive health
5.5
Effects of alcohol use, chewing Khat, cannabis and other drug
uses on STIs transmission and unwanted pregnancy
After the successful completion of this
section, the student will be able to:
Self-Questioning
Describe the effects of drinking
Before starting this section, ask
alcohol
yourself this question: "what do I
Explain the side effects of chewing
know about the effects of drugs
Khat
on human health and what do I
Discuss that using drugs and others
want to learn from this section?'
affects lifestyles
5.5.1 The effects of alcohol uses
Heavily alcohol use affects the lifestyles of humans. The normal blood alcohol limit for euphoria is
0.1%, but the increase in alcohol intake damages many parts of the human body functions.
Alcohol use has the following negative effects:
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
219
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
Too much intake of alcohol causes acute effects on parts of our bodies. For example, a
higher concentration of blood alcohol (0.25 to 0.30%) causes sleepiness and confusion.
Prolonged excessive alcohol intake increases dementia (poor nutritional status).
Alcohol damages the brain (vitamin deficiencies) and the liver (causing cirrhosis).
Heavy alcohol drinking causes a J-shaped legs, colorectal and colon cancer, violence, traffic
accidents and death.
Gulping up more alcohol causes a coma and death.
Alcoholic drinks cause 6.2% of males' and 1.1% of females' deaths globally.
Alcohol drinking is associated with risky sex and transmission of HIV.
Depression and anxiety
Stroke
Memory loss
Oral cancer
Breast cancer
Heart disease
High blood O
Gastritis
pressure
Pancreatitis
Liver damage,
hepatitis, cirrhosis
Harm to
and cancer
unborn babies
Fertility
Bowel cancer
Figure 4.42 Effects of alcohol on human body
5.5.2 Effects of chewing Khat
Khat is a shrubby plant (Catha edulis) that people chew its leaves as a recreational stimulant and a
psychoactive drug. It has become a popular chewable cosmopolitan leaf among users living in
Ethiopia and widespread in the Horn and Eastern Africa, Europe, and North America. In Eastern
Ethiopia, it is chewed by nearly 30% of adolescent girls and over 70% of adolescent boys. There
are about twenty million people worldwide who chew Khat leaves. When khat is chewed, it
stimulates the central nervous systems of human beings because the leaves of Khat contain a
stimulant drug called cathinone.
Chewing Khat leaves has the following negative effects:
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
220
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
1. Hypertension, stomatitis, esophagitis, gastritis, and constipation.
2. Acute coronary syndrome (coronary artery spasm) and myocardial infarction
3. Metabolic disorders, diabetes mellitus, hepatitis, and liver cirrhosis.
4. Impotency or loss of sexual drive in libido among aphrodesia (male users)
Table 5.8 Effects of using Khat leaves
Khat leaves
Effects of chewing
Immediate
Alertness, Arousal, Concentration, Confidence, Constipation
term
Euphoria, Friendliness, Hyperactivity, Increased blood pressure, Increased
heart rate, Insomnia, Psychosis, suppressed appetite, Talkativeness,
thought disorder, Verbosity etc.
Long
Depression, infrequent hallucinations, impaired inhibition, increased risk of
myocardial infarction (heart attack), Psychosis in extreme cases in the
term
genetically predisposed and oral cancer leading to death in indeterminate
terms.
Inquiry activity 5.19 Investigation on effect of Khat
Have you observed people drinking alcohol and chewing khat in your area? If so, have you
noticed any problems like physical, psychological, or economic problems among those
people? If so, why? If not, why not? Conduct a debate on the benefits and harms of
drinking alcohol and chewing khat in your area.
5.5.3 Effects of drug uses
Drugs are biochemical components mostly extracted from some plant species. Some drugs
intermittently affect the body and the brain whereas some drugs have long-lasting consequences
and permanent health hazards.
1. Marijuana
Marijuana is a drug prepared from dried leaves and flowers of a plant
called Marijuana plant (Cannabis sativa), which is stronger than any
other form with high potency strains known as sinsemilla or hashish
and extracts. Marijuana harms the brain, breathing system, heart,
child development, and muscular system coordination.
Figure 5.43 Cannabis sativa
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
221
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
2. Cocaine
Cocaine is an addictive stimulant drug made from the leaves of the
coca plant Erythroxylum coca native to South America. Cocaine
harms the cardiovascular system, breathing system,
gastrointestinal system, and nervous system.
Figure 5.44 Erythroxylum coca
3. Heroin
Heroin is a very addictive drug made from morphine, a
psychoactive (mind-altering) substance taken from the resin of the
seedpod of the opium poppy. Similarly, heroin has also negative
effects on our health.
Figure 5.45 Papaver somniferum
4. Inhalants
Inhalants are chemicals that can be found in ordinary household or workplace products that people
inhale on purpose to get in high mood. In fact, chemicals found in the products can change the way
the brain works and cause other problems in the body.
Generally, drugs have the following side effects
Increasing the risk of illness and infection
Heart conditions range from abnormal heart rates to heart attacks, collapsed veins, and
blood vessel infections from injected drugs.
Nausea and abdominal pain lead to changes in appetite and weight loss.
Increased strain on the liver that puts the person at risk of significant liver damage or liver
failure.
Seizures, stroke, mental confusion, and brain damage are all possibilities.
Problems associated with memory, attention, and decision-making, which make daily living
more difficult
People suffering from drug and alcohol addiction have a higher risk of unintentional injuries,
accidents, and domestic violence incidents. The high prevalence of HIV infections, syphilis, and
genital ulcer is due to unprotected sex fueled by the use of crack cocaine. Sexually active
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
222
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
adolescents are at a high risk of contracting sexually transmitted infections, including HIV (Figure
5.46).
ALL KINDS:
Effects of drugs
Analgesics, Anaesthetics,
Depressants, Inhalants,
Stimulants,
Hallucinogens
Organic solvents.
Amphetamines,
Cocaine, Heroin,
Cigarettes,
LSD,
Cocaine, Ketamine,
Marijuana
Alcohol, Organic
Alcohol, Caffeine
solvents, Heroin
Amphetamines,
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines
Organic solvents,
Figure 5.46 Effects of drug uses
Inquiry activity 5.20 Investigation
Be in groups, investigate the short-term and long-term effects of drugs such as
marijuana (cannabis), cocaine, heroin, and inhalants on the health of human
beings, and then present your findings in class.
Unit five summary
The human skeletal system consists of 206
protection of internal organs (brain, heart and
various types of bones, cartilage, joints,
lungs).
ligaments, tendons and connective tissues.
Bones that store minerals (calcium (99%),
The primary functions of the skeletal systems
iron, magnesium and phosphorus are
are locomotion, support to the body and the
responsible for the production of red blood
cells, platelets and most white blood cells.
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
223
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
The functions of the muscular systems are
Family planning is an access to ensure safe
movements, joint stabilization and heat
human right. It is central to gender equality
protection, maintenance of posture and
and women's empowerment and a key factor
facilitation of blood circulation.
in reducing poverty. In developing regions,
The skeletal muscles connected to the bones
about 218 million women are suffering from
and work hand-in-hand with the skeletal
lack of using safe and effective family
system to control voluntary movements such
planning methods for reasons ranging from
as walking and running. Smooth muscles
the lack of access to information or services
(stomach, intestines, bladder and uterus) are
to the lack of support from their partners or
involuntary muscles that are responsible for
communities. Family planning is the ability of
the contraction of hollow muscles.
individuals and couples to anticipate and
The cardiac muscle is an involuntary muscle
attain their lifestyles with family formation
found only in the heart and facilitates the
and to have children or not. Family planning
circulation of blood by pumping to the major
is a very important action that anticipates the
arteries and out into the body via the
futurity of the young generation on how to
circulatory systems.
sustain all living forms and family formation
The human reproductive system dealing with
with pertinent necessities to work and live
both male and female reproduction systems
successfully.
includes gametogenesis (gamete formation)
Alcohol interferes with the brain's
fertility and infertility.
communication pathways and affects the way
The male reproductive system discusses the
the brain works. It changes mood and
male reproductive organs including the penis,
behavior and makes harder to think clearly
urethra, testes that make sperm and produce
and move with coordination. Drinking over a
the hormone testosterone.
long time damages the heart and causes
cardiomyopathy (stretching and dropping of
The female reproduction system is the body
heart muscle), arrhythmias (irregular
parts including vagina, cervix, ovary, uterus,
heartbeat), stroke and high blood pressure.
the menstruation cycles and both positive and
Heavy drinking takes a toll on the liver and
negative feedbacks.
leads to a variety of problems and liver
In relation to reproduction, the unit briefs the
inflammations including steatosis or fatty
mechanisms of uses contraceptives, sexually
liver, alcoholic hepatitis, fibrosis and cirrhosis.
transmitted infections (STI) and diseases,
Alcohol causes the pancreas to produce toxic
causative agents, treatment or preventions.
substances that can eventually lead to
pancreatitis, a dangerous inflammation and
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
224
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
swelling of the blood vessels in the pancreas
pupils. A regular use of Khat can also cause
that prevents proper digestion.
tooth decay, gum disease, ulcers and
constipation. Drug use can cause short and
Cathinone is illegal in some countries since it
long-term serious health hazards effects
has stimulant effect when chewed as drug
possibly irreversible. Drugs affect mainly the
class similar to the leaves of the coca plant
central nervous systems and cause flatness,
used for making cocaine. Uses of Khat
depression and exhaustion and hallucinogens
increase respiration, tends to elevate blood
or distorting the sense of reality.
pressure, heart arrhythmias and dilated
Unit five review questions
Part I. True or false Items
Instructions: write true if the statement is correct and false if not.
1. Musculoskeletal system composes of only skeletons.
2. Muscular system comprises of cardiac, skeletal and smooth muscles.
3. The three types of muscle contractions are concentric, isometric and centric muscle fibers.
4. The source of blood cells is bone marrows.
5. Joints are binding tissues connecting individual bones to allow movements.
6. The saddle joints are in between the carpal and metacarpal.
7. Bones compose of Yellow and Red marrow.
8. The skull protects the human brain.
9. The rib cages protect the lung.
10. The skull is made of the cranium bones.
Part II. Multiple-choice Test Items if the statement is not correct.
Instructions: choose the correct answer from the given alternatives
1. What mineral makes bones strong?
A. Oxygen
C. Calcium
B. Iron
D. Zinc
2. What are the two bones in the lower arm?
A. Radius and ulna
C. Femur and humerus
B. Tibia and Fibula
D. Mandible
3. The purpose of white blood cells is to
C. Carry oxygen
C. Speed up digestion
D. Protect against infection
D. All
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
225
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
4. Which of the followings is a hinge joint?
A. Shoulder
C. Knee
B. Hip
D. None
5. What is a fibrous connective tissue that attaches bone to bone?
A. Cartilage
C. Ligament
B. Tendon
D. Rib
6. Which one is the hip joint?
A. Hinge joint
C. A and B
B. Ball and Socket joint
D. All
7. Muscles attached to bones by
A. Cartilage
C. Ligament
B. Tendon
D. Tissues
8. One of the following is not a part of the male reproductive system.
A. Penis
C. Uterus
B. Testes
D. Scrotum
9. Which of the following is not a part of the female reproductive system?
A. Ovary
C. Sperm duct
B. Vagina
D. All
10. What are the male sex cells?
A. Sperm cells
C. Scrotum
B. Sperm ducts
D. Vagina
11. The male sex cells made in
A. Testes
C. Penis
B. Sperm ducts
D. Ovary
12. The female sex cell is
A. Cilia
C. Cervix
B. Egg cells
D. Sperm cells
13. How long does the menstrual cycle take?
A. 5 days
C. 28 days
B. 14 days
D. 30 days
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
226
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
14. The character of an ovulation is
A. The release of a mature egg cell
B. The loss of the lining of the uterus
C. The joining of male sex cell and female sex cells
D. Fertilization
15. What is substance that passes through the placenta to the baby?
A. Oxygen
C. Blood
B. Carbon dioxide
D. Food
16. How long is gestation in humans?
A. 28 days
C. 9 years
B. 40 weeks
D. 11 Years
17. Which changes due to happen during puberty to boys and girls?
A. Hips widen
C. Underarm hair grows
B. Facial hair grows
D. Sperm production
18. STIs are most common in
age groups.
A. Young and adults of ages 18- 35 C. People of ages 60 and older
B. People of ages 36 - 45
D. All
19. The overall number of cases of STIs is:
A. Rising
C. Constant
B. Falling
D. All
20. As far as a person has no symptoms of STI, he/she
A. Cannot pass on STI
C. A and B
B. Don't have STI
D. None
21. Which of the following is a cause for STIs in women?
A. Pelvic inflammatory disease
C. Ectopic pregnancy
B. Higher risk for cervical cancer D. All of the above
22. Which of the following sexually transmitted infection (STI) is caused by bacteria?
A. Gonorrhea
C. A and B
B. Syphilis
D. All
23. One of the symptoms of genital herpes is
A. Burning in the genital area
C. A and B
B. Painful blisters in the genital area
D. None of the above
24. Which one of the human organs untreated syphilis affects?
A. Heart
C. Liver
B. Brain
D. A and B
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
227
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
25. Which of the followings is another type of STIs?
A. Chancroid
C. Molluscum contagiosum
B. Scabies
D. All of the above
26. It is one of the protective measures to lower the risk of getting an STI:
A. Use of male condoms
B. Eliminating multiple sex partners
C. Delay with having sexual relations as long as possible
D. All of the above
27. Which of the listed contraceptives requires prescriptions?
A. Birth control pill
C. Diaphragm
B. Contraceptive patch
D. All of the above
28. What do male condoms offer that other forms of birth control do not?
A. Least chance of failure
C. Cheapest to use
B. Best protection against STIs
D. All
29. Besides the condom, which one is another barrier method of birth control?
A. Diaphragm
C. Withdrawal
B. IUD
D. All
30. Which type of intrauterine device (IUD) is available?
A. Copper
C. Hormonal
B. Titanium
D. A and C
31. Which one is a possible side effect of birth control pills?
A. Nausea
C. Headaches
B. Irregular bleeding
D. All
32. How long is the vaginal ring left in place?
A. Months
C. 3 Weeks
B. 2 Weeks
D.1 week
33. Which of the methods is a natural family planning?
A. Basal temperature
C. Tracking the menstrual cycle on a calendar
B. Tracking changes in cervical mucus D. All
34. Which of the methods of sterilization is permanent?
A. Tubal sterilization
C.A and B
B. Vasectomy
D. No
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
228
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
UNIT FIVE RHE HUMAN BODY SYSTEM
35. One of the FGM commonly practiced in Ethiopia is
A. Circumcision
C. Infibulations
B. Excision
D. Clitoridectomy
36. How can you solve the problem of underage marriage of girls?
A. Awareness creation
C. Education
B. Law
D. All
37. Gulping up more alcohol causes
A. Toxicities
C. Does not affect
B. Coma and death
D. All
38. Chewing Khat causes
A. Hypertension, stomatitis, esophagitis, gastritis and constipation
B. Acute coronary syndrome and myocardial infarction
C. Metabolic disorders, Impotency, Diabetes mellitus, Hepatitis and Liver cirrhosis
D. All of the above
39. What types of drugs causing health hazards do you know?
A. Marijuana
C. Heroin
B. Cocaine
D. All
40. What are the health hazards of using drugs?
A. Abnormal heart attacks and increased liver damage or failure
B. Weight loss and lung disease, stroke, confusion and brain damage
C. Lung disease, seizures, stroke, mental confusion and brain damage
D. All
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
229
FDRE-MoE ETHIOPIA
BIOLOGY GRADE 11
