Unit 3
Motion in a Straight Line
Introduction
In this unit, you will be introduced to the basic concepts of motion. We encounter
Brainstorming
motion in our day-to-day activities and have enough experience about it. You
Question
might have learnt in lower grades that everything in the universe moves. It is
What do you
because of this that motion is one of the key topics in physics. We use the basic
think is motion?
concepts of distance, displacement, speed, velocity and acceleration to express
Give some examples
motion. There are different types of motions. Motion in a straight line is one of
of motion that you
the simplest forms of motion in a specific direction. The motions of a car on a
encounter in your
road, the motion of a train along a straight railway track or an object falling freely
daily life.
are examples of one-dimensional motion.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
describe motion in terms of frame of reference, displacement, speed, ve-
locity, and acceleration;
draw diagrams to locate objects with respect to a reference;
solve problems involving distance, displacement, speed, velocity and
acceleration;
make practical measurements of distance, displacement, average speed,
average velocity and acceleration.
40
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
3.1 Position, Distance and Displacement
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define motion, position, and displacement;
describe motion in terms of frame of reference;
differentiate between position, distance and displacement;
draw diagrams to locate objects with respect to a reference frame.
The most convenient example to explain about position, distance and dis-
placement is your daily travel from your home to your school. When you go to
school, your journey begins from your home. Your home is your original position.
After some time, you will reach your school. Your school is your final position.
In this process, you are continuously changing your position. While traveling
from home to school, you are increasing the gap between your present position
and your home. This continuous change of position is known as motion. Note
that your change of position is observed by considering the distance from your
school to home. Your home is taken as a reference frame. Motion is a continuous
change in position of an object relative to the position of a fixed object called
reference frame.
Key Concept:
JET A frame of reference is a set of coordinates that can be used to deter-
mine positions of objects.
JF Motion is the change in the position of the object with respect to a fixed
point as the time passes.
A body is said to be at rest in a frame of reference when its position in that
reference frame does not change with time. If the position of a body changes
with time in a frame of reference, the body is said to be in motion in that frame of
reference. The concepts of rest and motion are completely relative; a body at rest
in one reference frame may be in motion with respect to another reference frame.
For example, if you are 2 m from the doorway inside your classroom, then your
reference point is the doorway. Your classroom can be used as a reference frame.
In the classroom, the walls are not moving, and can be used as a fixed frame of
reference. We commonly use the origin as a fixed reference point to describe
motion along a straight line.
3.1 Position, Distance and Displacement
41
Exercise 3.1
It Assume you are sitting on a horse and the horse is moving at a certain
speed. Are you at rest or in motion? Discuss it by taking two frames of
reference: the horse itself and some fixed point on the ground.
Key Concept:
DE Position is a mea-
Position
surement of a loca-
To describe the motion of a particle, we need to be able to describe the position
tion, with respect
of the particle and how that position changes as the particle moves. Motion is
to some reference
the change in the position of the object with respect to a fixed point as the time
point (usually an
origin).
passes. For one-dimensional motion, we often choose the x axis as the line along
which the motion takes place. Positions can therefore be negative or positive
with respect to the origin of the x-axis. Figure 3.1 shows the motion of a rider in a
straight line. Its position changes as it moves.
Have you ever used Google Maps to locate your geographical position while you
are moving from some place to another? Google Maps is a Web-based service
that provides detailed information about geographical regions and sites around
the world. In addition to conventional road maps, Google Maps offers aerial and
Figure 3.1 A rider in motion changes its position as it moves.
42
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
satellite views of many places. Google Maps provides you with the longitude
(east-west position) and latitude (north-south position) coordinates of a location
or position of a place.
You can see how far you have travelled and how you travelled from place to place,
such as walking, biking, driving or on public transport. The following steps guide
you to get started using Google Maps:
Step 1: At first you need to open the Google Maps software application on your
Android phone, tablet or computer. For more information, click here to see
Google Maps https://www.google.com/maps/
Exercise 3.2
Step 2: Search for a place or tap it on the map.
Dr What is the dis-
Step 3: In the bottom right, tap directions.
tance around a
Step 4: To add destination you have to go to the top right and tap more and then
standard football
add a stop.
field?
10 Is distance a pos-
Distance
itive or negative
quantity?
Distance travelled is a measure of the actual distance covered during the motion of
a body. In other words, distance is the total path length traveled by the body. The
distance travelled does not distinguish between motion in a positive or negative
direction. This means that it is a scalar physical quantity. The SI unit of distance is
meter (m), though it can also be measured in other non-SI units such as kilometer
(km), miles (mi), centimeter (cm), etc. The symbol for distance is S. Pictorial
representation of the distance covered by a runner is shown in Figure 3.2.
S
Figure 3.2 The distance covered by a runner.
3.1 Position, Distance and Displacement
43
Displacement
When an object moves, it changes its position. This change of position in a certain
direction is known as displacement. A displacement is described by its magnitude
and direction. Hence, it is a vector quantity. Displacement is independent of
the path length taken. For example, you travel from your home to school. After
school, you travel 0 your home. Therefore, the change in your position when you
return back to your home is zero. In this case, we say that your displacement is
zero. The SI unit of displacement is the same as the SI unit of distance that is
meter (m). Figure 3.3 shows the difference between distance and displacement of
the motion covered from point A to point B.
ROAD
TRIP
Figure 3.1 shows a student on a bicycle at position Xᵢ at time ti. At a later time,
Distance
tf, the student is at position Xf. The change in the student's position, Xf - Xᵢ, is
called a displacement. Thus, displacement $ can be written as
Displacement
(3.1)
Figure 3.3 Illustration of distance
Key Concept:
and displacement.
It Displacement is the change in an object's position.
Table 3.1 Difference between distance and displacement.
Distance
Displacement
It is the length of path travelled
It is the shortest distance between
by an object in a given time.
the initial and final positions.
It is a scalar quantity.
It is a vector quantity.
It depends on the path followed
It depends o the initial and final
by the object.
positions of the object, but not
necessarily on the path followed.
It can be more than or equal to
Its magnitude can be less than or
the magnitude of displacement.
equal to the distance.
44
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
Activity 3.1
Three students walked on a straight line. The first student walked 200 m
to the right from a reference point A, then returned and walked 100 m to
the left and then stopped. The second student walked 200 m from point A
to the right, then returned and walked 300 m to the left and stopped. The
third student walked 200 m to the right from point A, then returned and
walked 200m to the left and stopped at point A. Discuss in groups about
the total distance and displacements of the first, the second and the third
student.
Example 3.1
A cyclist rides 3 km west and then turns around and rides 2 km east. (a) What is
her displacement? (b) What distance does she ride? (c) What is the magnitude of
her displacement?
Solution:
To solve this problem, we need to find the difference between the final position
and the initial position while taking care to note the direction on the axis.
a) Displacement: The rider's displacement is $ = Xf - Xᵢ = 1 km west. The displace-
ment is negative if we choose east to be positive and west to be negative.
b) Distance: The distance traveled is 3 km + 2 km = 5 km.
Exercise 3.3
c) The magnitude of the displacement is 1 km.
It What is the dis-
placement if the
Exercise 3.4
final position is the
jer Given the following values for the initial position Xᵢ and final position
same as the initial
Xƒ, check whether the value of the net displacement is positive or negative.
position?
a) Xf = (5,0) and Xᵢ = (-1,0)
b) Xƒ = (10,0) and Xᵢ = (-15,0)
c) Xƒ = (6,0) and Xᵢ = (4,0)
3.2 Average Speed and Instantaneous Speed
45
3.2 Average Speed and Instantaneous Speed
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
differentiate between average speed and instantaneous speed;
compute the average speed of a body; moving in a straight line covering a
certain distance in a given time;
estimate the speed of moving bodies in your surroundings.
Speed is a quantity that describes how fast a body moves. Speed is the rate
at which an object changes its location. Like distance, speed is a scalar quantity
because it has a magnitude but no direction. Since speed is a rate, it depends on
the time interval of motion. Its symbol is v. In other words, speed is the distance
covered by a moving body per unit time. The SI unit of speed is meter per second
(m/s). Other units of speed include kilometer per hour (km/h) and miles per hour
(mi/h). The mathematical equation used to calculate speed is
Distance
speed =
(3.2)
time
S
V
=
(3.3)
t
One of the most obvious features of an object in motion is how fast it is moving.
Exercise 3.5
In your journey from home to school, you walk slowly for some time, and you run
another time to cover the total distance. This shows that the speed for the walk
10 In Figure ??, what
and the speed for the run are different. In this regard, we define average speed.
does the speedome-
ter read?
Speed and average speed are not the same although they are derived from the
same formula. The average speed is defined as the total distance travelled divided
by the total time it takes to travel that distance:
Total distance covered
Average speed
=
(3.4)
Total time taken
(3.5)
Figure 3.4 Speedometer.
Vₐv
=
(3.6)
46
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
During a typical trip to school by car, the car undergoes a series of changes in its
speed. If you were to look at the speedometer readings at regular intervals, you
would notice that it changes. The speedometer of a car gives information about
the instantaneous speed of the car. It shows the speed of the car at a particular
instant in time. The speed at any specific instant is called the instantaneous
speed. To calculate the instantaneous speed, we need to consider a very short
time interval-one that approaches zero. For example, a school bus undergoes
changes in speed. Mathematically the instantaneous speed is given
Vins vins = At as At - 0
(3.7)
where, s is the distance travelled during the given very short time interval
At. Instantaneous speed and average speed are both scalar quantities. When you
solve the average of all instantaneous speeds that occurred during the whole trip,
you will get the average speed.
Exercise 3.6
It What are the
Example 3.2
differences and
A car covers a distance between two towns which are 80 km apart. If it takes the car
similarities between
1hr and 30 minutes to travel between the two towns, calculate the average speed
average speed and
of the car in m/s.
instantaneous
speed?
Solution:
The car takes 1hr and 30 minutes to travel between the two towns. This time is the
same as 1.5 hrs. Therefore, the average speed of the car is given by,
vav = st
with S = 80 km and t=1.5 hrs, Vav becomes,
53.33 km/hr
Exercise 3.7
10 If the car is trav-
However, we are required to calculate the average speed in m/s. For this purpose,
elling at 120 km/h,
we use 1 km = 1000 m and 1 hr = 3600 S. Hence,
what is the car's
speed in m/s.
Example 3.3
3.3 Average Velocity and Instantaneous Velocity
47
How far does a student walk in 1.5 hrs if her average speed is 5 m/s?.
Solution:
To find the distance, we rewrite the equation as
s = 5400 s X 5ᵐₛ s
= 27000 m
3.3 Average Velocity and Instantaneous Velocity
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
differentiate between average velocity and instantaneous velocity;
compute the average velocity of a body moving in straight line covering a
certain displacement in a given time.
Where an object started and where it stopped does not completely describe
the motion of the object. Velocity is a physical quantity that describes how fast a
body moves as well as the direction in which it moves. Hence, velocity is a vector
quantity. Its symbol is v (v with an arrow on the head). The SI unit of velocity
is meter per second (m/s). Other units of velocity include kilometer per hour
(km/h) and miles per hour (mi/h).
Key Concept:
It
Velocity is the rate of change of displacement.
X
If
tᵢ
Suppose that the positions of a car are Xᵢ at time ti and Xf at time tf. If
the details of the motion at each instant are not important, the rate is usually
expressed as the average velocity. Average velocity (vₐv) of a body is the total
Figure 3.5 The average velocity of
the car tells how fast and in which
displacement covered by that body in a specified direction divided by the total
direction the car is moving.
time taken to cover the displacement. Analytically it can be written as
(3.8)
where Xf is the final position at final time tf and Xᵢ is the initial position at
48
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
time tj. Average velocity points in the same direction as the displacement. If the
displacement points in the positive X- direction, the average velocity is also in the
positive x - direction. If the displacement points in the negative x-direction, the
average velocity is in the negative x-direction.
Key Concept:
Exercise 3.8
to Average velocity is the total displacement of a body over a time interval.
Dr Does the average
speed the same as
To determine the velocity at some instant, such as t = 1.0 s, or t = 2.0 S etc.,
the magnitude of
we study a small time interval near that instant. As the time intervals becomes
the average velocity?
smaller and smaller, the average velocity over that interval becomes instantaneous
Explain.
velocity. Instantaneous velocity of a body is its velocity at any time t. For a body
that undergoes uniform motion, the velocity of the body is uniform and the
average velocity and the instantaneous velocity are the same. Instantaneous
velocity can be positive or negative. The magnitude of the instantaneous velocity
is known as the instantaneous speed.
Exercise 3.9
jer
In 2003 Tirunesh Dibaba won the world junior cross-country title by
completing a 5,000-metre in 14 min 39.94 sec (junior world record) and
secured the gold at the International Association of Athletics Federations
(IAAF) world track and field championships, becoming the youngest-ever
world champion in her sport. Calculate her average speed.
Key Concept:
JF Instantaneous velocity is the velocity of a body at a specific instant in
time.
Example 3.4
A student attained a displacement of 360 m north in 180 S. What was the student's
average velocity?
Solution:
We know that the displacement is 360 m north and the time is 180 S. We can use
the formula for average velocity to solve the problem.
-
3.3 Average Velocity and Instantaneous Velocity
49
Example 3.5
A girl jogs with an average velocity of 2.4 m/s east. What is her displacement after
40 seconds?
Solution:
Given: vₐᵥ = 2.4m/s east, t = 40 seconds Solution: The displacement of the girl is
$ = = = 96 m East
s
Exercise 3.10
Example 3.6
10 Athlete 1 com-
A bus moving along a straight line towards west covers the following distances in
pletes 100m in 55
the given time intervals. Calculate the average velocity of the bus for each time
seconds and athlete
interval.
2 completes the
S in km
20
60
100
140
same distance in 50
t in hour
0
1
2
3
seconds. Compare
their average speeds.
Which athlete has
Solution:
By computing the displacement of the bus for each time interval, we can calculate
higher average
the average velocity of the bus as follows.
speed?
Between t₀ = 0 and t₁ = 1 hr
The average velocity during this time interval is
the
Between t₁ = 1 hr and t₂ = 2 hr
X₂ = Xf Xᵢ = 100 km 60 km = 40 km
The average velocity of the bus during this time interval is
the
Between t₂ = 2 hr and t₃ = 3 hr
X₃ = Xf - Xᵢ = 140 km - 100 km = 40 km
50
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
The average velocity during this time interval is
Therefore, for each time interval, the average velocity of the car is constant. This
implies that the car is undergoing uniform motion.
Note: You can convert km/hr into m/s by the relation:
1 1000
3.4 Acceleration
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define acceleration;
calculate the average acceleration of a body if its velocity changes from
some initial value to final value in a given time.
a)
The discussion of motion with varying velocity can be dealt with by the intro-
duction of the concept of acceleration. Acceleration is a vector quantity and is
a measure of how much the velocity of an object changes in a unit of time (in
v
one second). Acceleration is denoted by à and its SI unit is m/s, that is, meters
a
per second squared or meters per second per second. Acceleration occurs when
velocity changes in magnitude (an increase or decrease in speed) or in direction,
b)
or both as shown in Figure. 3.6. Acceleration is, therefore, a change in speed or
direction, or both.
Key Concept:
v
a
It Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity.
Figure 3.6 (a) positive acceleration
If the initial velocity of a body is vᵢ at a time ti, and the final velocity is vƒ at a
(car speeding up) and (b) negative
time tf , the average acceleration is, from the definition,
acceleration (car slowing down).
(3.9)
If a body starts from rest, then the initial velocity is zero (vᵢ = 0). If the velocity
of a body decreases, then the final velocity is less than the initial velocity. Such
3.4 Acceleration
51
motion is called decelerating motion. Deceleration is the negative of acceleration.
If the body comes to rest, the final velocity is zero (vf = 0).
Exercise 3.11
jo If the initial and final velocities of a car are the same, what will be its
acceleration?
It Is the direction of the acceleration always in the direction of the velocity?
Example 3.7
A train moving in the east direction accelerates from rest to 36 km/h in 20 S. What
is the average acceleration during that time interval?
Given: vᵢ = 0, vf = 36 km/h, t = 20 s,
Required: aₐᵥ =?
Solution:
e
Note that 36 km is equivalent to 10 ms. m/s. The plus sign in the answer means that
acceleration is to the right. This is a reasonable conclusion because the train
starts from rest and ends up with a velocity directed to the right (i.e., positive). So,
acceleration is in the same direction as the change in velocity.
Example 3.8
A car travelling at 7.0 m/s along a straight road accelerates 2.5 m/s² to reach a
speed of 12.0 m/s. How long does it take for this acceleration to occur?
Given: vᵢ = 7.0 m/s, Vƒ = 12.0 m/s, aₐv = 2.5 ml s²,
Required: t =?
52
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
Solution:
=2s
3.5 Uniform Motion
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define uniform motion;
give examples of uniform motion.
Uniform motion is the motion of an object along a straight line with a constant
velocity or speed in a given direction. In a uniform motion, an object travels
equal distances in fixed intervals of time. In fact, a moving body does not have a
uniform speed throughout its motion. Sometimes the body speeds up or slows
down, and other times it moves with a constant speed. This is why describing
motion in terms of average quantities (average speed and average velocity) is
highly important. Some examples of a uniform motion are a car moving on a
straight road with a fixed speed (as shown in Figure 3.7) and an airplane flying
with constant speed in a given direction.
Key Concept:
It Motion at a constant velocity or uniform motion means that the position
of the object is changing at the same rate.
The uniform rectilinear motion has the following properties:
The acceleration is zero (a=0) because neither the magnitude of the velocity
nor its direction changes.
v
Figure 3.7 A car moving with a constant speed without changing the direction of mo-
tion.
3.6 Graphical Representation of Motion
53
On the other hand, the average and instantaneous velocities have the same
values at all times.
Exercise 3.12
3.6 Graphical Representation of Motion
It Consider the fol-
lowing S-t graph of
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
two cars in motion
plot s-t and v-t graphs;
on a straight line as
shown in Figure 3.8.
define the slope of a motion;
Which car is moving
faster and why?
calculate the velocity from S-t graph and acceleration from v-t graph.
The motion of an object travelling even in a straight line can be complicated.
The object may travel forwards or backwards, speed up or slow down, or even stop.
Where the motion remains in one dimension, the information can be presented
in graphical form. The main advantage of a graph compared with a table is that it
allows the scope of the motion to be seen clearly.
Car B
Position-Time Graph
Distance
Car A
A position-time graph indicates the position of an object at any time for motion
that occurs over an extended time interval. The data from Table 3.2 can be
presented by plotting the time data on a horizontal axis and the position data on
Time
a vertical axis, which is called a position-time graph. The graph of the runner's
motion is shown in Figure 3.8. To draw this graph, first plot the runner's recorded
Figure 3.8 The s-t graph for a uni-
form motion.
positions; then, draw a line that best fits the recorded points.
Table 3.2 Table 3.2: Position-time table for the runner.
Position vs. time
Time (s)
Position (m)
0
0
1
5
2
10
3
15
4
20
5
25
6
30
54
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
To determine the velocity or speed of the runner, consider the meaning of the
slope. Start with the mathematical definition of slope.
vertical
Rewriting the above equation in another way, we have
slope - rise At At vavavi
(3.10)
The horizontal axis (the run) typically represents time, while the vertical axis
(the rise) measures different aspects of whatever you're measuring on your graph
(position in this case). Therefore, if we take any two points from the graph, the
speed from the S-t graph is
to the positive x-direction.
This shows that the displacement increased by 5.0 m in 1.0s. The S-t graph
gives a constant velocity.
Key Concept:
Jt The slope of a position-time graph represents the average velocity of an
object.
Velocity- Time Graph
A graph of velocity against time shows how the velocity of an object changes with
time. Just as a displacement-time graph shows how far an object has moved,
a velocity-time graph shows how its velocity changes during the motion of the
object. Table 3.3 shows the data for a car that starts at rest and speeds up along a
straight line of a road. The velocity-time graph obtained by plotting these data
points is shown in Figure 3.9. The positive direction has been chosen to be the
same as that of the motion of the car. Notice that this graph is a straight line,
which means that the car is speeding up at a constant rate. The rate at which the
car's velocity is changing can be found by calculating the slope of the velocity-
time graph. Consider a pair of data points that are separated by 1 s, such as 4.0
3.6 Graphical Representation of Motion
55
S and 5.0 S. At 4.0 s, the car is moving at a velocity of 20.0 m/s. At 5.0 s, the car
is travelling at 25.0 m/s. Thus, the car's velocity increased by 5.0 m/s in 1.00 S.
The rate at which an object's velocity changes is called the acceleration of the
object. When the velocity of an object changes at a constant rate, the object has a
constant acceleration.
25.0
20.0
Table 3.3: Velocity vs. time of a car
Time (s)
Velocity (m/s)
15.0
Velocity (m/s)
10.0
0
0
slope
rise
10.0 m/s
5.0
run
2.00s
1
5
5.00 m/s2
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
2
10
Time (s)
3
15
Figure 3.9 The slope of a velocity-
4
20
time graph is the acceleration of
5
25
the object.
Key Concept:
Activity 3.2
The slope of a velocity-time graph represents the acceleration of an
Plot a-t graph from
object.
the above v-t data
and discuss in
In a uniform motion, the v-t graph is a horizontal line as shown in Figure 3.10
groups about the
indicating that the velocity is constant at any given time. The area under the v-t
value of the acceler-
graph in a uniform motion represents the distance covered by the object. The
ation as time goes.
area of the rectangle in Figure 3.10 is given by, area = b X h = vt = s, which is
equal to the distance covered by the object.
V (m/s)
Activity 3.3
Discuss in groups and determine the slope of the v-t graph in a uniform
motion?
Area = b X h = vt=s
t
Speed Limit and Traffic Safety
Figure 3.10 The v-t graph of a
Have you ever noticed a traffic sign of a speed limit shown in the Figure 3.11?
uniform motion.
What does it indicate and what is its importance?
The above Figure 3.11 shows that drivers are required to keep the speed of their
cars at 80 km/hr or below. Drivers violating this speed limit will be charged by
the traffic police as they may cause danger. Nowadays, vehicles moving with
very high speed are the main causes for the death of thousands of people and
56
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
several property damages as they cannot be controlled easily during accident
as indicated in Figure 3.12. One can easily read the speed of a car from the
speedometer. Speedometer is a device used to measure the instantaneous speed
of a car. It is very important to keep the speed of cars at optimum level to save
lives and avoid property damages.
Figure 3.12 Traffic accident.
Activity 3.4
It Discuss in groups and identify the type of vehicles causing human/ani-
mal deaths and property damages in your area. Can you guess the percent-
age of the accidents caused by violation of speed limits? Discuss in groups
and report to you teacher. Also suggest possible solutions.
Virtual Laboratory
60
60
60
Company
Figure 3.11 Speed limit in a typical city road.
3.6 Graphical Representation of Motion
57
Click on the following link to perform virtual laboratory on motion in
straight line under the guidance of your teacher.
1. The Moving Man PhET Experiment
Unit Summary
In this unit, you have learnt the following main points.
Motion in a straight line is one of the simplest forms of motion in a
specific direction and is called rectilinear motion.
An object is in motion if it changes position relative to a reference
point
Motion can be described by distance, speed, displacement, and
velocity, where displacement and velocity also include direction.
Distance is a physical quantity which describes the length between
two points (places) and is the total path length travelled by a body.
Distance is a scalar quantity.
Displacement is the change in position of a body in a certain direc-
tion.
The speed of an object can be calculated by dividing the distance
traveled by the time needed to travel the distance.
The velocity of an object is the speed of the object with its direction
of motion.
Average velocity is displacement over the time period during which
the displacement occurs. If the velocity is constant, then average
velocity and instantaneous velocity are the same.
Acceleration occurs whenever an object speeds up, slows down, or
changes direction.
Uniform motion is the motion of an object along a straight line with
a constant velocity or speed in a given direction.
The slope of a position-versus-time graph at a specific time gives
instantaneous velocity at that time.
58
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
On a speed-time graph, a horizontal line represents zero acceleration
or constant speed.
End of Unit Questions and Problems
Part I: Conceptual questions and workout problems
1. How are average velocity and instantaneous velocity related in a
uniform motion?
2. What does the area under velocity against time graph describe in a
uniform motion?
3. If the slope of the graph is zero in a distance against time graph,
what can one conclude about the motion of the body?
4. When do we say that the acceleration of a body is
(a) positive?
(b) negative?
5. Here are three pairs of initial and final positions, respectively; along
an X axis. Which pairs give a negative displacement: (a) -3 m, 5 m;
(b) -3 m, -7 m; (c) 7 m, -3 m?
6. An athlete covers a 100 m distance in 55 seconds. Calculate the
average speed of the athlete.
7. A car moves with a steady speed of 60 km/hr for 2 hours between
two towns A and B. If the average speed of the car for the round trip
is 50 km/hr, then compute the speed of the car when it moves from
B to A.
8. Based on the distance against time graph of a certain car
shown in the Figure below, answer the following questions.
3.6 Graphical Representation of Motion
59
s(m)
80
60
20
t(s)
0
10
20
50
(a) What is the initial position of the car? Take your reference
frame at the origin.
(b) How fast is the car going?
9. A man riding a horse maintained an average speed of 30km/hr to
cover the distance between two villages A and B in 45 minutes. How
far apart are villages A and B?
10. An airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and then decel-
erates at 1.50 m/2 for 40.0 S. What is its final velocity?
11. The following table describes the distance covered by a body moving
along a straight line to north direction for the first 10 seconds.
S(m)
0
20
40
60
80
100
t(s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Based on the information given in the table,
(a) plot the distance against time graph using excel worksheet.
(b) compute the velocity of the car.
(c) plot the velocity against time graph of the car using excel work-
sheet.
(d) determine the initial position of the car
12. An athlete swims from the north end to the south end of a 50.0 m
pool in 20.0 S and makes the return trip to the starting position in
22.0 S.
60
Unit 3 Motion in a Straight Line
(a) What is the athlete's average velocity for the first half of the
swim?
(b) What is the average velocity of the athlete for the second half
of the swim?
(c) What is the athlete's average velocity for the round trip?
Part II: Multiple choice questions
13. A train is traveling on a straight track at a constant speed. In 80
seconds it covers a distance of 2400 meters. What is the speed of the
train?
(a) 30 m/s
(b) 40 m/s
(c) 60 m/s
(d) 100 m/s
14. A car is traveling on a straight highway at a speed of 90 km/h. How
far does the car travel in 15 minutes?
(a) 50 km
(b) 30 km
(c) 22.5 km
(d) 12.5 km
15. A car accelerates from rest to a speed of 20 m/s in 10 seconds. What
is the acceleration of the car during this time interval?
(a) 1m/s²
(b) 2m/s²
(c) 0.5m/s²
(d) 5m/s²
16. The following figure shows the speed versus time graph of a car
moving in a straight line. Between which two points is the car expe-
riencing uniform motion?
3.6 Graphical Representation of Motion
61
A
B
D
Speed
C
Time
(a) Between B and C
(b) Between C and D
(c) Between A and B
(d) Between B and C, C and D
17. A man walks 7 km in 2 hours and 2 km in 1 hour in the same direction.
What is the man's average velocity for the whole journey?
(a) 3 km/h
(b) 2 km/h in the same direction
(c) 2 km/h
(d) 3 km/h in the same direction
