Unit 4
Force, Work, Energy and Power
Introduction
In unit 3 you developed the concepts and ideas needed to describe the motion of
Brainstorming
a moving body. This branch of mechanics is called kinematics. In this chapter,
Questions
rather than simply describing the motion, we will consider the forces that cause
Based on the
the motion to occur. Treating motion in this way falls within the branch of me-
knowledge you ac-
chanics called dynamics. In simple terms, a force can be thought of as simply a
quired from your
push or a pull, but forces exist in a wide variety of situations in our daily lives and
lower grades, how
are fundamental to the nature of matter and the structure of the universe. In this
do you explain
unit, the different types of forces, Newton's laws of motion and the concept of
force?
work, energy and power will be discussed in a brief way.
What is your con-
cept of work and
energy?
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
understand the different types of forces;
practically measure forces and differentiate between mass and weight;
explain the Newton's laws of motion;
Know about work and energy;
relate work and power.
64
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
4.1 The Concept of Force
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define force, and give examples of forces;
practically measure the gravitational force on an object.
From your everyday experience, you have basic understanding of the concept
of force. Any time the state of motion of an object changes, a force has been
applied. Force can cause a stationary object to start moving or a moving object
to accelerate. You exert force to stretch or compress a spring, to throw or kick a
ball, to pick your books from a table, to fetch water from a river or well etc. In
mechanics, a force is a push or a pull exerted on a body that changes the state of
Activity 4.1
motion of the body. That means force can change the velocity of a body or cause
Can a force always
deformation by changing its shape or size. The push or pull on an object can
cause motion? Dis-
vary considerably in either magnitude or direction. Because a force is determined
cuss in groups and
by both a magnitude and a direction, it is a vector quantity. Forces, like other
with your teacher.
vectors, are represented by arrows and can be added using the familiar head-to-
tail method or trigonometric methods. Examples of forces include friction force,
normal force, and the force of gravity.
Contact and Non-Contact Forces
In each of the situations depicted in Figure 4.1, forces are acting. Some are applied
directly to an object and some act on a body without touching it. Forces that
involve physical contact between objects are called contact forces, because the
bodies will experience the force while contact is maintained. However, forces that
do not involve physical contact between objects are know as non-contact forces.
Contact forces are the easiest to understand and include the simple push and
pull that are experienced daily in people's lives. Applied forces, normal forces,
frictional forces, and spring forces are the types of contact forces.
You might have already an experience that when you bring a piece of iron
close to a magnet, but without touching it, the piece of iron will be attracted to
the magnet. This magnetic force is one common example of non-contact force.
Another example of a non-contact force is the gravitational force between an
object and the earth. If you throw the object vertically upwards, it falls back to
earth because of this force.
4.1 The Concept of Force
65
Pull Force
Push Force
Figure 4.1 Examples of contact forces.
Exercise 4.1
In unit 2, you have
already discussed
vector and scalar
quantities. There-
fore, tell whether a
force is a vector or
scalar quantity. How
do you represent it?
Gravitational Force
Magnetic Force
Figure 4.2 Examples of non-contact forces.
Key Concept:
Contact forces involve physical contact between two bodies and the non-
contact forces do not involve any physical contact.
You might have day to day experience of measuring a force, for example, through
observation or by doing it yourself. The most convenient way of measuring a
force is by using the deformation of a spring. The spring elongates when the force
is applied, and a pointer on the scale reads the value of the applied force. The SI
Key Concept:
unit of force is newton and is represented by N.
Force is a vector
Activity 4.2
quantity and is rep-
resented as F or
What do the scales on the roadsides or in the bathroom actually mea-
simply as bold F, i.e.,
sure? Your mass or your weight? Discuss in groups and with your teacher.
F
66
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
N
0,000 0.278
11.00
3.06
Orange
17:09:56
CAS
3 "
CAS
00
Figure 4.3 Measuring force.
Definition:
Weight is the magnitude of the gravitational force acting on a body and is
also measured in Newton. The gravitational force is directed towards the
center of the earth.
4.2 Newton's Laws of Motion
4.2 Newton's Laws of Motion
67
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define Newton's first, second and third laws of motion;
explain the dependence of acceleration on net force and mass;
explain how gravity affects the motion of objects.
Newton's First Law of Motion:
Activity 4.3
Let us say you are riding in a car. If the car comes to a sudden stop,
your body tends to keep moving forward. However, when the car starts
moving again, your body tends to move backward. What do you think is
the reason? Discuss in groups.
Newton's first law of motion is sometimes called the law of inertia. It states that a
body continues to be in its state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line un-
less it is acted on by unbalanced force. Newton's first law of motion explains how
inertia affects moving and non-moving objects. Inertia is a property of matter
by which it continues in its existing state of rest or uniform motion in a straight
line, unless that state is changed by an external force. In other words inertia is the
tendency of an object to resist any attempt to change its velocity.
Look at the pool balls in Figure 4.4. When a pool player pushes the pool stick
against the white ball, the white ball is set into motion. Once the white ball is
rolling, it rolls all the way across the table and stops moving only after it crashes
into the cluster of colored balls. Then, the force of the collision starts the colored
balls moving. Some may roll until they bounce off the raised sides of the table.
Some may fall down into the holes at the edges of the table. None of these motions
Activity 4.4
will occur, however, unless that initial push of the pool stick is applied.
What is the relation
Newton's first law of motion defines a special set of reference frames called inertial
between the mass
frames. An inertial frame is defined as one in which Newton's first law of motion
of a body and its
inertia? What is the
(also called the law of inertia) is valid. Such a reference frame is called an inertial
difference between
frame of reference. If an object does not interact with other objects, it has zero
mass and weight?
acceleration in an inertial frame of reference. Any reference frame that moves
Discuss in groups.
with constant velocity relative to an inertial frame is itself an inertial frame.
68
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
15
2
6
3
Figure 4.4 Pool balls remain at rest until an unbalanced force is applied to them. After
they are in motion, they stay in motion until another force opposes their motion.
Key Concept:
JET Newton's first law:
An object at rest remains at rest as long as no net force acts on it.
An object moving with constant velocity continues to move with the
same speed and in the same direction as long as no net force acts on
it.
Mass is a measure of inertia.
Mass is a measure of the resistance of an object to change in its state of motion.
Mass is an inherent property of an object and is constant everywhere. However,
weight is the magnitude of the gravitational force acting on an object and can
change from one place to another. Objects with large masses have large inertia
and are more resistant to changes in their state of motion.
4.2 Newton's Laws of Motion
69
Newton's Second Law of Motion
We have discussed Newton's first law which explains that an object either remains
at rest or moves in a straight line with constant speed when there is no unbal-
anced force acting on it. But what happens to an object when there is nonzero
unbalanced force acting on it? This question is answered by Newton's second law
of motion. To hold an object in your hand, you have to exert an upward force to
oppose, or "balance," the force of gravity. If you suddenly remove your hand so
that the only force acting on the object is gravity, it accelerates downward. This
is one example of Newton's second law, which states, basically, that unbalanced
forces or net external force causes nonzero acceleration.
Activity 4.5
Take a wooden block and place it on a smooth horizontal surface. Push
it with some force F. What did you observe? Now increase the force with
which you push the wooden block and see what happens. Repeat the
activity with even large pushing force. What can you conclude from this
activity?
When you exert some horizontal force F on the block, it moves with some
acceleration a. If you apply a force twice as great, you find that the acceleration
of the block doubles. If you increase the applied force to 3F, the acceleration
triples, and so on. From such observations, we conclude that the acceleration of
an object is directly proportional to the force acting on it. Consider the example
of a batter, like the man in Figure 4.5. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will
be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force.
Activity 4.6
Take two different wooden (or metal) blocks of different masses and
place them on a smooth horizontal surface. Push them with the same
force F. Which block accelerates more? What can you conclude from this
activity?
The acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the force acting on it.
Figure 4.5 Hitting a baseball with
greater force gives it greater accel-
Thus, the greater the mass of an object, the less that object accelerates under the
eration.
action of a given applied force.
70
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
Key Concept:
Newton's second law of motion states that the acceleration of a body is
directly proportional to the net force acting on it and inversely proportional
to the mass of the body.
Mathematically, Newton's second law can be expressed as
F = mã
(4.1)
where F is the force acting on the body, m is the mass of the body, and à is
the acceleration when acted on by the force F.
From the above equation, you can see that the unit of force newton can be
expressed in terms of the units of mass, length, and time.
1 N = 1kgm/s²
(4.2)
Therefore, 1 N is defined as the force that, when acting on an object of mass
1 kg, produces an acceleration of m/s².
At this stage, you may be able to guess the gravitational force Fg acting on an
object by applying Newton's second law. However, here, à is the acceleration due
to gravity. The acceleration due to gravity is denoted by 'g' and has a constant
Key Concept:
value of 9.8 m/s² on the surface of the earth and is directed towards the center of
the earth.
The value of the
acceleration due
to gravity g varies
Hence, applying Newton's second law, the magnitude of the gravitational
with location. For
force on an object is given by:
example, the value
of g on the surface
Fg = mg
(4.3)
of the moon is about
1/6th of that on the
This force is directed towards the center of the earth. Fg is also called weight
surface of the earth.
of the object. Weight of a body is represented by 'W'. The above equation can also
Moreover, the value
be written as:
of g will change as
an object is moved
W = mg
(4.4)
further from the
earth's surface.
4.2 Newton's Laws of Motion
71
Example 4.1
A force of 10N acts on a block of mass 2kg resting on a smooth horizontal surface.
What is the acceleration of the block?
Given: F = 10 N, m = 2 kg
Required: The acceleration 'a' of the block
Solution: The unbalanced force acting on the block is 10N. From Newton's second
law of motion we have:
F = ma
Therefore,
The direction of acceleration is the same as the direction of the force.
Example 4.2
A force of 100N acts on a certain object and accelerates it by 2ms/s² in the direction
of the force. What is the mass of the object?
Given: F = 100N, a =2m/s² =
Required: The mass m of the object.
Solution: The unbalanced force acting on the block is 100N. From Newton's second
law of motion we have:
F = ma
Therefore,
2m/s²
Example 4.3
What is the weight of a body of mass 10kg on the surface of the earth?
Given: m = 10kg
Required: The weight 'W' of the body.
Solution: The weight of the body is given by:
W = mg
Therefore,
W=10kg x x 9.8m/s² = 98N X
72
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
100 N
Newton's Third Law of Motion
Have you ever pushed a wall or your table with your finger tip? Let you do it again
in a class. What do you feel?
100 N
If you push a wall with your hand with some force, the wall pushes your
hand back with the same force. If you push the wall harder, the wall pushes you
back with larger force and you may feel pain in your hand. This simple activity
Figure 4.6 Action and reaction
illustrates an important general principle known as Newton's third law of motion.
forces involved when pushing a
car.
In fact, the force with which you push the car is equal in magnitude but opposite
in direction to the force with which the car pushes you back as shown in Figure
4.6. In general, if F₁₂ is the force exerted by object 1 on object 2 and F₂₁ is the
force exerted by object 2 on object 1, then,
Key Concept:
F₁₂ = F₂₁
(4.5)
The action and reac-
tion forces are equal
That means F₁₂ is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to F₂₁. F₁₂ is
in magnitude but
called action force and F₂₁ is called reaction force, though either force can be
opposite in direc-
labeled the action or reaction force.
tion and they act on
different objects.
Consider a block of mass m placed on a horizontal table (Fig.4.7). What are the
action and reaction forces?
F₂₁=N
The action and reaction forces are represented by F₁₂ and F₂₁. Let F12 be the
force that the block exerts on the table. This force is equal to the weight of the
block. F₁₂ is directed vertically downwards as shown in the figure. On the other
hand, the table exerts a force F₂₁ on the block. F₂₁ is directed vertically upwards,
but has the same magnitude as F₁₂. F₂₁ is also called normal force. However, it
has to be noted that taking F₂₁ as action force and F₁₂ as reaction force is also
possible. NewtonâAZs third law of motion states that every action has an equal
F₁₂=w=mg
and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs.
Figure 4.7 Action and reaction
forces for a block placed on a hori-
zontal table.
4.3 Forces of Friction
73
Figure 4.8 Cars stuck in a frictionless surface
4.3 Forces of Friction
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 4.2
define the force of friction;
Why is it difficult to
walk on a smooth
explain the dependence of friction force on the smoothness and roughness
surface? What
of surfaces;
brings a car moving
explain the advantage and disadvantage of the force of friction.
along a road to stop?
What keeps you
from slipping when
When an object is in motion on a given rough surface, there is resistance to the
you walk? Discuss in
motion of the object from the surface. Such resistance is called force of friction
groups.
and is denoted by 'f'. Forces of friction are very important in our everyday lives.
They allow us to walk or run and are necessary for the motion of wheeled vehicles.
Why do vehicles easily get stuck in a mud (Fig 4.8)? We classify friction forces in
to two main types. They are static friction and kinetic friction.
74
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
Definition:
Static friction: is a kind of friction that exists between two surfaces in
contact when one body tends to slide over the other without moving. It
requires large force to overcome this friction.
Kinetic friction: is the friction between two contacting surfaces when one
of them slides over the other or when one body rolls over the other. Its
effect on motion is less than that of the static friction.
N
The magnitude of friction force depends on the value of the normal force and on
f
Direction of motion
the nature of the contacting surfaces. In general, friction force is larger between
rough surfaces than smooth surfaces. The force of friction is directly proportional
W mg
to the normal force.
Figure 4.9 Frictional force oppos-
ing motion.
4.4 The Concept of Work
Brainstorming
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
Questions
define and describe the scientific meaning of work;
If you carry a sack of
describe the quantitative relationship between work, force and displace-
teff from your home
ment;
to the market, how
much work do you
calculate the work done on an object.
do?
If you push a wall
for 3 hours, how
Scientific Meaning of Work
much work do you
do?
The word work has a variety of meanings in everyday language. In everyday
sense, the term work means to do something that takes physical or mental effort.
Direction of
But in physics, work has a distinctly different meaning. Consider the following
applied force
situations:
Directions of applied
force and displacement
A student holds up a heavy chair for several minutes.
Direction of
A student carries a bucket of water along a horizontal path while walking at
the motion
a constant velocity.
Figure 4.10 Work is done because
It might surprise you to know that as the term work is used in physics, there is no
the force is applied in the same
direction as the direction of dis-
work done on the chair or the bucket, even though effort is required in both cases.
placement of the box.
In physics, work means the use of force to move an object. Not all force that is
4.4 The Concept of Work
75
III
⑉
E
⑉
F
F
⑉
⑉
III
⑉
ДИЯ
⑉
⑉
m
m
MAA
#
111
A
S
B
Figure 4.11 A force moves an object from point A to point B.
used to move an object does work. For work to be done, the force must be applied
in the same direction as the direction of displacement of the object. If a force is
applied in a different direction than the direction of displacement of the object,
no work is done. Figure 4.10 illustrates this fact. As shown in the Figure, carrying
a box while walking does not result in work being done. Work is done only when
the box is lifted up from the ground.
In physics a force does work on an object if it causes the object to move.
Work is done, when a force F|| is applied to an object and the object moves
through a displacement S in the direction of force.
W = F||S
(4.6)
where F|| is the force in the direction of displacement of the object and S is
the magnitude of the displacement.
Definition:
Work is a scalar quantity. The SI unit of work is a Newton-meter (N m)
which is called Joule (J).
Example 4.4
A boy pushed a box by a force of 60 N through a displacement of 12 m on a
horizontal surface. How much work is done by the boy? Assume the force is
parallel to the direction of displacement of the box.
Given: F|| = 60N,
S = 12m
Required: W =?
76
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
Exercise 4.3
Solution:
W= FS =60Nx 12m
1. Write the conditions
W = 720Nm=720J
for work done to be
zero.
2. What will be the
Example 4.5
work done by your
How much vertical force is required to lift a load vertically to a height of 3 m, if the
hand if you hold
work done is 600 J?
your exercise book
Given:
W = 600J,
S=3m
at 1 m height for two
Required:
F| =?
hours?
Solution:
W
=>
Key Concept:
One Joule of work is
done when 1New-
ton of force moves
an object a displace-
200 mg F₁| = 200N
ment of 1 meter
in the direction of
The force needed to lift a load to a height of 3 m is 200 N.
force.
Joule = 1 Newton X
Key Concept:
1 meter
Work is the product of a force and the magnitude of displacement in
the direction of the force.
Work is a transfer of energy from one object to another through the force.
IF Force does work on an object when the object is displaced in the direc-
tion of the applied force.
4.5 Kinetic and Potential Energies
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define and use the concepts of kinetic and potential energies;
solve problems related to kinetic energy and potential energy of an object.
4.5 Kinetic and Potential Energies
77
In the previous section you have learned about work as the transfer of energy
Exercise 4.4
from one object to another through the applied force. In this section you are
What is energy?
going to learn about kinetic and potential energies. Energy is the capacity to do
Can you mention
work and is a scalar quantity. Its S.I unit is Joule (J) similar to that of work.
some forms of
energy? How can
Kinetic Energy
energy transform
from one form to
An object in motion has the ability to do work and thus can be said to have energy.
another?
Kinetic energy (Eₖ) is the form of mechanical energy possessed by an object due
to its motion. For example, a rolling ball, a moving car, or a thrown stone possess
kinetic energy due to their motion. The kinetic energy of an object depends on its
mass and the speed with which it travels. We define kinetic energy of the object as:
Eₖ=¹₂ₘv²
(4.7)
Definition:
Kinetic energy is a scalar quantity and can be described only by its magni-
tude. Its SI unit is Joule (J)
1J=1kgm²/s²
(4.8)
Example 4.6
A 200 g ball is thrown at a speed of 20 m/s. What is the kinetic energy of the ball?
Given: m = 200g,
v = 20m/s
Required: Eₖ
Solution:
Convert the unit of mass from g to kg
200g x (1kg)/(1000g) = 0.2kg
The kinetic energy is
78
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
Exercise 4.5
jer Consider Example 4.6;
1. For a fixed speed, if the mass of the ball is doubled, what will be its
kinetic energy?
2. For a fixed mass, if the speed of the ball is doubled, what will be its
kinetic energy?
3. For a fixed mass, if the speed of the ball is tripled (3 times), what will
be its kinetic energy?
Exercise 4.6
What is potential
Example 4.7
energy? Mention
How fast must a 1 kg ball move in order to have a kinetic energy of 50 J?
examples of poten-
Given: m = 1kg,
Eₖ = 50J =
tial energy. If you
Required: v=?
lift a box and put it
on the top of a shelf,
Solution:
what type of energy
N.B: The phrase 'how fast' is related to the speed of the ball
is possessed by the
box? If you stretch a
spring, what type of
Eₖ = ¹₂ᵐv²
v²=2xEₖ
energy it holds?
Gravitational Potential Energy
Potential energy is the stored energy in an object by a virtue of its position or its
configuration. There are two types of potential energy. Examples are potential
energy due to gravity, and elastic potential energy. However, in this section you
are going to learn gravitational potential energy.
Gravitational potential energy is the energy of an object held in a vertical position
due to the force of gravity working to pull it down. The gravitational potential
energy depends the height and mass of an object. The heavier the object and the
4.5 Kinetic and Potential Energies
79
higher it is above the ground, the more potential energy it holds. The gravitational
potential energy (Eₚ) of an object is given by:
Ep = mass X gravitational acceleration X height
Eₚ = mgh
(4.9)
Exercise 4.7
jt
Object A has twice the mass of object B. If object B is 4 m above the
floor and object A is 2 m above the floor, which one has greater potential
energy?
jo
If both objects in the question above were lowered by 1 m, would they
still have the same ratio of potential energies that they had in their original
positions? Explain your reasoning.
Example 4.8
How much potential energy is possessed by an object of mass 30 kg placed on the
top of 50 m high building? (Use the acceleration due to gravity g = 10 m/s²).
Given: m = 30 kg,
h = 50m,
g = 10 m/s²
Required: Eₚ =?
Solution:
15000 15000
The potential energy possessed by a 30 kg object at a height of 50 m is 15000 J.
Example 4.9
How high should an object of mass 5 kg be lifted in order to have an energy of 1000
J? (Use the acceleration due to gravity g = 10 ).
Given: m = 5 kg,
Eₚ = 1000 J,
g = 10 m/s²
Required: h =?
Solution:
80
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
Key Concept:
Eₚ = mgh
h h= Epmg
Kinetic energy:
energy possessed by
an object due to its
motion.
Potential energy:
This means that an object of mass of 5 kg should be lifted to a height of 20 meters
energy possessed
in order to have a gravitational potential energy of 1000 J.
by an object due
to its position or
configuration
The sum of kinetic and potential energies is known as Mechanical energy. Thus,
we can express mechanical energy as:
Mechanical Energy = Kinetic Energy + Potential Energy
4.6 Power
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define and describe power;
describe quantitative relationships among work, energy and power.
Brainstorming
In the previous section you have learned that work is done by moving an object
Questions
parallel to the direction of the force applied. But it is important to consider the
to
What is power?
time taken to do the work.
You and your friend
Definition:
are given the same
work. You com-
Power is the rate at which work is done or the rate at which energy is being
pleted the work in
transferred.
3 hours. But your
friend completed
the work in one and
power = work time taken done = Energy time transferred taken
(4.10)
a half hour. Who has
more power? Men-
tion some examples
(4.11)
of power in your
Power is a scalar quantity like work and energy. The SI unit of power is J/s
daily life.
(Joule/second) which is called watt (W). 1 w is the power developed when one
Joule (1J) of energy is transferred in one second (1 s).
1W=1J/s
(4.12)
4.6 Power
81
Example 4.10
If a car used up to 1500 J of energy in 5 seconds, what is the power developed by
the car?
Given: E = 1500 J,
t=5s
Required: P =?
Solution:
P = E t = 1500 5 s J = 300J/s = 300 W
Exercise 4.8
Example 4.11
A machine lifts
What is the power of a water pump that can lift 500 liters of water through a vertical
a 100 kg of stone
height of 10 meter in 5 seconds (Take g = 10 m/s² )?
to a height of 5 m
Given: m = 500 kg,
h = 10 m,
t=5s
in 2 seconds. Cal-
Required: P =?
culate the power
developed by the
Solution:
machine?
P = Eₚ t = P = t = 500 kg X 5 s 10 m X 10m = 10000J/s = 10000 W = 10 kW
The power of a water pump is 10 kW.
Virtual Laboratory
Click on the following links to perform virtual laboratory on force,
work and energy under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Forces and Motion: Basics PhET Experiment
2. Energy Skate Park PhET Experiment
82
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
3. Hooke's Law PhET Experiment
Unit Summary
In mechanics, a force is a push or a pull exerted on a body that
changes the state of motion of the body. That means force can
change the velocity of a body or cause deformation by changing its
shape or size.
Forces can be classified as contact and non-contact forces. Contact
forces involve physical contact between two bodies and the non-
contact forces do not involve any physical contact
Newton's first law of motion, sometimes called the law of inertia,
states that a body continues to be in its state of rest or of uniform
motion in a straight line unless it is acted on by unbalanced force.
An inertial frame is defined as one in which Newton's first law of mo-
tion is valid. Any reference frame that moves with constant velocity
relative to an inertial frame is itself an inertial frame.
Newton's second law of motion states that the acceleration of a
body is directly proportional to the force acting on it and inversely
proportional to the mass of the body.
Action and reaction forces are equal in magnitude but opposite in
direction. Work is the product of a force and displacement parallel
to the direction of the force applied, or a transfer of energy from one
object to another through the force.
Kinetic energy (Eₖ) is the form of mechanical energy possessed by
an object due to its motion.
Potential energy is the energy possessed by an object due to its
position or configuration.
Mechanical energy is the sum of kinetic and potential energies.
Power is the rate at which the work is done or the rate at which
energy is being transferred.
4.6 Power
83
End of Unit Questions and Problems
Part I: Short answer questions
1. What is the difference between mass and weight?
2. State Newton's laws of motion.
3. What are the action and reaction forces involved when you walk on
a surface?
4. What is the acceleration of a 10 kg block when acted on by a force of
50N?
5. Determine the weight of a 50kg mass on the surface of the earth.
6. A certain force F accelerates a 25 kg object by 4m/s². Calculate the
magnitude of the force F.
7. What is frictional force? Explain some of its advantages and disad-
vantages.
8. What is the weight of a 250 kg object on the surface of the moon? The
acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the moon is one-sixth
of that on the surface of the earth.
Part II: Multiple choice questions
1. Which of the following units belongs to work?
A. kg m/s²
B. N/m
C.kg m² / s²
D. N1m²
2. A box is pulled from point A to point B by a force of 10 N. If the
distance between the points is 6 m, what is the work done?
A.6J
B.10J
C.60J
D.100J
84
Unit 4 Force, Work, Energy and Power
3. Which one of the following objects DOES NOT have gravitational
potential energy?
AA bottle on the surface of a table
B. A ball on the level ground
CA stone on the roof of a house
D. A fruit on a branch of a tree
4. A loader lifts a 500 kg stone at a height of 8 m in 2 seconds. The
power developed by the loader is (take g = 10m/s²)
A. 5000 W
B. 20000 W
C. 40000 W
D. 80 000 W
Part III: Workout Problems
1. A physics student does a work on a 2.5 kg curling stone by exerting
50 N of force horizontally over a distance of 2 m. Calculate the work
done by the student on the curling stone.
2. Calculate the kinetic energy of the following objects.
(a) A man of mass 50 kg running at a speed of 20 m/s
(b) A 200 g of bullet fired at a speed of 300 m/s
(c) A car of mass 1000 kg travelling at 80 meter per second
3. Calculate
(a) The potential energy of 10 kg stone placed at a height of 10 m
above the ground.
(b) The position of the 10 kg stone if it possesses a potential energy
of 400 J.
4. A crane is capable of doing 1.5 X 10⁵ J of work in 10 seconds. What is
the power of the crane in watts?
