Unit 1
Physics and Human Society
Introduction
You learnt about general science in lower grades. General science includes sub-
Brainstorming
jects like Biology, Chemistry and Physics. Therefore, in this grade level and in
Questions
higher grades, you will learn about each of the three subjects and explore their
Explain science
beauty. In this unit you will learn about physics and the human society. In par-
and its broad cate-
ticular, you will learn about definition of physics, different branches of physics,
gories.
relationship between physics and other fields of study, contributions of promi-
What are the
nent scientists in advancing physics, and the way physics knowledge was evolving
main branches of
and changing in history.
natural science?
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
define physics in different ways;
describe the different branches of physics;
describe the relationships between physics and other fields of study;
discuss the contributions of prominent scientists in advancing physics at
different periods of time;
describe how aspects of physics are used in other sciences (e.g. biology,
chemistry, engineering, etc.) as well as in everyday technology; and
discuss how physics knowledge was evolving and changing in history.
2
Unit 1 Physics and Human Society
1.1 Definition and Nature of Physics
Exercise 1.1
10 In your own
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
words, define what
define physics in different ways.
physics is.
Name other tech-
Have you ever thought about some modern technological devices such as
nological products
computers, smart phones, tablets etc? Also think about the fact that our histor-
in your locality that
ical heritages such as Harar Jugol, Fasciledes Castle, the Obelisk of Axum and
rely on the principle
rock-hewn churches of Lalibela buildings have kept their balance and survived
of physics.
for hundreds of years. The working principles of all these rely on physics.
The word physics is thought to have come from the Greek word phusis, mean-
ing nature. Hence, physics is a branch of natural science aimed at describing the
fundamental aspects of our universe. These include what things are in it, what
properties of those things are noticeable, and what processes those things or
their properties undergo. In simpler terms, physics attempts to describe the basic
mechanisms that make our universe behave the way it does. For example,
Activity 1.1
Physics enables you to understand the working principles of cars, airplanes,
it By discussing in
space-rockets, refrigerators, radios, televisions,e as well as many of your
groups, mention im-
daily utensils and tools.
portance of physics
other than those
Physics explains physical phenomena such as the difficulty of walking on a
mentioned above.
smooth plane, and why an electric fan rotates etc.
What other physi-
cal phenomena may
Physics helps you discover some of the unknown parts of nature and makes
you understand in
you familiar with the modern world.
your locality using
physics?
Physics helps you to understand some concepts in other subjects like:
IF What is a physi-
Biology, Chemistry, Geology, Astronomy, etc.
cist?
Studying physics helps you understand concepts, relationships, principles
and laws of nature. A person who studies physics is called a physicist. In addi-
tion to understanding the concepts, relationships, principles and laws of nature,
studying physics has various career opportunities. Some of te fields in which
physics is applicable include:
The field of transportation
The field of aviation and space science
1.2 Branches of Physics
3
The field of medicine
The field of forensic and military science
the field of meteorology and metrology etc
Key Concept:
so
1.2 Branches of Physics
Physics is a
branch of natu-
ral science that
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
attempts to describe
describe the different branches of physics.
the basic mecha-
nisms that make our
As our technology evolved over the centuries, physics has expanded into
universe behave the
many branches. Some of the branches of physics are summarized in Table 1.1.
way it does.
Exercise 1.2
List as many physical phenomena in your surroundings as you can.
Describe in which branch of physics each physical phenomenon can be
categorized.
Key Concept:
Activity 1.2
The branches of physics include: Mechanics, Acoustics, Optics, Ther-
Discuss in groups
modynamics, Electromagnetism, Nuclear Physics, etc.
and list some other
fields or areas of sci-
ence where physics
is applicable.
1.3 Related Fields to Physics
At the end of the lesson, you should be able to:
Key Concept:
identify different general fields of physics and their applications in life;
Physics is the
discuss the relationships between physics and other sciences and fields
foundation of many
like transport, traffic, quality control and standards, etc.
important scientific
disciplines including,
Physics is the foundation of many important scientific disciplines. Some of
Chemistry, Engi-
neering, Geology,
them are discussed below.
Biophysics, Geo-
Chemistry: Chemistry deals with the interactions of atoms and molecules.
physics, Medical
Physics etc.
However, it is rooted in atomic and molecular physics.
4
Unit 1 Physics and Human Society
Table 1.1 Some branches of physics and their descriptions
Branch
Description
Mechanics
Mechanics is the branch of physics which deals with the
motion of an object without or with the reference of force.
Mechanics can be further divided into two branches namely
quantum mechanics and classical mechanics. Quantum
mechanics deals with the behavior of smallest particles like
neutrons, protons, and electrons, while classical mechanics
is the branch that deals with laws of motion of forces and
physical objects.
Acoustics
Acoustics is the branch of physics which deals with the study
of sound and its transmission, production, and effects.
Optics
Optics is the branch of physics which deals with the behav-
ior, propagation, and properties of light.
Thermodynamics
Thermodynamics is the branch of physics which studies
thermal energy and the transfer of heat.
Electromagnetism
Electromagnetism is the branch of physics which deals with
the study of electromagnetic force like electric fields, light,
magnetic fields, etc. There are two aspects of electromag-
netism which are "electricity" and "magnetism"
Nuclear physics
Nuclear physics is the branch of physics which deals with
the structure, properties and reactions of the nuclei of
atoms.
Astrophysics
Astrophysics is a science that employs the methods and
principles of physics in the study of astronomical objects
and phenomena.
Engineering: Most branches of engineering also apply physics. For exam-
ple, in architecture, physics is at the heart of determining structural stability,
acoustics, heating, lighting, and cooling for buildings.
Geology: Parts of geology, the study of nonliving parts of Earth, rely heavily
on physics; including radioactive dating, earthquake analysis, and heat
transfer across Earth's surface.
Biophysics: Biophysics applies principles and methods used in physics to
study biological phenomena. Physics uses mathematical laws to explain the
1.4 Historical Issues and Contributors
5
natural world, and it can be applied to biological organisms and systems to
gain insight into their workings.
Geophysics: Geophysics applies the principles and methods of physics to
the study of the Earth
Medical Physics: Diagnostics and medical therapy, such as x-rays, mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasonic blood flow measurements
involves principles of physics.
1.4 Historical Issues and Contributors
At the end of the lesson, you should be able to:
recognize at least three issues and four prominent physicists with signifi-
cant contributions to the development of physics;
collect and use pictures and texts from a library and the internet to present
prominent figures in the history of physics.
Over the last few centuries, the growth of scientific knowledge has resulted
in ever-increasing specialization and branching of physics into separate fields.
Physics, as it developed from the renaissance to the end of the 19th century, is
called classical physics. Revolutionary discoveries starting at the beginning of
the 20ᵗʰ century transformed physics from classical physics to modern physics.
Many laws of classical physics have been modified during the 20ᵗʰ century, re-
sulting in dramatic changes in technology, society, and our view of the universe.
Discoveries of physics find applications throughout the natural sciences and in
technology. Some of the physics discoveries that changed the world are discussed
below.
Isaac Newton contributions laid the foundations for classical physics/clas-
sical mechanics. He contributed to the Scientific Revolution of the 16th and
17th century by formulating three laws of motion, known as NewtonâAZs
laws of motion and showed how the principle of universal gravitation could
be used to explain the behavior not only of falling bodies on the earth but
also planets and other celestial bodies in the heavens.
6
Unit 1 Physics and Human Society
Michael Faraday contributed a lot to the field of electromagnetism. In 1821
he succeeded in producing mechanical motion by means of a permanent
magnet and an electric current. Ten years later he converted magnetic force
into electrical force, thus inventing the world's first electric generator. In
general Michael Faraday changed the world with magnet.
James Prescott Joule studied the nature of heat, and discovered its rela-
tionship to mechanical work. This led to the law of conservation of energy.
Joule's work helped lay the foundation for the first of three laws of thermo-
dynamics that describe how energy in our universe is transferred from one
object to another or transformed from one form to another.
Marie Curie conducted pioneering research in the field of nuclear physics,
particularly on radioactivity. She is considered as the mother of modern
nuclear physics. She discovered elements polonium and radium.
Albert Einstein is known for developing theory of relativity. This revolution-
ary theory had a profound impact on classical mechanics and the under-
lying philosophy of physics. He is widely acknowledged to be one of the
greatest physicists of all time. Einstein also made important contributions
to the development of the theory of quantum mechanics.
Exercise 1.3
It Mention some other well-known historical contributors in physics and
describe their roles.
Key Concept:
JF Revolutionary discoveries starting at the beginning of the 20th century
transformed physics from classical physics to modern physics. Many laws
of classical physics have been modified during the 20ᵗʰ century, resulting
in dramatic changes in technology, society, and our view of the universe
1.4 Historical Issues and Contributors
7
Unit Summary
The following are the main points you learnt in this unit.
Science is a systematized knowledge arising from observation, study
and experimentation.
Physics is the branch of natural science which describes the basic
mechanisms that make our universe behave the way it does.
Physics is the study of everyday phenomena.
A person who studies physics is called a physicist.
Physics has several branches such as mechanics, acoustics, optics,
thermodynamics, electromagnetism, nuclear physics, astrophysics
etc.
Physics is the foundation of many important scientific disciplines
such as chemistry, engineering, geology, biophysics, geophysics,
medical physics, etc.
There are several well-known scientists and engineers that have
contributed a lot for the advancement of physics.
End of Unit Questions
1. The Greek word 'phusis' for nature is appropriate in describing the
field of physics. Which one of the following is the best answer for
this?
(a) Physics is a natural science that studies life and living organ-
isms on habitable planets like Earth.
(b) Physics is a natural science that studies the laws and principles
of our universe.
(c) Physics is a physical science that studies the composition,
structure, and changes of matter in our universe.
(d) Physics is a social science that studies the social behavior of
living beings on habitable planets like Earth.
2. A moving car suddenly comes to a rest after applying brakes. Which
8
Unit 1 Physics and Human Society
branch of physics do you think is appropriate to explain this phe-
nomenon?
(a) Mechanics
(b) Acoustics
(c) Electromagnetism
(d) Nuclear physics
(e) None of the above
3. Which of the following is not one of the branches of physics?
(a) Thermodynamics
(b) Optics
(c) Classical physics
(d) Evolution
4. Which of the following is not a historical contributor in physics?
(a) Willebrod Snell
(b) Daniel Bernoulli
(c) Thomas Young
(d) Charles Darwin
5. Which of the following institution/project does not apply the princi-
ple of physics?
(a) Ethiopian Aviation Industry
(b) Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD)
(c) Quality and Standard Authority of Ethiopia
(d) Ethiopian Radiation Protection Authority
(e) None of the above
6. Which branch of Physics is most important when studying the na-
ture and behavior of light?
(a) Quantum Mechanics
1.4 Historical Issues and Contributors
9
(b) Nuclear Physics
(c) Optics
(d) Thermodynamics
7. Galileo's famous experiment at the leaning tower of Pisa demon-
strated that
(a) what goes up must come down
(b) all objects fall to earth at the same rate, regardless of their mass
(c) heavier object falls faster than lighter object of the same size
(d) gravity does not act on a falling object
Vcs
c
h
S
m
kg
A
mol
e
NA
