Unit 7
Temperature and Thermometry
Introduction
You are familiar with the word temperature. The water in the shower or bucket
Brainstorming
feels hot or cold or warm. The weather outside is chilly or steamy. You certainly
Questions
have a good experience for how one temperature is qualitatively different from
What is tempera-
another temperature. You may not always agree on whether the room tempera-
ture? How do you
ture is too hot or too cold or just moderate. But you will likely all agree that you
feel your environ-
possess built-in thermometers for making qualitative judgments about relative
ment? Is it hot
temperatures. In this unit you will learn temperature and its effects, different
or cold? Do you
temperature measuring scales, different types of thermometers, conversion of
feel the difference
between hot and
temperature from one scale to another, and linear expansion of solids.
warm, cold and
cool? Are these
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
words are accurate
understand temperature and different temperature scales;
to describe the
temperature of an
construct your own temperature scale;
object? How is tem-
develop experience of using different thermometers.
perature related to
your life?
146
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
7.1 Temperature and Our Life
At the end of this section , you should be able to:
define temperature;
describe the effect of temperature in your daily life;
discuss the range of temperature difference from equator to polar region
of the Earth.
Activity 7.2
The concept of temperature has evolved from the common concepts of hot
and cold. Human perception of what feels hot or cold is a relative one.
Click on the follow-
ing link
Activity 7.1
Gas Properties PhET
1. a) Prepare three cups with hot, warm and cold water;
Experiment and
describe the mo-
b) Place your left hand in the hot water and your right hand in the
tion of water and
cold water and automatically put both hands in the warm water.
gas particles and
What do you feel on your left and right hands? Discuss.
their average ki-
netic energy as the
2. If you touch a wood and a metal plate in the morning, the wood feels
temperatures in-
warmer than the metal plate. Why? Discuss in large group.
creases or decreases
3. Is testing the hotness and coldness of a body by your hands (feeling)
gradually.
reliable?
From Activity 7.1 you have learned that testing the hotness or coldness of a
Key Concept:
body by feeling is not reliable. This is because the warm water feels cool to the
IF Temperature is
hand that was in the hot water, and warm to the one that was in the cold wa-
the degree of hot-
ter. Thus, you cannot conclude that the warm water is hot or cold using your hand.
ness or coldness of a
body.
Temperature is defined as the measure of the average kinetic energy of the
Temperature is re-
particles in a sample of matter expressed in terms of units or degrees designated
lated to the average
on a standard scale.
kinetic energy of the
particles in a body.
A key feature of our environment is the combination of temperature and
humidity that determines the heat balance of human beings. Human beings are
comfortable with temperature between 18°C and 22°C, particularly referred to
as room temperature. Temperature affects human life in different ways. Human-
being's clothing, eating habit, health and even economy is affected by temperature
of the environment.
7.1 Temperature and Our Life
147
(a) Cold weather
(b) Moderate weather
(c) Hot weather
Figure 7.1 Different living styles due to variations of temperature.
Exercise 7.1
How does temperature affect human-being's clothing, eating habit,
health and economy?
What do you feel when the temperature is below or above room temper-
ature?
In our planet Earth, temperature varies from one place to another. For exam-
Activity 7.3
ple, polar regions are very cold, temperate regions have moderate temperature
How do human
and tropical regions are hot. The temperature difference from the pole to the
beings and other liv-
equator depends on the Sun's energy and the energy retained in Earth's system.
ing creatures adapt
The equator receives the most direct sunlight and therefore the most intense solar
to the temperature
energy. The polar region, on the other hand, receives less of sun's energy and has
of Tropic, Temper-
lower overall temperature. The yearly average temperature of tropical rain forest
ate and Polar zones?
zone varies from 21°C to 31°C. The average temperature of temperate climates is
Discuss in group.
between -3°C and 18°C. During summer, the average temperature in polar zone
Identify bodies
which have very
is - 14°C. However, in winter the average temperature is -50°C. Figure 7.2 shows
high temperature
the temperature of tropic, temperate and polar zones in descending order from
and very low tem-
the hottest (Equatorial zone) to the coldest (Polar zone).
perature in your
surroundings.
In nature, the Sun and the other stars have high temperature. The average
temperature of the Sun's outer surface is about 5600 K (≈ 5327°C). In your sur-
rounding there are also bodies with high temperature, for example, fire from
biomass (wood), electric heaters, electric stoves, and a candle's flame and so on.
There are also materials which have low temperature. Some examples are solid
water or ice (below 0°C), solid carbon dioxide (-78°C), liquid nitrogen (-196°C)
and so on.
148
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Brainstorming
Questions
7.2 Extreme Temperature Safety
What is extreme
temperature? Which
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
temperature is com-
describe the comfortable environmental temperature for human beings;
fortable for human
beings?
explain some safety precautions of extreme temperature.
The human body has a normal temperature between 97°F (36.56°C) and
Activity 7.4
99° F (37.2°C), but on average, a normal body temperature is 98.6° F (37°C). To
How can you main-
maintain this temperature without the help of warming or cooling devices, the
tain a healthy tem-
average temperature of the surrounding environment needs to be at about 82°F
perature when the
(28°C). In reality the temperature of the surrounding environment is rarely 28°C.
weather is very cold
It varies from time to time.
or very hot? Discuss
in groups.
POLAR ZONE
SUBPOLAR ZONE
TEMPERATE ZONE
SUBTROPICAL ZONE
TROPICAL ZONE
EQUATORIAL ZONE
Figure 7.2 Temperature of tropic, temperate and polar zones.
7.3 Temperature Change and its Effects
149
High environmental temperatures can be dangerous to your body. In the
range of 90° and 105°F (32°C and 40°C), you can experience heat cramps and ex-
haustion. Between 105° and 130°F (40° and 54°C), heat exhaustion is more likely.
You should limit your activities at this range. An environmental temperature over
130° (54°C) often leads to heat stroke.
Safety precautions
1. Stay well-hydrated to best avoid heat-related illness. Drink enough
water. Don't rely solely on thirst as a guide to how much liquid you
should be drinking.
2. Wear clothing that is appropriate to your environment. Clothes that
are too thick or too warm can quickly cause you to become over
heated. If you feel yourself getting too hot, loosen your clothing or
remove excess clothing until you feel cool enough.
3. Wear sunscreen when possible to avoid sunburn, which makes it
harder for your body to get rid of excess heat.
4. Try to avoid places that can get extremely hot.
7.3 Temperature Change and its Effects
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
Brainstorming
describe the average change in global temperature;
Questions
explain the major effects of higher temperature in our community and
Have you observed
environment;
change in temper-
ature from year to
list the causes for the temperature increment in our environment;
year? What are the
causes for change in
list greenhouse gases that cause rise in temperature.
temperature? How
can this problem be
One of the most immediate and obvious effects of global warming is the increase
resolved?
in temperatures around the world. The average global temperature has increased
by about 1.4 degrees Fahrenheit (0.8 degrees Celsius) over the past 100 years, ac-
cording to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Since
record keeping began in 1895, the hottest year on record worldwide was 2016
according to NOAA and NASA data. That year's Earth surface temperature was
150
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
1.78 degrees Fahrenheit (0.99 degrees C) higher and was the largest incremental
change in temperature.
0.6
Global Temperatures
0.4
Annual Average
Temperature Anomaly (°C)
Five Year Average
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
Figure 7.3 Yearly average global temperature increment for the last 120
years.
Exercise 7.2
Search from different sources and write a report on the following questions:
1. What are the causes for the continuous rise in temperature on our
planet Earth.
2. How do you think can this problem be solved to improve the lives of
future generation?
3. What is the greenhouse effect?
4. The communities in different regions of Ethiopia have indigenous
knowledge practice of caring natural resources like forest. Have you
observed this in your community? How does this practice reduce
global warming?
The natural warming of the Earth that results when the greenhouse gases in
the atmosphere such as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, water vapor and
fluorinated gasses trap heat from the sun is called greenhouse effect. Naturally,
7.3 Temperature Change and its Effects
151
the greenhouse effect is important to warm the planet to its comfortable average
temperature (15°C) and to keep life on Earth. However, mankind's activity such
as burning of fossil fuels for energy is artificially increasing up the natural green-
house effect which results in global warming. The choices we make now and in
the next few decades will determine how much the planet's temperature will rise.
If people keep adding greenhouse gases into the atmosphere at the current
rate, the average temperature around the world could increase by about 4
to 12°F.
If we make big changes, like using more renewable resources instead of
fossil fuels, the increase will be less about 2 to 5°F.
Higher temperatures mean that heat waves are likely to happen more often
and last longer, too. Heat waves can be dangerous, causing illnesses such as heat
cramps and heat stroke, or even death. Warmer temperatures can also lead to a
chain reaction of other changes around the world. This is because increasing air
temperature also affects the oceans, weather patterns, snow and ice, and plants
and animals. The warmer it gets, the more severe the impacts on people and the
environment will be.
Activity 7.5
Discuss the major effects that higher temperatures have on people and the
environment with respect to:
1. Agriculture
4. Health
5. Forests
2. Water supply
6. Plants, animals and ecosys-
3. Energy
tems
Key Concepts:
Greenhouse gases are the causes for global warmings.
Higher temperature affects agriculture, energy, water supply, health,
and ecosystems.
Greenhouse gases are: carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and
fluorinated gases.
A body having particles with small kinetic energy has low temperature.
A body having particles with high kinetic energy has high temperature.
152
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Brainstorming
7.4 Measuring Temperature with Different Thermometric
Questions
Scales
Which tempera-
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
ture scales do you
come across in your
define thermometer;
life? Which scale do
explain how thermometer works;
physicians use to
measure your body
describe different temperature scales;
temperature?
design temperature scales using local materials.
In the previous section you have discussed that it is difficult to measure the
temperature of a body accurately by touching or using our sense perceptions.
To measure the temperature of a body accurately we need a special instrument
called thermometer.
Exercise 7.3
Thermometer is a device used to measure the temperature of a body. It mea-
How does a ther-
mometer work?
sures temperature in degrees.
Many thermometers make use of the fact that materials usually expand with
increasing temperature. A thermometer consists of a tube of uniform thin bore
with a small bulb at its bottom. The tube is commonly filled with mercury or
expansion chamber
alcohol to a certain height. It operates by contraction and expansion of the
capillary tube
mercury or alcohol in the bulb. Figure 7.4 shows parts of mercury thermometer.
scale
Temperature Scales
Exercise 7.4
stem
column of mercury
1. List some of the temperature scales you know.
2. Which temperature scales do medical doctors use to measure a body
temperature?
3. What is the human body temperature in Celsius and Fahrenheit
constriction
scales?
mercury bulb
4. Which temperature scales are commonly used in your local area?
Figure 7.4 Mercury thermometer.
7.4 Measuring Temperature with Different Thermometric Scales
153
In this section you are going to see three different temperature scales. These
are:
Centigrade (Celsius) scale
Celsius
Fahrenheit scale
Boiling point
100°C
Kelvin scale
of water
100
In designing a thermometer, two temperatures of a body are marked on it as
Celsius
degree
fixed points. These are the lower fixed point (melting point of ice) and the upper
fixed point (boiling point of water) at sea level.
Freezing point
0°C
of water
The Celsius Scale
The Celsius scale or centigrade scale was devised by the Swedish astronomer,
Anders Celsius (1701-1744). He assigned the value 0°C (0 degree Celsius) to the
ice point of water and 100°C(100 degree Celsius) to the steam point or boiling
point of water. By dividing the space between the two fixed points into 100 equal
parts a Celsius scale is determined. Each unit or division is called degree (°). Each
Figure 7.5 The Celsius tempera-
ture scale.
division in Figure 7.5 represents 1°C.
Exercise 7.5
What is the temperature of the melting point of ice?
What is the temperature of the boiling point of water at sea level?
The Fahrenheit Scale
The Fahrenheit scale was designed by the German scientist Daniel Fahrenheit.
He assigned 32° F (32 degrees Fahrenheit)to the ice point of water and 212° F
(212 degrees Fahrenheit) to the steam point or boiling point of water. Since the
Boiling point of
water
100
100°C
200
212'F
difference between the ice point and boiling point is 180; one can obtain the
Human body
37°C
100
98.6°F
temperature
Fahrenheit scale by dividing the space between the two fixed points into 180
Freezingpoint of
O'C
32°F
water
equal parts. Temperature in Fahrenheit scale is denoted by °F, read as degrees
Sublimation
79°C
100
-109°F
of dry ice
Fahrenheit. Each division in Figure 7.6 represents 10 degree Fahrenheit.
200
Boiling point of
-300
liquid air
-194°C
-318°F
The Kelvin Scale
Absolute zero
-273°C
-459°F
The third type of temperature scale is called Kelvin scale. This scale was designed
by Scottish physicist Lord Kelvin (1824 - 1907). He assigned 273.15 to ice point
Celsius
Fahrenheit
154
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
and 373.15 to boiling point. By dividing the space between the two fixed points
into 100 equal parts Kelvin scale is obtained. The SI unit for temperature is kelvin.
Its symbol is K (Note: No degree sign is used with the unit kelvin). This scale is
used commonly for scientific works and has greater scientific significance.
Experiments have shown that there exists a lowest possible temperature below
which no substance can be cooled. This lowest temperature is defined to be the
zero point on the Kelvin scale (0 K or -273.15 °C) and is referred to as absolute
zero.
Key Concepts:
jur Celsius scale: a temperature scale where the freezing point of water is
fixed at 0 degrees and the boiling point is at 100 degrees.
Jo Fahrenheit scale: a temperature scale where the freezing point of water
is fixed at 32 degrees and the boiling point is at 212 degrees.
JET Kelvin scale: a temperature scale that uses absolute zero as one of its
fixed points.
Jr Absolute zero: the temperature at which a substance has no thermal
energy.
Reading Thermometer
When the temperature of a material rises, the volume of the mercury expands and
causes the mercury inside the tube to rise. Thus, one can read out the marked
scale on the tube and know the value of the temperature. In contrast to this when
the temperature of the material falls, then the mercury inside the tube contracts.
This causes the level of the mercury inside the tube to drop. The temperature can
thus be read from the corresponding scale on the tube.
7.4 Measuring Temperature with Different Thermometric Scales
155
Activity 7.6
Materials needed: Cold, warm, hot water in different containers and a
thermometer.
1. Observe your thermometer and determine its unit of measurement.
2. Measure the temperature of the water in different containers.
3. Record the measured values in a table with proper units.
4. Compare the temperature of the recorded values.
Project: Design Your own Temperature Scale
Materials needed for each group:
Clear, narrow necked plastic bottle (350 to 500 ml water bottles work well ),
Clear, plastic drinking straw or similar clear thin plastic,
Measuring cups or beakers,
210 ml water,
210 ml alcohol (ethanol based),
Large glass jars (to mix the water and alcohol). Note that this alcohol-water
mixture is more than enough for seven (7) groups. Each group needs only
60 ml.
Stirring rod made of metal or wood,
Food coloring,
Rulers,
Fine point permanent markers,
Clay,
Thermometers.
Procedure
Before the activity
156
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
1. A week before the activity, bring a clear, plastic disposable bottle with a
narrow neck to school.
2. Prepare a mixture of equal parts rubbing alcohol and water. Each team
needs about 60 ml of this mixture.
3. Use a stirring rod to keep the solution mixed.
4. Pour about 60 ml of the alcohol-water mixture into each bottle.
5. Add a few drops of food coloring to the mixture and mix it gently.
Marked index
card
Tape
Modeling clay
or clay doh
Clear Bottle
Clear straw
Water, alcohol,
food coloring
Figure 7.7 A thermometer that should be designed by students.
7.4 Measuring Temperature with Different Thermometric Scales
157
6. Use a fine-point permanent marker, and use a ruler to make equally-spaced
marks on the straw. You can use any division you want, as long as the marks
divide the straw equally. You are advised to be careful not to bend the straw
in this process.
7. Consider how the scale on a thermometer is marked and carefully number
the marks on the straw.
8. Decide on a unit of measurement for your straw (degree name)
9. Place the straw in the bottle and hold it at the neck of the bottle without
letting it touch the bottom of your plastic bottle.
10. Use modeling clay to seal the neck of the bottle so the straw stays in place.
The designed thermometer should look like the one in Figure 7.7.
11. Wrap your hands around the bottle and observe what happens to the mix-
ture in the bottle. Record on your worksheets the thermometer reading
using the numbers on your scales. For more dramatic results, place the
thermometer in a tube of warm water.
12. Use a real thermometer to measure the temperature of your hands (or tube
of water). Record this temperature on the worksheet next to the reading
from your thermometers.
13. Place your thermometers in a location away from a source of heat (a hallway
instead of the classroom, or some distance away from a heater). After sev-
eral minutes, record the air temperature reading using your new thermome-
ters. Compare with your measurement using a commercial thermometer.
14. Move the thermometers to a source of heat (the warmer classroom instead
of a hallway, or near a heater) and repeat.
15. Place your thermometers in safe places around the classroom and record
the temperature throughout the day. At the same time, record the corre-
sponding Fahrenheit or Celsius thermometer reading, and note the times
the measurements were taken.
16. Complete your worksheets, share, compare and discuss the results.
158
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Exercise 7.6
Brainstorming
Question
1. Do you see any correlations in your data when the temperature is
What are the ther-
cold and when the liquid in your thermometer drops or rises with
mometric prop-
the supply of heat?
erties of mercury
thermometer, alco-
2. Compare the scale on your thermometer to the scale on the real
hol thermometer,
thermometer. How many units on your scale equals 1 unit degree
thermocouple, resis-
Celsius on the real thermometer?
tance thermometer
and radiation ther-
3. Convert from one scale to the other?
mometer?
4. How might understanding the thermal properties of objects, includ-
ing measuring their temperatures, be important in many every day
engineering applications?
5. Write a short report about the process and output of the activity.
Activity 7.7
1. What is the unit of measurement on your temperature scale?
2. Fill your temperature measurements in the provided chart (Table
7.1).
Table 7.1 Worksheet of your temperature scale.
Distance from heat
Temperature on
Temperature
Compare the tem-
source
your designed
on your real
peratures
thermometer
thermometer
0.5 m
1m
1.5 m
2m
2.5 m
7.5 Types of Thermometers and Their Use
7.5 Types of Thermometers and Their Use
159
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
list different types of thermometers;
describe the uses of different thermometers.
All thermometers make use of the change in some physical property with
temperature. A property that changes with temperature is called a thermometric
property. For example, the thermometric property of the mercury thermometer
is the length of the mercury column, while in the constant-volume gas ther-
mometer it is the pressure of the gas. Several important thermometers and their
thermometric properties will now be discussed.
Exercise 7.7
1. What are the different temperature scales? What are fixed points in
each scale?
2. Explain the meanings of lower and upper fixed points?
50
130
3. How many divisions are there between the lower and the upper fixed
120
40
110
points, in each scale?
100
30
90
20
80
70
4. What is the SI unit of temperature?
10
60
50
0
40
30
5. What type of thermometers do you know from your life experience?
10
20
10
20
Discuss.
30
10
6. Searching from the internet describe different types of thermome-
ters and their use.
Figure 7.8 Mercury thermometer.
Liquid Thermometers
1. Mercury Thermometer
In a mercury thermometer, a glass tube is filled with mercury and a standard
temperature scale is marked on the tube. With changes in temperature,
the mercury expands and contracts and the temperature can be read from
the scale. Mercury thermometers can be used to determine body, liquid,
and vapor temperatures. Mercury thermometers are used in households,
laboratory experiments, and industrial applications. Mercury thermometer
is suitable to measure temperature between -30 degree Celsius and 300
Figure 7.9 Alcohol thermometer.
degree Celsius.
160
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
2. Alcohol Thermometers
An alcohol thermometer is a thermometer which utilizes the expansion
and contraction of alcohol in response to temperature changes to measure
the temperature. A number of different alcohols can be used, depending
on the environment where the thermometer is being utilized, with ethanol
being among the most common. This type of thermometer is very popular
because it is nontoxic, unlike a mercury-in-glass thermometer, and the
contents will not pose a threat to human health or the environment if
the thermometer is broken. Alcohol thermometers are used to measure
temperature from -115°C to 78.15 °C.
3. Resistance Thermometer
Most substances offer resistance to the flow of electricity, and this resistance
changes with temperature. As a result, electrical resistance provides an-
other thermometric property. Electrical resistance thermometers are often
made from platinum wire, because platinum has excellent mechanical and
electrical properties in the temperature range from -270°C to +700°C. The
resistance of platinum wire is known as a function of temperature. Thus,
the temperature of a substance can be determined by placing the resistance
thermometer in thermal contact with the substance and measuring the
resistance of the wire.
Figure 7.10 Resistance thermome-
ter.
4. Thermocouple
The thermocouple is a thermometer used extensively in scientific labora-
tories. It consists of thin wires of different metals, welded together at the
ends to form two junctions, as Figure 7.12 illustrates. Often the metals are
copper and constantan (a copper-nickel alloy). One of the junctions, called
22.4%
the "hot" junction, is placed in thermal contact with the object whose tem-
perature is being measured. The other junction, termed the "reference"
junction, is kept at a known constant temperature (usually an ice-water
mixture at 0°C). The thermocouple generates a voltage that depends on
WÖHLER
the difference in temperature between the two junctions. This voltage is
the thermometric property and is measured by a voltmeter, as the drawing
Figure 7.11 Thermocouple ther-
mometer.
indicates. With the aid of calibration tables, the temperature of the hot
junction can be obtained from the voltage. Thermocouples are used to
measure temperatures as high as 2300 °C or as low as -270°C.
5. Thermistor
7.5 Types of Thermometers and Their Use
161
A thermistor is a resistance thermometer, or a resistor whose resistance is
dependent on temperature. The term is a combination of 'thermal' and
'resistor'. It is made of metallic oxides, pressed into a bead, disk, or cylin-
145
drical shape and then encapsulated with an impermeable material such as
ThermoPop
glass. There are two types of thermistors: Negative Temperature Coefficient
(NTC) and Positive Temperature Coefficient (PTC). With NTC thermistor,
when the temperature increases, resistance decreases. Conversely, when
temperature decreases, resistance increases. This type of thermistor is used
the most. A PTC thermistor works a little differently. When temperature
increases, the resistance increases, and when temperature decreases, resis-
tance decreases. This type of thermistor is generally used as a fuse. Typically,
a thermistor achieves high precision within a limited temperature range of
about 50°C around the target temperature. This range is dependent on the
Figure 7.12 Thermistor thermome-
base resistance
ter.
6. Radiation Thermometers
Radiation thermometers are not based on any change of property with tem-
perature but use the electromagnetic radiation from a body to be measured.
J00
As the body warms up, the total radiation it emits increases rapidly and
the spectral distribution shifts to shorter wavelengths. The temperature
can thus be determined by measuring the radiation, and there is a clear
advantage that all the detecting equipments is remote from the hot body.
The application areas of radiation thermometer are quite extensive. They
are frequently used in industrial processes, the professional sector and in
particular to monitor main supply units or to measure the temperature of
components in motors or machines. Glass and electrical industries use
Figure 7.13 A radiation thermome-
ter.
many forms of radiation thermometers.
Exercise 7.8
1. List the different types of thermometer.
2. Write the difference between mercury and alcohol thermometers.
3. Describe measuring ranges of temperatures of different types of
thermometers.
4. Why do we need different types of thermometers? Discuss.
162
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Key Concepts:
JF Mercury thermometer uses the expansion of mercury due to change in
temperature. It measures temperature between -30 degree Celsius and 300
degree Celsius.
It Alcohol thermometer uses the expansion of alcohol due to change in
temperature. It is used to measure temperature from - -115 °C to 78.15°C.
JF Thermocouple uses voltage as the thermometric property. It measures
temperatures as high as 2300 °C or as low as -270 °C.
7.6 Conversion between Temperature Scales
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
convert temperature in degree Celsius scale to temperature in Fahrenheit
scale and vice versa;
convert temperature in degree Celsius scale to temperature in Kelvin scale
and vice versa;
convert temperature in degree Fahrenheit scale to temperature in Kelvin
scale and vice versa.
7.6 Conversion between Temperature Scales
163
Temperature conversion between Degree Celsius and Fahrenheit Scale
212 °F
100 °C
373.15K
water boils
32 °F
0 °C
273.15 K
water freezes
-459.7 °F
-273.15 °C
OK
absolute zero
°F
°C
K
Figure 7.14 The fixed points of Fahrenheit, Celsius and Kelvin temperature
scales.
Exercise 7.9: Using the fixed points from Figure 7.6
go Derive the formula to convert temperature in Celsius scale to Fahrenheit
scale.
It Derive the formula to convert temperature in Fahrenheit scale to Celsius
scale.
Tc - ice point
TF - ice point
=
(7.1)
steam point - ice point steam point - ice point
Tc - 0 TF - 32
1>
Tc = TF - 32
=
(7.2)
100-0 212 - 32
100
180
From this relation we determine the following two formulas that help to
convert temperature from degree Celsius scale to Fahrenheit scale and vice versa.
164
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
THE
(7.3)
(7.4)
Example 7.1
If the temperature of the surrounding is 50°F, what is the temperature in degree
celsius?
Given: TF = 50°F
Required: Tc =?
Solution:
Inserting the value of TF
.:.Tc=10°C
Example 7.2
The temperature of a room is 20°C. What is the temperature of the room in degree
Fahrenheit?
Given: Tc = 20°C
Required: Tₚ =?
Solution:
Inserting the value of Tc
=36°F+32°F
.:.TF = 68° F
Temperature Conversion Between Degree Celsius and Kelvin Scale
7.6 Conversion between Temperature Scales
165
Exercise 7.10
0 c
K
1. The size of one Kelvin is identical to that of one Celsius degree.
100
373.15
Discuss and reason out.
2. The temperature difference of 5 °C is equal to the temperature dif-
ference of 5 K. Discuss.
0.01
273.16
3. What is the minimum possible temperature in nature?
0.00
273.15
Denoting the Celsius temperature scale by Tc and the Kelvin temperature
scale by Tₖ and using the ice and steam points of both scales;
Tc - ice point
TK - ice point
=
(7.5)
steam point - ice point steam point - ice point
Tc - 0
Tₖ - 273.15
=
Tc = TK - 273.15
Tc = Tₖ - 273.15
-273.15
0
100
0
373.15-273.15
100
100
(7.6)
Tc = Tₖ - 273.15,
Тₖ = Тc + 273.15
(7.7)
Figure 7.15 The fixed points of
Example 7.3
Celsius and Kelvin temperature
scales.
Water is boiled to a temperature of 72 °C. What does a Kelvin scale read for this
value?
Given:
Tc = 72°C
Required:
Tₖ =?
Solution:
Inserting the value of Tc
Tx = Tc+273.15= (72 +273.15)K
.:.Tₖ=345.15K
166
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Brainstorming
Example 7.4
Questions
The temperature of a hot metal is 573.15 K. What is the value of this temperature
in degree Celsius scale?
What happens
Given:
Tₖ = 573.15K
to metals when
Required:
Tc =?
they are heated or
cooled? Does the
Solution:
wood expand or
Inserting the value of Tₖ
contract when it is
heated or cooled?
Tc = T-273.15=(573.15-273.15)°C
.:.Tc=300°C
Temperature Conversion Between Degree Fahrenheit and Kelvin Scale
From the previous discussions you have learned how to derive a formula of
conversion between the Celsius temperature scale and Fahrenheit temperature
scale. Moreover, you have learnt how to determine the formula of conversion
between the Celsius temperature scale and the Kelvin temperature scale.
Exercise 7.11
1. Employing the same procedure, derive the formula relating the
Fahrenheit temperature scale and the Kelvin temperature scale.
2. The temperature of the environment in Fahrenheit scale is 82 What
is its reading in Kelvin scale?
3. You designed your own thermometer and have a new temperature
scale. On this temperature scale the steam point is 312 degrees and
the ice point is 112 degrees. What is the temperature on this scale
that corresponds to 28 degree celsius ?
7.7 Thermal Expansion of Materials
7.7 Thermal Expansion of Materials
167
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define thermal expansion;
describe the difference in expansion rate of materials;
recommend materials for construction purpose based on their expansion
rate;
calculate temperature dependent linear expansion of materials.
In the previous section you have learnt about temperature, effects of temperature,
different temperature scales, and all temperature related issues. Now we are going
to see the thermal expansion of materials.
Different materials expand or contract at different rates. In general, gases expand
more than liquids, and liquids expand more than solids. Observation of thermal
expansion in a solid object requires careful analysis. Understanding the expansion
of metals is very crucial for using them in different technological applications.
Have you ever found the metal lid on a glass jar too tight to open? One solution
is to run hot water over the lid, to loosen it because the metal expands more
than the glass does. To varying extents, most materials expand when heated and
contract when cooled.
Activity 7.8
Materials needed: copper wire of 2 mm in diameter and 50 cm in length,
aluminum wire of 2mm in diameter and 50 cm in length and steel wire of
2 mm in diameter and 50 cm in length. Procedure
Fasten the three wires at one end and put on a surface or knife-edge
near the other end,
Heat the wires at the same time, (Please do not touch the wires in
your hand. It is dangerous! Use holder.)
1. Which wire expands more?
2. Which wire expands less?
3. What are the factors that determine the linear expansion of solids?
168
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Exercise 7.12
to The lengths of solid bars of different materials can be measured at
different temperatures using very precise equipment as shown in Table
7.2.
Table 7.2 Expansion and contraction of solids.
Material
Length in - 100°C)
Length in cm (0°C)
Length in cm (100°C)
Lead
99.71
100
100.29
Steel
99.89
100
100.11
Aluminum
99.77
100
100.23
Brass
99.81
100
100.19
Copper
99.83
100
100.17
Glass
99.91
100
100.09
Pyrex TM (glass)
99.97
100
100.03
L₀
1. What can you say about the change in length of the bars when they are
cooled to the temperature of -100 degree celsius or heated to the tempera-
ture of 100 degree celsius? Is it very small? While discussing consider very
Temprature = To
long structures such as bridges.
L₀
LL
2. What similarity do you see in how all the materials react as they warm?
3. In what way do the materials react differently as they warm?
Temprature = To +T
4. Which material expands the most as it warms?
Figure 7.16 When the temperature
5. Which material expands the least as it warms?
of the rod raises by T, the length
of the rod increases by L.
6. What do you notice from your list when you examine how the materials
cool and contract? Does the material that expands the most at a high
temperature also contract the most at a low temperature?
7. Compare the change in length of materials at 100 °C in the table and write
it in an increasing order.
8. A builder asked you to select a metal that does not vary with temperature.
Which best metal do you recommend from the list?
When a solid is heated, its particle moves farther apart and hence the solid
expands. To varying extents, most materials expand when heated and contract
7.7 Thermal Expansion of Materials
169
when cooled. The increase in any one dimension of a solid is called linear ex-
pansion, linear in the sense that the expansion occurs along a line. Figure 7.16
illustrates the linear expansion of a rod whose length is L₀ at temperature T₀.
When the temperature increases from T₀ to T₀ + T, the length becomes L₀ + L
where T and L are the magnitude of the changes in temperature and length
respectively. Conversely when the temperature decreases to T₀ - T, the length
decreases to L₀ - L.
For modest temperature changes, experiments show that the change in length
(L) is directly proportional to the change in temperature T.
Key Concept:
jer
Linear expansion: the increase in length of a substance due to heating.
It
Coefficient of linear expansion: the increase in length of a 1 m road of
a given substance when its temperature increases by 1 K.
Exercise 7.14
L oc T
(7.8)
An interesting
In addition, the change in length is proportional to the initial length of the
example of linear
rod.
expansion occurs
when there is a hole
L oc L₀
(7.9)
in a piece of solid
From the above two equations we conclude that,
material. We know
that the material
L oc L₀ T
(7.10)
itself expands when
heated. What about
By using the proportionality constant α,
the hole? Does it
expand, contract, or
L = αL₀AT
(7.11)
remain the same?
where, α is the coefficient of linear expansion and its unit is 1/C
170
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Exercise 7.13
1. What happens to the change in length of the rod if the initial length
of the rod is doubled?
2. Does the coefficient of linear expansion depend on the nature of
material?
3. A bimetallic strip is made from two thin strips of metal that have
different coefficients of linear expansion. Brass α = 19 X 10⁻⁶(ºC)⁻¹
and steel α = 12 X 10⁻⁶(ᵒC)⁻¹ are selected. The two pieces are weld
together.
(a) What happens when the bimetallic strip is heated?
(b) What happens when the bimetallic strip is cooled?
(c) Discuss some technological applications of bimetallic strips. The
coefficients of linear expansion of solids are described in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3 The coefficients of linear expansion of solids.
Substance
Coefficient of linear expansion α in (°C)⁻¹
Aluminum
2.6 X 10⁻⁵
Brass
1.9 X 10⁻⁵
Concrete
1.2 X 10⁻⁵
Copper
1.7 X 10⁻⁵
Glass (common)
8.5 X 10⁻⁶
Glass (Pyrex)
3.3 X 10⁻⁶
Gold
1.4 X 10⁻⁵
Iron or steel
1.2 X 10⁻⁵
Lead
2.9 X 10⁻⁵
Nickel
1.3 X 10⁻⁵
Quartz (fused)
0.5 X 10⁻⁶
Silver
1.9 X 10⁻⁵
7.7 Thermal Expansion of Materials
171
Example 7.5
A thin rod of gold has a length of 1.5 X 10⁻¹ m at a temperature of 27 °C. The rod
falls into a sink of hot water whose temperature is 49 °C. What is the change in the
length of the gold rod?
Given: α=1.4x10⁻⁵(ºC)⁻¹, L₀ = 1.5 x 10⁻¹
Required: L=?
Solution:
From Table 7.3
L = αL₀AT = 1.4 x 10⁻⁻(°C)⁻¹ x 1.5x 10⁻¹(49°C-27°C)
L= 1.4x 10⁻⁻(°C)⁻¹ x 1.5 x 10⁻¹(22°C)
Example 7.6
The initial length of a brass rod is 50 cm at a temperature of 25°C. What will be its
final length when it is heated to a temperature of 70°C?
Given: L₀ = 50cm = 0.5m
Required: LF =?
Solution:
L = αL₀ T
L = 1.9 x 10⁻⁻(°C)⁻¹ x 0.5m(70°C-25°C)
L = 0.043cm
LF = 50cm + 0.043cm = 50.043cm
Virtual Laboratory
172
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
Click on the following links to perform temperature related virtual lab-
oratory under the guidance of your teacher. You can also directly copy
and paste the links in to your browser.
1. States of Matter: Basics PhET Experiment
2. Energy Forms and Changes PhET Experiment
Unit Summary
Temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of a body or an
environment or it is the measure of the average kinetic energy of the
particles in a sample of matter.
Temperature affects mankind's clothing, eating habit, health and
economy.
One of the most immediate and obvious effects of global warming is
the increase in temperatures around the world due to greenhouse
gases.
An instrument that is used to measure temperature of a body is
called thermometer.
A thermometer can read a temperature of a body in one of the fol-
lowing three scales. These are Celsius scale (°C) Faherenheit scale
(°F) and Kelvin scale (K).
The SI unit of temperature is Kelvin (K).
The change in temperature of Celsius and Kelvin scales are equal.
On heating, the particles of a substance move faster and move fur-
ther apart so that the substance expands on heating.
The increase in any one dimension of a solid is called linear expan-
sion.
For modest temperature changes, experiments show that the change
in length (L) is directly proportional to the change in temperature
T and the initial length of the rod L₀. L = αL₀T, where α is
coefficient of linear expansion.
7.7 Thermal Expansion of Materials
173
End of Unit Questions and Problems
Part I Multiple choice
1. Which of the following best defines temperature? Temperature is:
A. the degree of hotness or coldness of a body
B. the measure of the average kinetic energy of a molecule in a body
C. the measure of the total kinetic energy of a molecule in a body
D. A and B
E. A and C
2. Which one of the following instruments is used to measure the tem-
perature of a body?
A. Anemometer
B. Barometer
C. Hydrometer
D.
Thermometer
3. In constructing a thermometer it is necessary to use a substance
that:
A. Expands or contracts with change in temperature
B. Remains constant while heating or cooling
C. Explode while heating
D. None of the above
4. At what temperature do the Fahrenheit and Celsius scale read the
same value?
A. 40°C, 40°F
B. -40°C, 40°F
C. -40°C, - -40°F
D.
40°C, - 40°F
5. Room temperature is about 20 degrees on the: A. Kelvin scale B.
Celsius scale C. Fahrenheit scale D. Absolute scale
6. Thin strips of iron and zinc are weld together to form a bimetallic
strip that bends when heated. The iron is on the inside of the bend
because:
A. It has higher coefficient of linear expansion
B. It has higher specific heat
C. It has higher temperature
D. It has lower temperature
7. Which one of the following sets of temperatures are equivalent? A.
50°F, 10°C, 283.15 K B. 68°F, 20°C, 341.15 K C. 86°F, 30°C,
187.15 K D. None
174
Unit 7 Temperature and Thermometry
8. An annular thin ring of aluminum is cut from the aluminum sheet
as shown below. When the ring is heated:
A. The aluminum expands outward and the hole remains the same
B. The hole decreases in diameter
C. The diameter of the hole expands with the same percent as any
length of the aluminum
D. Linear expansion forces the shape of the hole to be elliptical.
Part II: Short Answer
1. What is temperature?
2. What are the causes for the rise of temperature in our environment?
3. Define absolute zero temperature.
4. What are the steam and ice points of water in Kelvin scale?
5. What is the lowest possible temperature in nature?
Part III: Workout
1. What is the temperature in Celsius scale if the reading in Fahrenheit
scale zero?
2. The temperature of an object is 310 K. What is this temperature in
Fahrenheit scale?
3. The ice and the steam points of the newly designed thermometer is
25° X and 125° X respectively. What value of temperature does this
thermometer read for 62 °C?
4. Calculate the increase in length of a 2m copper rod that is heated
from 0°C to 150°C?
5. The temperature varies from 25°C to 38 °C yearly in Afar region. A
concrete side walk is constructed between two buildings when the
temperature is 25°C. A sidewalk consists of one concrete slab of
length 3m with negligible thickness. What amount of empty space
should be provided to protect the concrete from bending?