Unit 6
Mechanical Oscillation and
Sound Wave
Brainstorming
Introduction
Questions
Many systems oscillate, that is they move back and forth about a fixed point.
Have you ever
played a swing,
All oscillations involve force and energy. For example, you push a child in a
guitar or kirar? Have
swing to get the motion started. You put energy into a guitar string when you
you ever slapped wa-
pluck it. Some oscillations create waves. A wave is a disturbance that moves
ter with your hands
from its source accompanied by transfer of energy. A guitar creates sound
and observed what
waves and you can make water waves in a swimming pool by slapping the
happened? Discuss
water with your hand. Some, such as water waves, are visible. Some, such as
such phenomena or
sound waves, are not. Oscillation is also known as periodic motion. Periodic
motion.
motion is a motion that repeats itself. A small object oscillating at the end of
a spring, a swinging pendulum etc. are examples of periodic motion.
120
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
understand the oscillation of strings, pendulum, and a spring-mass sys-
tem;
know the propagation of different types of waves;
distinguish between different types of waves;
estimate the speed of sound in different media and at different tempera-
ture.
6.1 Common Characteristics of Waves
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define the common characteristics of waves such as period, frequency,
wavelength and amplitude;
describe terms like crest, trough and wave speed;
relate wave frequency, period, wavelength, and velocity;
solve problems involving wave properties.
There are common terms such as period, frequency, amplitude, wave speed
and wavelength that are used to explain periodic motion. These are common
characteristics that all waves share and are discussed below.
Rest position: Rest position is the undisturbed position of particles when they
are not vibrating.
Displacement: Displacement is the distance that a certain point in the medium
has moved from its rest position.
Trough: Trough is the lowest point below the rest position.
Crest: Crest is the highest point above the rest position.
Period (T): Period, denoted by symbol T, is the time for one complete cycle of the
periodic motion. It is also defined as the time taken for one complete wave to
pass a given point.
Frequency (f): Frequency, denoted by symbol f, of a wave is defined as the num-
ber of complete waves passing a given point per unit time. The higher the fre-
6.1 Common Characteristics of Waves
121
quency, the greater the number of waves per second. A common unit for fre-
quency is one cycle per second. This is defined as one Hertz (Hz).
1Hz=1 cycle/s.
Amplitude (A): Amplitude is defined as the maximum displacement from equi-
librium position. Amplitude is denoted by the symbol A and measured in meters
(m).
Wave speed (v): Wave speed is defined as the distance the wave travels in one
second. It is denoted by the symbol V and like all speeds it is measured in meter
per second.
Wavelength (A): Wavelength is defined as the distance between identical points
on adjacent waves. For example, the distance between two adjacent crests or
troughs of a wave is one wavelength. Wavelength is denoted by Greek letter A
(lambda).
displacement
crest
amplitude
X
motion of
trough
the wave
wavelength
Figure 6.1 Characteristics of wave.
Next, we illustrate the relation between period, frequency, wavelength and wave
speed. We begin with simple question. What does it mean by a wave of frequency
Key Concept:
1Hz, 2Hz, 3Hz, etc? If you consider a wave with a frequency of 2 Hz this would
Period, Frequency,
mean 2 waves passing a point per second. This implies that each wave would
Amplitude, Wave
take 0.5 second to pass the point. Therefore, the period of the wave is 0.5 second.
speed, and Wave-
Hence, the period is the reciprocal of the frequency.
length are common
characteristics of all
1
waves.
f
=
or
T T=1/f 1
(6.1)
In terms of wavelength and frequency, wave speed can be written as,
122
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
wave speed = frequecy X wavelength
v=Axf
(6.2)
6.2 String, Pendulum and Spring
Brainstorming
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
Question
calculate the period of simple pendulum of a given length;
Find a string or
compute the period of oscillation of a spring mass system on smooth
rope in your locality.
horizontal surface;
Stretch the string or
rope by fixing one of
define Hooke's law;
its ends with a fixed
pole and holding
practically measure the periods of simple pendulum of a given length and
the other end with
spring mass system in a laboratory or class;
your hand. We say
that the string is in
calculate the value of the acceleration due to gravity in your locality.
equilibrium. Now,
flick the string either
y
up or down. What
Pulse
is
do you observe?
x
Figure 6.2 Pulsed string wave.
If you flick the string once either up or down, a single traveling disturbance is
Activity 6.1
created. This single disturbance propagation is called pulse. The pulse moves
Poke a stick into
horizontally along the string while the particles of the string moves up and down
water contained in
at right angles to the horizontal motion of the pulse. Wave is comprised of a
a dish. What do you
series/train of pulses traveling in a medium.
observe? Instead
of poking the stick
into the water once,
continuously move
it in and out. Now
what do you ob-
serve? Discuss the
phenomena with
your friends and
your teacher.
6.2 String, Pendulum and Spring
123
Wave Motion
Particle Motion
Figure 6.3 Particle and wave motion.
Periodic motion
A to-and-fro movement that repeats itself over and over in a fixed time interval
is referred to as periodic motion. The beating of your heart, the ticking of a
clock, and the movement of a child on a swing are familiar examples. One of the
key characteristics of a periodic system is the time required for the completion
of one cycle of its repetitive motion. A swinging simple pendulum is another
example of periodic motion. A simple pendulum consists of a point mass (the
bob) suspended by a massless, un-stretchable string.
S
Suspension Point
Length
A
B
Maximum point
Maximum point
Bob
0
Equilibrium Point
Figure 6.4 Schematics of simple pendulum.
If the pendulum is displaced from equilibrium, it swings back and forth, and
its motion is periodic.
A simple pendulum is defined to have an object that has a small mass, also
known as the pendulum bob, which is suspended from a light wire or string, such
124
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
as shown in Figure 6.4.
The period of a simple pendulum is given by
T = g
(6.3)
where, L is the length of the simple pendulum and g is the acceleration due to
gravity. This result is interesting because of its simplicity. The only parameters
that affect the period of a simple pendulum are its length and the acceleration
due to gravity. The period is completely independent of other factors, such as
mass. If the length of a pendulum is precisely known, it can actually be used to
measure the acceleration due to gravity.
Example 6.1
What is the period of a simple pendulum with length 50 cm? Use the acceleration
due to gravity g =
Given: L = 50 cm = 0.5m, g = 9.8m/s²
Required: T =?
Solution:
The period of a simple pendulum is given by
T =
Substituting the values of L and g and using π=3.14 we have,
0.5m 1.42s
Example 6.2
A simple pendulum has a length of 100 cm and oscillates periodically with a period
of 0.65π S at a certain place. What is the value of the acceleration due to gravity at
that place?
Given: L = 100 cm = 1m,
T = 0.65π
Required: T =?
6.2 String, Pendulum and Spring
125
Solution:
From the expression of the period of a simple pendulum,
T=2πV₈
The acceleration due to gravity at that place is given by
+
Key Concept:
The period of a
simple pendulum
depends only on
Activity 6.2
its length and the
Use a simple pendulum to determine the acceleration due to gravity
acceleration due to
g in your locality. Cut a piece of string that is about 1m long and attach
gravity. It does not
depend on the mass
a metal ball (or any small object of high density) to the end of the string.
of the bob.
Starting at an angle of less than 10°, allow the pendulum to swing. Using
stopwatch, measure the period of the simple pendulum for 10 complete
oscillations and calculate g. How accurate is this measurement? How
might it be improved?
The simple spring
We are all familiar with a spring. Suppose an object of mass m is attached to one
end, while the other end of the spring is held fixed. The object has an equilibrium
position, call it x = 0, and this is the position where the spring is neither stretched
nor compressed. If the object is displaced away from x = 0 (either stretched or
compressed) and released, it will undergo a to and fro motion about x = 0. This is
another example of periodic motion. In this case, X is the distance by which the
spring is either stretched or compressed and is measured from the equilibrium
position.
If the object is displaced form x = 0, the spring pulls (or pushes) it back to the
equilibrium position (x = 0). Thus, the spring produces a restoring force denoted
by Fᵣₑₛ. The restoring force is related to the extension of the spring by HookâĂŽs
law. Thus, HookâĂŽs law is stated as, 'The restoring force (or the force exerted
by the spring) is directly proportional to the displacement of the object from the
equilibrium position x'. Mathematically,
126
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
Frₑₛ = - kx
(6.4)
where, k is a proportionality constant called the spring constant (or stiffness)
of the spring. Its SI unit is N/m (Newton per meter). The negative sign indicates
that the restoring force always acts opposite to the direction of motion or displace-
ment of the spring-mass system. The restoring force Fᵣₑₛ is equal in magnitude
and opposite in direction to the applied force that causes the displacement. That
is,
Fapp = Fres = -(-kx),
Fapp = kx
(6.5)
where, Fapp is the applied force on the spring.
The force exerted by the spring is a restoring force. No matter which way the
object is displaced from equilibrium, the spring force always acts to return the
object to equilibrium.
If k is large, then the spring is stiff and produces a lot of force for a small
displacement. If k is small, then the spring is said to be loose and doesn't pull
The object at the free end of the
spring is in equilibrium when the
mass
spring is neither stretched nor
compressed. We call this x=0
x
(a)
x = 0
When the spring is stretched ,the
object is at x > 0.The spring
mass
force pulls the object back
toward equilibrium (Fx<0).
x
x
(b)
x = 0
When the spring is compressed,
È
the object is at x<0. .Thespring
mass
force pushes the object back
toward equilibrium (Fx>0)
x
x
(c)
x 0
Figure 6.5 Demonstration of Hooke's law using displacement of a spring.
6.2 String, Pendulum and Spring
127
back with much force. The spring constant k can be measured by applying a force
Activity 6.3
(Fₐₚₚ) and measuring how much the spring stretches (x). Then k = Fapp/x and
has units of force/distance (N/m).
Discuss different
An oscillating object moves repeatedly one way and then in the opposite
examples of spring
direction through its equilibrium position. The displacement of the object (i.e.,
by bringing them to
class. Which springs
distance and direction) from equilibrium continually changes during the mo-
are stiffer and which
tion. In one full cycle after being released from a non-equilibrium position, the
ones are loose?
displacement of the object:
decreases as it returns to equilibrium
reverses and increases as it moves away from equilibrium in the opposite
direction
decreases as it returns to equilibrium
increases as it moves away from equilibrium towards its starting position.
Now, suppose the cart is released from rest at the location x = A. As indicated
Key Concept:
in Figure 6.6, the spring exerts a force on the cart to the left, causing the cart to
The force exerted
accelerate toward the equilibrium position. When the cart reaches x = 0, the net
by the spring is
force acting on it is zero. Its speed is not zero at this point, however, and so it
a restoring force.
continues to move to the left. As the cart compresses the spring, it experiences a
No matter which
force to the right, causing it to decelerate and finally comes to rest at x = -A. The
way the object is
spring continues to exert a force to the right; thus, the cart immediately begins to
displaced from equi-
move to the right until it comes to rest again at x = A, completing one oscillation
librium, the spring
in the time T.
force always acts to
From Figure 6.6:
return the object to
equilibrium.
(a) The mass is at rest position and at its maximum positive value of X. Its veloc-
ity is zero, and the force on it points to the left with maximum magnitude.
(b) The mass is at the equilibrium position of the spring. Here the speed has its
maximum value, and the force exerted by the spring is zero.
(c) The mass is at its maximum displacement in the negative X direction. The
velocity is zero here, and the force points to the right with maximum mag-
nitude.
(d) The mass is at the equilibrium position of the spring, with zero force acting
on it and maximum speed.
128
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
v=0 =
F
(a)
V
F = 0 =
(b)
v=0 =
(c)
F = 0 =
(d)
v=0
(e)
Exercise 6.1
A block of mass
4kg is connected
x = A
0
x=A =
X
to the free end of
a spring and un-
Figure 6.6 A mass attached to a spring undergoes periodic motion about x = 0.
dergoes periodic
motion with period
(e) The mass has completed one cycle of its oscillation about x = 0.
of π/10 s. Compute the
spring constant of
The period of an object of mass m attached to a spring of spring constant k is
the spring in N/m.
given by
T = k
(6.6)
Key Concept:
where, m is the mass of the object and k is the spring constant of the spring. It
The period of a
can be seen that the period only depends on the mass and the spring constant (or
spring mass sys-
stiffness) of the spring.
tem oscillating on a
smooth horizontal
surface depends
Example 6.3
on the mass and
A block of mass 2kg is connected to the free end of a spring with a spring constant
the stiffness (spring
of 200 N/m. Compute the period of the block.
constant) of the
Given: m = 2kg,
K = 200N m
spring.
Required: T =?
6.3 Propagation of Waves and Energy Transmission
129
Solution:
From the period of an object of mass m attached to a spring of spring constant k,
T=2πVπ
6.3 Propagation of Waves and Energy Transmission
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
differentiate between mechanical, electromagnetic, longitudinal, and
transverse waves;
give examples of mechanical, electromagnetic, longitudinal, and trans-
verse waves;
describe the propagation of waves practically using string and water.
A wave is a disturbance propagation in space or in matter. A musician's instru-
ment creates waves that carry sound to your ears. Dialing a cell phone to call a
friend sends microwaves from the cell phone antenna; the microwaves carry the
signal containing your voice to your friend. Similarly, when you throw a stone into
a pond, the energy of the falling stone creates waves in the water that carry the
energy to the edge of the pond. Do you think waves require material medium for
their propagation? In this section we see that some waves need material medium
for their propagation, while others do not need material medium. Waves that re-
quire material medium for their propagation are called Mechanical waves. Other
types of waves known as electromagnetic waves do not need material medium
for their propagation.
Mechanical waves travel through a material as a vibration of the particles of
the material (water, wood, air, etc.). It is these vibrations that form the wave. All
mechanical waves require a medium to travel through. Examples of mechanical
waves include sound waves, water waves, waves in strings, etc.
Electromagnetic waves do not require a medium to travel through. They
are comprised of vibrating electric and magnetic fields and there are no particle
130
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
vibrations at all. This means electromagnetic waves are able to travel through a
vacuum. Examples of electromagnetic waves include light, radio waves, x-rays etc.
The above discussion of wave propagation is depending on whether the waves
require a material medium for their propagation or not. It is also possible to
explain about wave propagation depending on the relation between the direction
of propagation of the wave and the direction of vibrations of the particles of the
medium. On this basis, waves can be classified as transverse and longitudinal
waves.
Key Concept:
Transverse and Longitudinal Waves
All mechanical
waves require a
A transverse wave is a wave where the direction of propagation of the wave
medium to travel
is perpendicular to the direction of vibrations of particles of the medium. In
through. Electro-
other words, in transverse waves, the directions of the particles' vibrations are at
magnetic waves
right angles to the direction of energy transfer (wave movement). Examples of
do not require a
transverse waves include all electromagnetic waves, waves on strings etc. Figure
medium to travel
through.
6.7 shows a transverse wave on the string. To generate such a wave, start by tying
one end of a long string or rope to a wall. Pull on the free end with your hand,
producing a tension in the string, and then move your hand up and down. Note
that the wave travels in the horizontal direction, even though your hand oscillates
vertically about one spot. The displacement of particles in a string is at right
angles to the direction of propagation of the wave.
Key Concept:
V
Wave propagates
away from
In a transverse wave,
source.
the displacement of
Vibrate the
individual particles
end of string
to generate a
is at right angles
wave.
to the direction of
propagation of the
Figure 6.7 Example of transverse wave on a string.
wave.
In longitudinal waves the direction of propagation of the wave (the direction
of energy transfer) is parallel to (in the same direction as) the direction of vibra-
tions of particles of the medium. This means, the vibrations are forward and
backward along the wave. Examples of longitudinal waves include sound waves,
pressure waves, etc. Propagation of longitudinal waves results in the areas of
compressions and rarefactions. Compressions refer to regions where the particles
are pushed together whereas, rarefactions refer to regions where the particles
6.4 Sound Waves
131
move apart (see Figure 6.8). Compressions and rarefactions can be considered
as the longitudinal version of a crest and a trough, respectively. Moreover, if the
medium of propagation is gas, compressions and rarefactions can be taught of as
Key Concept:
regions of high and low pressures, respectively.
A transverse wave
Compression
Expansion
is a wave where the
direction of propa-
gation of the wave
Wavelength
is perpendicular to
the direction of vi-
brations of particles
Figure 6.8 Illustration of longitudinal wave.
of the medium. In
longitudinal waves
6.4 Sound Waves
the direction of
propagation of the
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
wave is parallel to
identify sources of sound wave and explain how sound is produced;
the direction of vi-
brations of particles
compare the speed of sound in different materials;
of the medium.
determine the speed of sound in air at a given temperature;
explain reflection, refraction, diffraction, and interference of sound waves.
Have you ever tried to play a "guitar" or "kirar"? When you strike each string,
it starts to vibrate and as a result you hear a musical sound. When a tuning fork is
struck against a hard object, the prongs vibrate (move backward and forwards).
The vibrations travel away from the tuning fork as a wave called sound wave.
Sound is one of the most common phenomenon in nature. You hear different
sounds throughout the day. The sound of cars, barking of dogs, friends chatting, a
teacher talking and music are some examples of sound. All the above mentioned
sounds stimulate your ears and make you recognize the sources of sound and the
messages sent through sound. In this topic, we explain what a sound is, produc-
tion and propagation of sound, speed of sound in different media, and reflection
of sound (echo).
Sound carries energy and loses its energy as it travels. Our ears are designed
by nature to pick up sound transmitted through different materials. Like other
waves, sound has the properties of frequency, wavelength, amplitude, and speed.
132
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
Production and Propagation of Sound
Sound wave is the most common example of longitudinal waves. They travel
through any material medium with a speed that depends on the properties of the
Activity 6.4
medium. As the wave travels through air, the elements of air vibrate to produce
Take different ma-
changes in density and pressure along the direction of motion of the wave. Sound
terials such as a
is generated by the series of vibrations of an object. Every source of sound is in a
whistle, a ruler, a
state of vibration.
tuning fork, etc from
Activity 6.5
your locality and
produce a sound
Tie a pith ball with a thread and suspend it from any height. Bring a
using them. Explain
tuning fork and touch the pith ball with it. What do you observe? Strike
how each material
the tuning fork with a rubber hammer or on a table edge and touch the
produces sound.
pith ball. What do you observe? What does this show?
How does the sound
reach your ears?
When you touch the pith ball with a tuning fork, nothing happens to the pith
Explain and confirm
ball. Now strike the tuning fork by the hammer on the prong by holding on its
that sounds are pro-
stem. Then touch the pith ball with the fork, you can see the pith ball will fling
duced by vibrating
objects.
away. This shows that the energy on the prong is transferred to the pith ball, and
the pith ball starts to vibrate.
All the sounds you hear are produced by a vibrating object. The air near the
vibrating object is set in motion in all directions. The produced sound travels in
every direction, in the form of energy and reaches your ear.
Activity 6.6
This activity shows the transmission of sound through solids. Two
students sitting at the two ends of a table will do this activity. Let one
student from one end scratch the table with his/her finger nail slightly
while you are sitting on another end of the table and hearing. Have you
heard the scratch or not? Now let the other student who is sitting place
his/her ear against the table while you are scratching. Ask the student who
has placed his/ her ear against the table, what he/she has heard. Can you
tell the difference? What do you conclude from this activity?
The material through which the sound travels and reaches your ear is called a
medium. Sound needs material medium for its transmission. For example, being
in a classroom you hear the school bell ringing, student shouting in a field, or
an ambulance siren. All these sounds travel and reach your ear using air as a
6.4 Sound Waves
133
medium.
Key Concept:
Speed of Sound
Sound is generated
Have you ever compared the speed of sound and light? Exercise 6.2 helps you
by a series of vibra-
compare the two.
tions of particles.
Every source of
sound is in a state of
The speed of sound waves in a medium depends on the compressibility and
vibration.
density of the medium. This means that sound has different speed in different
media. The speed of sound in air is about 331 m/s at 0°C. The speed of sound in
air, V at any temperature Tc can be calculated as
Exercise 6.2
During a thunder-
= 1+
(6.7)
storm you may see
a distant lightning
where 331m/s is the speed of sound at 0°C and Tc is the air temperature in de-
flash some seconds
gree Celsius. The speed of sound in liquids and solids is not affected significantly
before you hear
by the change in temperature, but affected by their body structure.
the thunder. What
do you think is the
reason?
Example 6.4
What is the speed of sound in air at 20°C?
Given: Tc = 20°C
Exercise 6.3
Required: v =?
During rainy season
Solution:
it is common to
The speed of sound at temperature Tc is given by:
hear thunderstorms.
Can you estimate
= 1+ Tc
the distance to the
thunderstorm? Hint:
Count the number
of seconds between
seeing the flash of
lightning and hear-
The difference in speed of sound in different materials can be easily under-
ing the thunder and
stood from the structure of molecules of a substance. The transmission of sound
use air temperature
in different substances depends on the structure of the particles in the substances.
to be approximately
Since the particles in solids are close together, they easily pass the sound to the
20°C.
next particles by collision and the sound moves faster. The particles in liquids
are close together but not bound. However, in gases, the particles are far apart
and collision between them takes place rarely. This is why sound travels slower
134
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
Table 6.1 Speed of sound in various materials.
S. No
Material
Speed of sound in m/s
1
Air (0°C)
331
2
Air (0°C)
343
3
Sea water (25°C)
1533
4
Water (25°C)
1493
5
Iron
5950
6
Lead
1960
7
Rubber
1600
in liquid than in solids and faster in liquids than in gases. The speed of sound in
different materials is given in Table 6.1.
Key Concept:
Reflection, Refraction, Diffraction and Interference of Sound
Sound travels slower
in liquid than in
Echo is used in SONAR (Sound Navigation and Ranging) to find the depth of seas
solids and faster in
or distance of submarines. The principle used here is the fact that time taken for
liquids than in gases.
the sound to reach the obstacle from the source is equal to the time taken for it to
Speed of sound in
return.
liquids and solids is
not affected signifi-
cantly by the change
When you shout in an empty hall or in a forest, the sound will bounce back from
in temperature, but
the wall or forest and comes towards you. We call this the reflection of sound. The
affected by their
reflection of sound from hard surfaces is called an "echo".
body structure.
Hard substances such as walls, rocks, hills, metals, wood, buildings, etc. are good
reflectors of sound since they are polished and hard. But when sound strikes soft
Exercise 6.4
surfaces such as wool, cloth, etc. most of the sound energy is absorbed. When
Discuss with your
you shout or whistle while you are at some distance away from a tall building or a
friends the following
mountain, you may be able to hear the original sound and the reflected sound as
questions. What
two separate sounds.
do you hear if you
shout in a big empty
Key Concept:
hall or in a forest?
Have you ever used
The reflection of sound from hard surfaces is called an echo.
whip to scare birds
or animals? What is
the sound that you
hear back?
6.4 Sound Waves
135
reflected wave
Sender/
Object
Receiver
original wave
distance r
Figure 6.10 Reflection of sound from an object.
Sound bends (changes its direction) when the parts of the wave fronts travel
at different speed. This occurs, for example, in uneven winds or when sound is
Figure 6.9 : Demonstration of reflection of sound (echo).
136
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
day
night
cooler, sound
warmer, sound
travers slower
travers faster
cooler, sound
warmer, sound
travers slower
travers faster
Sound waves
Sound waves
Ground
Ground
Figure 6.11 Reflection of sound during the day and night
Exercise 6.5
When do we hear
travelling through an air of uneven temperature. Such bending or change in the
sounds clearly? Is
direction of sound wave due to change in its speed is called refraction. During a
it during the day or
day, the air near the ground is warmer than the rest of the air. This means that
at night? Discuss
this phenomena in
the speed of sound near the ground increases making them bend away from the
groups.
ground. However, during the night time, the air near the ground is colder than
the rest of the air and the speed of sound near the ground decreases. This makes
sound waves bend towards the ground.
Sound wave also changes its direction or spreads out. Such a change in the
direction or spreading out of sound wave as it passes through an opening or
around a barrier in its path is known as diffraction. Diffraction is a phenomenon
that we experience in our day to day life. It is because of diffraction of sound wave
that we can hear others who are speaking to us from adjacent rooms. Diffraction
is more pronounced with waves of longer wavelength. It means that we will be
able to hear low frequencies around obstacles better than frequencies which are
higher. The long wavelength waves can bend around obstacles and reach our
ears from sources situated at distant places. This principle is also used while
soundproofing a room. A superior quality sound proofing means that there are
no openings present, as even a small aperture can let the sound spread in the
whole area and cause disturbance by the process of diffraction.
6.5 Superposition of Waves
137
6.5
Superposition of Waves
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
define superposition principle;
explain how standing waves are formed;
define interference of waves.
When two or more waves pass through a single point at the same time the re-
sultant instantaneous displacement at that point is the sum of the displacements
that would be created separately by each wave, taking signs in to account. This
principle is said to be the superposition principle.
Superposition is also known as Interference. Interference can be either con-
structive or destructive depending on the phase between the interfering waves.
Two waves are said to be in phase when corresponding points of each wave reach
maximum or minimum displacements at the same time. When two periodic
Key Concept:
waves with the same frequency and wavelength travel in the same direction in
phase, their resultant wave is more amplified and we can say that the two waves
Superposition oc-
interfere constructively.
curs when two or
If two periodic waves with the same frequency and wavelength travel in the
more waves pass
through a single
same direction, but out of phase, the resulting wave is diminished (or may be
point at the same
zero) in amplitude. In such a case the two waves interfere destructively.
time.
Standing Waves
The superposition of two identical waves travelling in opposite directions in the
same medium gives standing (stationary) wave. If you have ever plucked a guitar
string, or blown across the mouth of a pop bottle to create a tone, you have
generated standing waves. In general, a standing wave is one that oscillates with
time, but remains fixed in its location. It is in this sense that the wave is said to be
"standing."
The positions in the medium at which maximum displacement occurs are
called antinodes (A) and those positions with zero displacement are called nodes
(N). Note that:
The distance between adjacent antinodes is equal to 1/2
The distance between adjacent nodes is equal to 1/2
138
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
A
A
2A
A
A
Incident periodic wave
resulting standing wave
reflected periodic wave
A = displacement amplitude
Figure 6.12 Superposition of two identical waves results in a standing wave.
The distance between a node and an adjacent antinode is 1/4
Key Concept:
6.6 Characteristics of Sound Waves
The superposition
of two identical
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
waves travelling in
opposite directions
define terms like loudness, pitch, and timbre (quality);
in the same medium
identify sound pollution issues in the surrounding and justify problems
gives standing (sta-
identified in relation to sound standards.
tionary) wave.
Sound cannot travel through a vacuum. The movement of molecules of a
medium is essential for the propagation of sound waves. The characteristics of
sound are:
Pitch: The pitch of a sound depends on the frequency of the sound wave. The
higher the frequency of the sound waves, the higher their pitch. In higher pitch
sounds, the particles vibrate more often past their equilibrium position per sec-
6.6 Characteristics of Sound Waves
139
ond.
Loudness: The loudness of a sound depends on the amplitude of the sound wave.
Exercise 6.6
If the amplitude is greater, the sound is louder. In louder sounds, the particles
What is the dif-
move further from their equilibrium position. The loudness of a sound is mea-
ference between
sured in decibel (dB). Exposure to elevated sound that may lead to adverse effects
louder and quieter
in humans or other living organisms is called sound pollution. Some of the ad-
sounds, or higher
verse effects include hypertension, hearing loss, sleep disturbances, etc. A noise
pitch and lower
becomes harmful when it exceeds 75 dB and painful above 120 dB.
pitch sounds? Why
does the same note
sound different
Timbre (Quality): The same note played on different instruments sounds dis-
from a violin to a
tinctly different. Timber or quality is the property of tone that distinguishes it
piano? Discuss in
from another tone of the same pitch and intensity but produced by different
groups and with
sources. Quality does not mean good or bad, it just refers to the difference in
your teacher.
sound.
Key Concept:
Pitch refers to the highness or lowness of a sound. Loudness or intensity
Activity 6.7
describes your perception of the energy of the sound. The loudness of
What do you think
a sound is measured in decibel (dB). Timbre is a general term for the
are the causes of
distinguishable characteristics of a tone.
sound pollution in
your locality? Dis-
cuss in groups and
suggest possible
Virtual Laboratory
solutions to avoid
some of them.
Click on the following links to perform virtual laboratory on mechani-
cal oscillation and sound wave under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Pendulum Lab PhET Experiment
2. Masses and Springs PhET Experiment
3. Wave on a String PhET Experiment
4. Wave Interference PhET Experiment
140
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
Unit Summary
Oscillation, also known as periodic motion is a to and fro motion
about a fixed point called equilibrium position.
Wave is a disturbance that propagates from source carrying energy.
Waves that require material medium for their propagation are called
mechanical waves; and those which do not require medium for their
propagation are known as electromagnetic waves.
Transverse waves are waves in which their direction of propagation
is perpendicular to the direction of vibrations of the particles of the
medium. However, the direction of movement of some waves is
parallel to the direction of vibrations of particles of the medium.
Such waves are called longitudinal waves.
Sound waves are the most common example of longitudinal waves.
They travel through any material medium with a speed that depends
on the properties (density) of the medium.
When two or more waves pass through a single point at the same
time the resultant instantaneous displacement at that point is the
sum of the displacements that would be created separately by each
wave, taking signs in to account. This principle is said to be the
superposition principle. The superposition of two identical waves
travelling in opposite directions in the same medium gives standing
(stationary) wave.
End of Unit Questions and Problems
Part I: Conceptual questions and workout problems
1. Calculate the period of a simple pendulum of length 4m.
2. An object of mass 2kg is attached to one end of a spring of spring
constant 800N/m. If the object is undergoing periodic motion on a
smooth horizontal surface, what is the period of oscillation?
3. Explain the difference in the speed of sound:
(a) between solids, liquids and gases
6.6 Characteristics of Sound Waves
141
(b) between warm air and cold air
4. In which type of wave are the vibrations parallel to the direction of
wave propagation? Give at least two examples for such type of wave.
5. An electromagnetic wave has a wavelength of 10 nm. Calculate its
frequency.
6. Draw diagrams to illustrate the difference between constructive and
destructive interference.
7. Two identical waves of amplitude 4cm meet. What will be the ampli-
tude of the combined wave at a point where:
(a) they interfere constructively?
(b) They interfere destructively?
8. Imagine you are sitting in a room and someone is playing kirar
outside and next to your room. You may be able to hear the sound
of the kirar through the open doorway, though you cannot see the
kirarist. Explain why?
9. Sound travels along a steel rod of length 4m in a time of 0.0008 S.
What is the speed of sound in the steel?
10. Calculate the speed of sound in air at 30 degree celsius.
11. Suppose a man stands at a distance from a cliff and claps his hands.
He receives an echo from the cliff after 2 seconds. Calculate the
distance between the man and the cliff. Take the speed of sound to
be 343 m/s.
12. A ship is sailing in a part of the sea where seabed is 500m below the
ship. The ship uses sonar to detect the seabed. How long will it take
a pulse of sound to travel to the seabed and return to the ship. Use
speed of sound in sea water to be 1500m/s.
Part II: Multiple Choice Questions
13. With reference to waves, a disturbance is:
142
Unit 6 Mechanical Oscillation and Sound Wave
(a) an oscillation produced by some energy that creates a wave.
(b) the resistance produced by some particles of a material.
(c) the number of oscillations per unit time
(d) the constructive or destructive interference of waves.
14. What is the period of a wave with a frequency of 2 Hz?
(a) 1 S
(b) 4s
(c) 0.5 S
(d) 2 S
15. What kind of interference occurs between two identical waves mov-
ing in opposite directions?
(a) Constructive interference
(b) Destructive interference
(c) Both constructive and destructive interference
(d) Neither constructive nor destructive interference
16. Diffraction is
(a) The constructive interference of two waves of the same fre-
quency travelling in the same direction
(b) The change in direction of waves as they pass through an open-
ing or around a barrier in their path
(c) The change in the direction of waves as they pass from one
medium to another
(d) The a change in the direction of waves when they bounce off a
barrier
17. A closed organ pipe has
(a) a node at the closed end and an antinode at the open end
(b) an antinode at the closed end and a node at the open end
(c) a node at each end
6.6 Characteristics of Sound Waves
143
(d) an antinode at each end
18. The loudness (or intensity) of a sound wave is related to its
(a) frequency
(b) wavelength
(c) amplitude
(d) period
