Unit Outcomes
After completing the unit, you will be able to
discuss the formation of ionic, covalent and metallic bonds;
explain the general properties of substances containing ionic, covalent and
metallic bonds;
develop the skills of drawing the electron dot or Lewis structures for simple
ionic and covalent compounds;
describe the origin of polarity within molecules.
III
Chemical Bonding
Students form groups and discuss on the following questions
and present your discussion points to the class.
1. What held together the Sun and other planets?
2. Is it possible for human beings to survive in the absence
Start-up Activity
of gravitational force?
3. Why do most substances not exist in their elemental
from?
III
In Unit 3 we have discussed about the atomic structure. We have seen that a common
atom contains a nucleus composed of protons and neutrons, with electrons in certain
energy levels revolving around the nucleus. In this unit, the main focus will be on these
electrons. In Unit 4, we have seen the importance of elements being arranged in
groups and periods. We have also discussed the general properties that the elements
in groups and periods share. Elements are distinguishable from each other due to their
electrons. Because each element has a distinct number of electrons, this determines
their chemical properties as well as the extent of their reactivity. In chemical bonding,
only valence electrons are involved. This unit therefore deals with the way how the
different types of chemical bonds are formed, the properties of compounds formed
in each type of chemical bonding, and the electron dot or Lewis structures used to
represent molecules or compounds formed in each type of chemical bonding.
5.1 Chemical Bonding
At the end of this section, you will be able to
define chemical bonding
describe why atoms form chemical bonds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Most of the elements are not found in their atomic
form. Do you know why this is so?
2. What binds atoms together to form compounds or
molecules?
3. Do you know how atoms combine to form compounds
Activity 5.1
or molecules?
The material world in which we live is changing from time to time. This is due to the
fact that nature is associated with innumerable chemical and physical changes. The
chemical changes occur due to changes in the composition of the elements from which
141
Chemistry Grade 9
the materials are made of. We call these chemical changes, chemical reactions. As you
have learned in your grade 7 science a chemical reaction involves change in molecular
composition of a substance. It has been established that atom is the smallest particle
of matter which takes part in a chemical reaction. Molecule is the smallest constituent
particle of substance which has an independent existence and which represents the
properties of the respective elements or compounds.
Why do atoms form chemical bond?
Most of the elements in nature have been found to exist in combined state. This is
due to the fact that atoms of some elements are unstable by their own. There are,
however, some atoms which have independent existence and are considered to be
highly stable. Except those of a few elements, the atoms of most of the elements have
an inherent tendency to combine and form molecules or compounds. The combining
atoms may belong to the same element or different elements. Within the molecules,
the atoms are held together by attractive forces. A chemical bond is, therefore, the
force that holds atoms together to form molecules or compounds.
Octet Rule
The American chemist Gilbert Lewis (1875-1946) used this observation to explain
the types of ions and molecules that are formed by other elements. He called his
explanation the octet rule. The octet rule states that atoms tend to form compounds in
ways that give them eight valence electrons, and thus the electron configuration of a
noble gas (except helium).
In the preceding unit we have discussed about the valence electrons of the atoms of
elements in each group in a periodic table. The valence electrons of all atoms are
between 1 and 8. Most elements follow the octet rule in chemical bonding, which
means that an element should have eight valence electrons in a bond or exactly fill
up its valence shell. Having a total of eight valence electrons ensures that the atom is
stable. This is the reason why noble gases, a valence electron shell of eight electrons,
are chemically inert; they are already stable and tend to not need the transfer of
electrons when bonding with another atom in order to be stable. There, however, are
exceptions to this rule. For example hydrogen and helium need only two electrons on
their valence shell to become stable. The group IIA elements could also become stable
having six valence electrons.
How could atoms satisfy the Octet Rule?
There are three ways in which atoms can satisfy the octet rule.
i. By losing their own valence electrons.
ii. By gaining valence electrons from other elements.
iii. By sharing their valence electrons with other atoms.
142
Chemical Bonding
To become stable, atoms of metals tend to lose all of their valence electrons, which
leave them with an octet. For example, sodium, an alkali metal has 11 electrons and
its electronic configuration is 2,8,1. In order to fulfil the octet rule, sodium needs to lose
its outermost electron and hence its electronic configuration will become 2,8.
Atoms of non-metals, on the other hand, tend to gain electrons in order to fill their
valence shell with an octet. For example, oxygen being a non-metallic element has a
total of eight electrons. Its electronic configuration will be 2,6. To attain eight valence
electrons, oxygen must gain two additional electrons in its valence shell. This, therefore,
will change its electronic configuration to 2,8 which fulfils octet. Oxygen, however, can
do this by sharing its two valence electrons with two electrons of another atom, which
is known as sharing of electrons.
<<<<<<<<<<<>
Exercise 5.1
Provide appropriate answer to the following questions
1. What is the electronic configuration of a noble gas?
2. Why is the noble gas configuration important?
3. Define octet rule.
4. Do most elements follow the octet rule?
5. How does hydrogen violate the octet rule?
5.2 Ionic Bonding
In the preceding section, we have discussed that for atoms to become stable, they
need to gain, lose or share their valence electrons. This losing, gaining or sharing of
electrons by atoms leads to chemical bonding. The result of chemical bonding will
be the formation of molecules or compounds having different chemical and physical
properties. In this section, first, we are going to discuss the formation of ionic bonding.
This will be followed by the discussion about how to write chemical formula of ionic
compounds using the Lewis formula. The section will also cover the discussion of the
properties of ionic compounds.
5.2.1 Formation of lonic Bonding
At the end of this section, you will be able to
explain the term ion;
elucidate the formation of ions by giving examples;
define ionic bonding;
describe the formation of an ionic bond.
143
Chemistry Grade 9
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. What would happen to an atom when it gains or
loses its valence electrons without combining with
other atoms?
2. An electrically neutral atom has an equal number of
negatively charged electrons and positively charged
?
protons. What will happen to the charge of atom 'A'
if it has one more electron than its protons and atom
'B' if it has one less electron number than its protons?
3. What type of force holds atoms "A" and "B" together
(refer question number two)?
Activity 5.2
What are lons?
In unit three, we have seen that an atom is a basic unit of matter that consists of a
dense nucleus composed of positively charged protons and neutral neutrons, which is
surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged electrons. An atom possessing the same
number of protons and electrons, is electronically neutral. However, if the total number
of electrons does not equal the number of protons, the atom has a net positive or
negative electrical charge.
Any atom or molecule with a net charge, either positive or negative, is known as an ion.
The positive electric charge of a proton is equal in magnitude to the negative charge
of an electron; therefore, the net electric charge of an ion is equal to its number of
protons minus its number of electrons.
Net electric charge = number of protons - number of electrons
lons are highly reactive species. They are generally found in a gaseous state, and do
not occur in abundance on Earth. lons in the liquid or solid state are produced when
salts interact with their solvents. They are repelled by like electric charges but are
attracted to opposite charges.
Types of lons
There are two ways of classifying ions in chemistry. These include
i. classification based on the type of electric charge that atoms or group of atoms
possess and
ii. classification based on the number of atoms involved in ion formation.
144
Chemical Bonding
Based on the type of electric charge of atoms they are classified into anions and
cations.
Anions: Are atoms or a group of atoms that have more electrons than protons and so
have a net negative charge. Examples are Cl, It, (SO₄)², and (NO₃).
Cations: Are atoms or a group of atoms that have more protons than electrons and
so have a net positive charge. Examples are Na⁺, Ca²⁺, and AI³⁺.
Table 5.1 Cations and anions of some metallic and non-metallic elements.
Element
Proton
Electron
Charge
Representation
Proton
Electron
lon
Hydrogen
1
1
o
H
1
0
H+
Sodium
11
11
o
Na
11
10
Na⁺
Magnesium
12
12
o
Mg
12
10
Mg²⁺
Aluminium
13
13
o
Al
13
10
AI³⁺
Nitrogen
7
7
o
N
7
10
N³⁻
Oxygen
8
8
o
o
8
10
O²⁻
Chlorine
17
17
o
CI
17
18
Cl⁻
How Do lons Form?
lons can be formed by ionization, which is the process of a neutral atom losing or
gaining its valence electrons. Generally, the electrons are either added to or lost
from the valence shell of an atom. the inner-shell electrons do not participate in this
type of chemical interaction. lonization generally involves a transfer of electrons
between atoms or molecules. The process is driven by the achievement of more stable
electronic configurations, such as the octet rule. Polyatomic and molecular ions can
also be formed, generally by gaining or losing elemental ions, such as H⁺, in neutral
molecules. Polyatomic ions are generally very unstable and reactive.
A common example of an ion is Na⁺ (read as sodium cation or ion). According to
Table 5.1, sodium has a +1 charge when it contains ten electrons (neutral sodium has
11 electrons). However, according to the octet rule, sodium would be more stable
with 10 electrons (2 in its innermost shell, 8 in its outermost shell). We have said that
metals lose electrons in order to attain octet. Therefore, sodium metal tends to lose an
electron to become more stable. On the other hand, chlorine, a non-metallic element
tends to gain an electron to become Cl⁻ (read as chloride ion). Chlorine naturally has
17 electrons, but it would be more stable with 18 electrons (2 in its innermost shell, 8
in its second shell, and 8 in its valence shell). Therefore, chlorine will take an electron
from another atom to become negatively charged. As a general rule, the charge of
all group IA metals is 1+, group IIA metals is 2+, group IIIA metals is 3+, group VIIA
nonmetals is -1. Group IVA to VIA will not form an ionic bond in most cases, and they
are not the topic of this section.
145
Chemistry Grade 9
Ionic Bonding
Let US consider the chemical bond that will be formed between sodium metal and
chlorine. As we have discussed above, sodium will lose its outermost electron to attain
octet and hence will become sodium cation (Na⁺; 2,8). Chlorine being a non-metal,
accepts the electron sodium has lost and becomes a chloride ion (CΓ, 2,8,8). When
the two oppositely charged ions come together, they will be held together by an
electrostatic force and result in the formation of sodium chloride (NaCI), commonly
known as table salt. A bond formed by two oppositely charged ions due to electrostatic
force is known as an ionic bond. The process of forming such a bond is called ionic
bonding. Figure 5.2 shows the formation of an ionic bond between sodium and chlorine
atoms using atomic diagrams.
There is another alternative for sodium and chlorine to attain the octet rule. Sodium,
instead of losing its valence electron, needs to gain another seven electrons to its
outermost shell in order to attain eight electrons on its valence shell. This, however,
is very difficult to be achieved by sodium because metals tend to lose electrons.
Secondly, gaining seven electrons needs a large amount of energy. Chlorine, on the
other hand, is a non-metallic element that tends to gain electrons than losing its
outermost electrons. If chlorine wants to achieve the octet rule by losing its seven
valence electrons, which of course is the second option, it needs a large amount of
energy. It is, therefore, easy for sodium to lose one electron than gaining seven extra
electrons on its valence shell. It will be easy for chlorine to gain one electron than
losing its seven valence electrons to fulfil the octet rule.
Let US consider another example, the formation of an ionic bond between calcium and
chlorine. Calcium with atomic number 20 has an electronic configuration of 2,8,8,2.
In order to achieve octet, calcium removes its two valence electrons. This will make
calcium a cation (Ca²⁺; 2,8,8) because the number of electrons is less by 2 than the
number of protons. Chlorine as we have discussed above, needs only one electron to
fulfil octet. The two electrons removed from calcium will, therefore, be received by
two chlorine atoms to make two chloride ions (2CI). One calcium cation (Ca²⁺) will
be attracted by the two chloride ions (2CI) resulting in calcium chloride (CaCl₂). The
atomic diagram in Figure 5.3 depicts the ionic bond formation between calcium and
chlorine.
As a general rule, ionic bond is formed between a metallic and a non-metallic elements.
For atoms with the largest electronegativity differences (such as metals bonding with
non-metals), the bonding interaction is called ionic, and the valence electrons are
typically represented as being transferred from the metal atom to the non-metal.
Once the electrons have been transferred to the non-metal, both the metal and the
non-metal are considered to be ions. The two oppositely charged ions electrostatically
attract each other to form an ionic compound.
146
Chemical Bonding
************
Exercise 5.2
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Define the terms cation and anion.
2. How do cations and anions form?
3. What is a chemical bond?
4. How are ionic bonds formed?
5. An aluminium atom has three valence electrons. Do you think it will lose
three electrons or gain five electrons to obtain an octet in its outermost
electron shell? Why?
6. An iodine atom has seven valence electrons. Do you think it will lose seven
electrons or gain one electron to obtain an octet in its outermost electron
shell?
7. Describe the formation of potassium iodide.
5.2.2 Lewis Formulas of lonic Compounds
At the end of this section, you will be able to
give examples of simple ionic compounds;
draw Lewis structures or electron-dot formulas of simple ionic compounds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the rest of
the class.
1. What would you do to describe an orange for
a person who has never seen orange in his/her
?
entire life?
2. Why is it important to have a common way of
representing substances?
3. Why do you think it is important to use a common
Activity 5.3
formula of ionic compounds?
Lewis Dot Formula
To explain the various types of bonds and to visualise the change in the valence
electrons, the American physical chemist Gilbert N. Lewis (1916) proposed the Lewis
dot formula.
147
Chemistry Grade 9
Figure 5.1 The American Physical Chemist Gilbert N. Lewis (1875-1046).
In the Lewis symbol for an atom, the chemical symbol of the element with its valence
electrons is represented as dots surrounding it. Only the electrons in the valence level
are shown using this notation. The number of dots equals the number of valence
electrons in the atom. These dots are arranged to the right, left, above, below the
symbol, with no more than two dots on a side (Table 5.2).
Table 5.2 The Lewis symbols for the elements of the third period of the periodic table.
Atom
Electronic configuration
Lewis's symbol
Sodium
2,8,1
Na.
Magnesium
2,8,2
Mg.
Aluminium
2,8,3
Al.
Silicon
2,8,4
Si
Phosphorus
2,8,5
.P.
-
Sulphur
2,8,6
:s.
Chlorine
2,8,7
:CI.
Argon
2,8,8
:Ar:
Lewis symbols can also be used to illustrate the formation of cations from atoms, for
sodium and calcium as shown below:
Na*
Na+ + e⁻
Ca·
Ca²⁺ + 2e⁻
Likewise, they can be used to show the formation of anions from atoms, as shown
below for chlorine and sulphur:
:CI· + e⁻
:CI:
:S. + 2e⁻
is:
2-
:S:
#
148
Chemical Bonding
Some examples of the Lewis dot formulas of ionic compounds are shown in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3 Lewis symbols showing the transfer of electrons during the formation of ionic
compounds.
Metal
Nonmetal
Ionic Compound
Na
+
:CI.
Na+[:ci:]
sodium chloride
sodium atom
chlorine atom
(sodium ion and chloride ion)
Mg
+
:0.
Mg2+[:0:]~ 2-
magnesium oxide
magnesium atom
oxygen atom
(magnesium ion and oxide ion)
Ca
+
2:F.
ca²⁺[:F:]2
calcium fluoride
calcium atom
fluorine atoms
(calcium ion and two fluoride ions)
The Lewis dot formula can also be represented using the atomic diagram as shown
in Figures 5.2 and 5.3. The dots on the atomic diagram represent the electrons. Some
dots are starred simply to show you the electron(s) involved in the chemical reaction.
You don't have to make star on the electrons involved in the chemical reaction as a
rule.
Na
+
CI
+
CI
Na
A sodium
A chlorine
A sodium
A chlorine
atom
atom
cation
anion
Na
+
CI
Na+
+
Cl-
Figure 5.2 An atomic diagram showing the formation of ionic compound (NaCl)
between the atoms of sodium and chlorine.
CI
CI
Ca
Ca
CI
CI
Ca
+
2 CI
Ca²⁺
CI2
Figure 5.3 An atomic diagram showing ionic compound (CaCl₂) formation between
calcium and chlorine.
149
Chemistry Grade 9
+++++++++++++
Exercise 5.3
Provide the appropriate answer for the following questions.
1. Draw the Lewis dot structures for each of the following molecules:
a. H2S
c. HCN
e. AI2O3
b. CH2Br₂
d. K2O
2. In the Lewis structures listed below, M and X represent various elements in
the third period of the periodic table. Write the formula of each compound
using the chemical symbols of each element:
2-
2-
M²⁺
:
X
M⁻
X
a.
b.
3
C.
3
d.
5.2.3 General Properties of Ionic Compounds
At the end of this section, you will be able to
describe the general properties of ionic compounds;
investigate the properties of a given samples of ionic compounds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the
following questions in your respective groups. Present
your discussion points to the rest of the class.
1. How do you express your friend's behaviour and
?
physical appearance?
2. If you are given juices made up of lemon, grape
and orange without letting you know, how do you
differentiate the juices?
3. Is there any way that you can differentiate ionic
Activity 5.4
compounds from other compounds?
lonic compounds contain ionic bonds. An ionic bond is formed when there is a large
electronegativity difference between the elements participating in the bond formation.
The greater the electronegativity differences among the bonding atoms, the stronger
the attraction between cation and anion. The properties of ionic compounds depend
on how strongly the cations and anions attract each other in an ionic bond. Based on
the above behaviour, iconic compounds exhibit the following properties:
They Form Crystals
As we know substances can exist in one of the three states, namely solid, liquid, or
gas. A solid-state substance can exist as powder, crystal, or amorphous. Most ionic
compounds exist in crystalline solid form. The constituent particles of the crystals are
150
Chemical Bonding
ions, not molecules. The opposite charged ions in ionic compounds are held together
very strongly by electrostatic force of attraction. Hence the ionic compounds are
generally hard solids. At an atomic level, an ionic crystal forms a regular structure,
with the cation and anion alternating with each other forming a three-dimensional
structure based, on the smaller ion uniformly filling in the empty spaces between the
larger ions (Figure 5.4).
Na+
Cl-
Figure 5.4 The crystal structure of sodium chloride (NaCI).
They Have High Melting Points and High Boiling Points.
Considerable heat energy is required to separate the strong electrostatic attraction
force between the positive and negative ions in ionic compounds. Therefore, a high
temperature is required to melt and boil ionic compounds. The process of melting an
ionic compound requires the addition of large amounts of energy in order to break all
of the ionic bonds in the crystal and let the ions move freely. For example, breaking
the ionic bonds in sodium chloride to make it melt requires a temperature of about
800°C. We call this temperature, melting point. It requires a very high temperature-
1465°C to boil sodium chloride. Boiling a substance means converting its constituents
into a gaseous form.
They are Hard and Brittle
lonic crystals are hard because the positive and negative ions are strongly held
together by electrostatic attraction force. It takes a large amount of mechanical force,
such as striking a crystal with a hammer, to force one layer of ions to shift relative to
its neighbour. Such striking brings ions of the same charge next to one another (Figure
5.5). The strong repulsive forces between like-charged ions cause the crystal to break.
The property of being hard but liable to be broken is known as brittleness.
B
CI
CI
CI*
CI*
CI*
CI*
CI
CI*
CI*
CI
CI*
CI
CI*
CI*
CI*
CI*
CI*
CI*
CI
CI*
CI
CI*
CI*
CI*
Figure 5.5 Appearance of sodium chloride crystal before and after hitting.
The sodium chloride crystal is shown in two dimensions (Figure 5.5, left). When struck
by a hammer, the negatively-charged chloride ions are forced near one another and
the repulsive force causes the crystal to shatter (Figure 5.5, right).
151
Chemistry Grade 9
They are Soluble in Polar Solvents
The solubility of a substance is the maximum amount of solute that can dissolve in
a given quantity of solvent. Solubility depends on the chemical nature of both the
solute and the solvent, and the temperature and pressure. One way of classifying
solvents is into polar and non-polar. Polar solvents dissolve polar compounds and non-
polar solvents dissolve non-polar compounds. This is commonly referred to as "like
dissolves like". A polar solvent is a type of solvent that has large partial charges.
Water, methanol, liquid ammonia, liquid hydrogen fluoride, acetone and ethanol are
common examples of polar solvent. There are, however, several ionic compounds that
are insoluble in water. Most salts of carbonates, oxalates, phosphates, sulphides and
hydroxides are insoluble in water.
They Conduct Electricity when they are Dissolved in Water or in Molten State
Melting and dissolving ionic compounds makes cations and anions free to move. Since
the ions are free charged particles, they move towards the respective electrodes
under the influence of electric field and conduct electricity through the solution. Molten
ionic compounds also conduct electricity. For example: sodium chloride (NaCl) in its
molten state releases sodium cation (Na⁺) and chloride anion (CI) as shown below:
NaCl
Na+ + Cl-
In an electrolytics cell, the sodium cation moves to the negative electrode (cathode),
and the chloride anion moves towards the positive electrode (anode). This causes
complete movement of charge across the circuit.
+
e⁻
anode
(positive)
Cathode
(Negative)
Oxidation
Reduction
electron loss
electron gain
Anions
(negative)
B-
X + e
A+ + e
A
Cations
(positive)
Electrolyte
Figure 5.6 In an ionic solution, the A⁺ ions migrate toward the negative electrode,
while the B⁻ ions migrate toward the positive electrode.
152
Chemical Bonding
Experiment 5.1
Conductivity of Ionic Compounds
Objective: In this experiment, we are going to see whether distilled water, solid table salt
(NaCI), or a water solution of table salt can conduct electricity or not.
Materials: Distilled water (100 mL), table salt (60 g), three 25 mL beakers, battery,
copper wire, two pieces of metallic rods or graphite rod, small electric bulb.
Procedure:
1. Take a 25 mL beaker and add 15 mL distilled water.
2. Take 20 g table salt (NaCl) and add it into the second beaker.
3. Dissolve 30 g of table salt (NaCl) in 50 mL distilled water. Add 25 mL of the solution
into the third 25 mL beaker.
4. Assemble each of the beakers as shown in Figure 5.7 below, turn by turn and see
what happens to the electric bulb in each case.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.7 A) Distilled water; B) Solid table salt powder; C) A water solution of
table salt.
Observation and analysis questions
Provide answers to the following questions based on the above experiment.
1. In which case did the electric bulb light?
2. Why the electric bulb did not light in the other two cases?
3. What do you conclude from this observation?
They Have High Density
The density of a substance is the amount of a substance per unit volume. It is one of the
physical properties by which substances differ. The oppositely charged ions in an ionic
compound are held closely by the electrostatic force of attraction. Hence, the number
of ions per unit volume in an ionic compound is high, which makes their density high.
153
Chemistry Grade 9
************
Exercise 5.4
Provide appropriate answers to the following questions
1. State the five general properties of ionic compounds.
2. Why do ionic compounds form crystals?
3. If a compound dissolves in water, will it be a proof for the ionic nature of
the compound? Why?
4. Why do ionic compounds do conduct electricity in the molten state or when
dissolved in water but not in the solid state?
5.3 Covalent Bonding
We have thoroughly discussed that in order to become stable, atoms of elements need
to fulfil the octet rule. Except the noble gases, all the second raw elements obey the
octet rule either by gaining, losing or sharing electrons. In the preceding section, we
have seen how atoms become stable by losing and gaining electrons. In this section,
we shall discuss the second type of bonding known as covalent bonding, the Lewis dot
formulas of covalent molecules, polarity in covalent molecules, coordinate covalent
bond, and general properties of covalent compounds.
5.3.1 Formation of Covalent Bond
At the end of this section, you will be able to
define covalent bonding;
describe the formation of a covalent bond.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present a summary of your discussion points
to the class.
1. An ionic bond is an electrostatic attraction force
between a cationic and an anionic species. Is there
?
another way through which two non-metallic atoms
form a bond?
2. What kind of force holds the atoms together in
compounds that are not ionic?
Activity 5.5
3. How do the molecules H2, O2, HCI, and H2S form?
A covalent bond consists of the simultaneous attraction of two nuclei for one or more
pairs of electrons. In other words, a covalent bond is formed when two atoms share
one or more electron pairs. The electrons residing between the two nuclei are known
as the bonding electrons. In this type of bond, each shared electron will be counted
154
Chemical Bonding
by both atoms' valence shells in order to satisfy the octet rule. Based on the number
of pairs of shared electrons, the covalent bonds formed can be classified into three:
i.
Single bond: one pair of electrons is shared between the bonding atoms
ii.
Double bond: the bonding atoms share two pairs of electrons and
iii.
Triple bond: the bonding atoms share three pairs of electrons.
Generally, bonds sharing more than one pair of electrons are called multiple covalent
bonds. Covalent bonds occur between identical atoms or between different atoms
whose difference in electronegativity is insufficient to allow the transfer of electrons
to form ions.
Formation of Single Covalent Bond
Let's consider the covalent bond in the hydrogen molecule (H₂). A hydrogen molecule
is formed from two hydrogen atoms, each with one electron in its valence shell. The
two hydrogen atoms are attracted to the same pair of electrons in the covalent bond.
The bond is represented either as a pair of "dots" or as a solid line. Each hydrogen
atom acquires a helium-like electron configuration. Such a type of bond is known as a
single bond (Figure 5.8).
H.
+
H
H:H or H — H
The alternative way of showing the above covalent bond formation would be the
following:
Two hydrogen atoms
a hydrogen molecule, H2
H
H
H
X
H
a shared pair of electrions
Figure 5.8 Atomic diagram showing the formation of covalent bond in hydrogen
molecule (H₂).
There exists an attraction force between the positively charged nuclei and the
negatively charged bonding electrons revolving around the nucleus (Figure 5.9). The
attractive forces are equal in magnitude but opposite in sign. Each hydrogen nucleus
attracts both electrons and this is the basis of covalent bond formation. The repulsive
force between the positively charged nuclei protects the nuclei from collision during
covalent bond formation.
Attraction
+
+
Nucleus
Shared electrons
Figure 5.9 Attraction between the nuclei and the electrons in a covalent bond.
155
Chemistry Grade 9
The two chlorine atoms in the chlorine molecule (CI₂) are joined by a shared pair of
electrons. Each chlorine atom contains seven valence electrons in the valance shell
and requires one more electron to form an argon-like electron configuration and
become stable (Figure 5.10). The two chlorine atoms achieve this if each chlorine atom
contributes one electron to the bonding pair shared by the two atoms. The remaining
six valence electrons of each chlorine atom are not involved in bond formation and
are located around their respective atoms. These valence electrons, normally shown as
pairs of electrons, are commonly known as non bonding electrons, lone pair electrons,
or unshared electron pairs.
+
CI:
CI
CI:
Shared
2.8.7
2.8.7
2.8.8
2.8.8
Chlorine atom,
Chlorine atom,C
Chlorine molecule, CI2
Figure 5.10 Atomic diagram showing formation of chlorine molecule (CI₂).
Single covalent bonds can also occur between two different atoms. For example,
hydrogen sulphide (H₂S) is formed when two hydrogens, each share their valence shell
electrons to one sulphur atom. Sulphur is a group VIA element and it has 6 valence
electrons. In order to fill its outermost shell with eight electrons, it needs two more
electrons, in this case, two valence electrons shared by the two hydrogens. The two
hydrogens will have an electronic configuration similar to that of helium which makes
them stable enough whereas the sulphur atom will attain the electronic configuration
of argon that makes it stable.
2H + :s
H: S
H
<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 5.5
Provide appropriate answers to the following questions.
1. Define a covalent bond.
2. Why the nuclei of the two covalently bonded atoms do not collide during
the formation of a covalent bond?
3. In covalently bonded atoms, what holds the two atoms together?
4. Describe the formation of H2O, F2, CF₄, and NH3.
156
Chemical Bonding
Formation of Multiple Covalent Bonds
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Is there another possible way through which two
atoms or groups of atoms form a covalent bond
other than a single bond?
?
2. Atom "A" has a total of eight electrons and atom
"B" has a total of seven electrons. How do A2 and
B2 form?
3. Can you construct a model that shows A2 and B2,
Activity 5.6
from locally available materials?
Formation of Double Bond
An oxygen molecule would be a good example for a double covalent bond formation.
Atmospheric air consists of 21% of life-giving gas known as oxygen. Oxygen is a
group VIA element with 6 valence electrons. Each oxygen atom requires two electrons
to fulfil the octet rule. The two oxygen atoms, therefore, need to share two electrons
each so that they could attain the nearest noble gas electronic configuration, neon.
Since two pairs of electrons are shared between the two oxygen atoms in an oxygen
molecule, such a type of bond is known as a double bond. The four pairs of electrons
that do not participate in bonding and are situated on the two oxygens atoms in O2
are the lone pair electrons (Figure 5.11).
ö:
+
or O = O
o
+
o
o
Figure 5.11 Atomic diagram that shows formation of oxygen molecule (O₂).
Formation of Triple Covalent Bond
Nitrogen is a group VA element. It has 5 valence electrons. We know that 78% of the
atmosphere is filled with the element nitrogen. Nitrogen exists in its molecular form
which will not be stable, otherwise. This stability could be achieved by fulfilling the
octet rule. To do so each nitrogen atom shares three electrons each to have the nearest
noble gas (neon) electronic configuration. The sharing of three pairs of electrons in a
covalent bond results in a triple bond. The pairs of electrons on the valence shells of
the two nitrogen atoms in the N2 are the lone pair electrons (Figure 5.12).
157
Chemistry Grade 9
N
+
N
N
N
N
Figure 5.12 Atomic diagram of the formation of nitrogen molecule (N₂).
************
Exercise 5.6
Provide appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. How many different types of covalent bonds have you known so far?
2. Describe the formation of carbon dioxide (CO₂), ethylene (H₄C₂), and
acetylene (H2C2) molecules using atomic diagram using atomic diagrams.
5.3.2 Lewis's Formula of Covalent Molecules
At the end of this section, you will be able to
draw Lewis structures or electron-dot formulas of simple covalent molecules;
give examples of different types of covalent molecules;
make models of covalent molecules that show single, double, and triple bonds
using sticks and balls or from other locally available materials.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. In the previous section, we discussed writing Lewis's
formulas of ionic compounds. How can one write
Lewis's formula of a covalent molecule?
2. Using the same analogy, write the Lewis formulas of
?
the covalent molecule HCN.
3. How many bonding and lone pair electrons are
there in HCN?
4. How many single, double, and triple covalent bonds
Activity 5.7
are there in HCN?
In section 5.2.2, we discussed about Lewis's formula of ionic compounds. We also used
Lewis's formula to indicate the formation of covalent bonds, which are shown in Lewis
structures, drawings that describe the bonding in molecules.
The number of bonds that an atom can form can often be predicted from the number
158
Chemical Bonding
of electrons needed to reach an octet. This is especially true of the non-metals of
the second period of the periodic table (C, N, O, and F). For example, each atom of
group IVA element has four electrons in its outermost shell and therefore requires four
more electrons to reach an octet. These four electrons can be gained by forming four
covalent bonds, as illustrated below for carbon in CCI₄ (carbon tetrachloride) and
silicon in SiH₄ (silane). Because hydrogen only needs two electrons to fill its valence
shell, it is an exception to the octet rule.
:CI:
H
:CI:C:CI: or :CI-C-CI: +
:CI:
I:
H:Si:H or
H-Si-H
:CI:
H
:CI:
H
Group VA elements such as nitrogen have five valence electrons in the atomic Lewis
symbol: one lone pair and three unpaired electrons. To achieve an octet, these atoms
form three covalent bonds, as in NH₃ (ammonia).
HINTH
H*N*H
H
or
H
Oxygen and other atoms in group VIA achieve an octet by forming two covalent
bonds. For very simple molecules, we can write the Lewis structures by merely pairing
up the unpaired electrons on the constituent atoms. Look at the examples in Table 5.5.
Table 5.5 Lewis's formula of some simple covalent molecules.
Element/molecule
Dot formula
Line formula
Hydrogen
H:H
H-H
Nitrogen
:N:::N:
:N=N:
Oxygen
O: :O
:0=0:
Chlorine
:CI : Cl:
:CI-CI:
Water
H:O:H
H-O-H
Ethene
H.,
H
H
H
H..C::C..T
H
c
c
H
H
Acetylene
H:C:::C:H
H-CEC-H
Formaldehyde
:0:
H
H:C:H
c=0:
H
159
Chemistry Grade 9
+++++++++++++
Exercise 5.7
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Write the Lewis structure for the diatomic molecule P2, an unstable form of
phosphorus found in high-temperature phosphorus vapor.
2. Write Lewis structures for the following:
a. O2
b. H2CO
c. AsF₃
3. Construct models for CH₄, O2, N2, H2C2 molecules from locally available
materials.
5.3.3 Polarity in Covalent Molecules
At the end of this section, you will be able to
discuss the polarity in covalent molecules;
distinguish between polar and non-polar covalent molecules.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Why is table salt soluble in water but not in oil?
?
2. What effects does electronegativity difference
have to the electron distribution of atoms that are
covalently bonded?
3. What would be the electron distribution of a
covalent bond formed from two atoms having
Activity 5.8
similar electronegativities?
The existence of a 100% ionic or covalent bond represents an ideal situation. In
reality no bond or a compound is either completely covalent or ionic. Even in case of
covalent bond between diatomic molecules, there is some ionic character.
When covalent bond is formed between two similar atoms, for example in H2, O2
CI₂, N2 or F2 the shared pair of electrons is equally attracted by the two atoms. As a
result electron pair is situated exactly between the two identical nuclei. The bond so
formed is called nonpolar covalent bond. Contrary to this in case of a heteronuclear
molecule like HF, the shared electron pair between the two atoms gets displaced more
towards fluorine since the electronegativity of fluorine (as you have learned in unit 4)
is far greater than that of hydrogen. The resultant covalent bond is a polar covalent
bond.
Nonpolar Covalent Molecules
Let US consider the homonuclear diatomic molecule H2. In a molecule like H2, in which
160
Chemical Bonding
the atoms are identical, we expect the electrons to be equally distributed between the
two atoms. The two hydrogens have equal electronegativity (2.1), and the difference
between the electronegativities will be zero. Therefore, the covalent bond in H2 is
non-polar. Generally, all homoatomic molecules like O₂, N2, Cl₂are non-polar covalent
molecules.
Let US consider the heteronuclear polyatomic molecule ethane (C2H6). There are two
different types of covalent bonds in ethane i.e., H-C and C-C. The electronegativity
value difference between hydrogen (2.1) and carbon (2.5) will be 0.4, which is below
the minimum value for a polar covalent bond. The C-C bond is non-polar because
there is no electronegativity value (0.5) difference between the two carbons. Hence,
ethane is a nonpolar covalent molecule.
Other examples of non-polar molecules include any of the homonuclear diatomic
elements (H₂, N₂, O₂, CI₂ which are truly non-polar molecules), carbon dioxide
(CO₂), benzene (C₆H₆), carbon tetrachloride (CCI₄), methane (CH₄), ethylene (C₂H₄).
hydrocarbon liquids (gasoline and toluene), and most organic molecules.
Non-polar molecules also form when atoms sharing a polar bond arrangement such
that the electric charges cancel out each other. For example, in CO2 and CCI₄ the
individual C-O and C-CI bonds are polar. This is because, in the case of C-O bond
the electronegativity value difference between carbon (2.5) and oxygen (3.5) is 1.0.
Hence, the bond is polar. Similarly, in C-CI bond the electronegativity value difference
between carbon (2.5) and chlorine (3.0) is 0.5, which is the minimum value requirement
for a polar covalent bond. However, in CO2 the molecular structure is linear O=C=O
and the charges on the two oxygen atoms cancel out each other as they are oriented
in the opposite directions (see below) making the molecule non-polar. In the case of
CCI₄, the chlorines arrange themselves in a tetrahedral geometry (see below) around
the carbon atom, and each partial charge on the four chlorine atoms will cancel out
each other. This made CCI₄ a nonpolar covalent molecule.
Cl
CI
C
C
δ+
to
8+
lo
Cl
Cl
C
Cl
CI
Polar Covalent Molecules
In many covalent bonds the electrons are not shared equally between two bonded
atoms. For example, in hydrogen chloride (HCI) the electrons are unevenly distributed
between the two atoms because the atoms that share the electrons in the molecule
are different and have different electronegativities. A bond in which electrons are
shared unevenly is called a polar bond or polar covalent bond. A polar bond has a
slight positive charge on one end and a slight negative charge on the other end. The
161
Chemistry Grade 9
greater the difference in electronegativity between the bonded atoms, the more polar
the bond will be. The direction of bond polarity can be indicated with an arrow. The
head of the arrow will point at the negative end of the bond; a short perpendicular
line near the tail of the arrow marks the positive end of the bond.
to
H-CI
H-CI
A polar molecule is a molecule containing polar bonds where the sum of all the
partial charges is not zero. Polar bonds form when there is a difference between
the electronegativity values of the atoms participating in a bond. Polar molecules
also form when the spatial arrangement of chemical bonds leads to a more positive
charge on one side of the molecule than the other.
The HCI bond and other polar bonds can be thought of as being intermediate between
a non-polar covalent bond, in which the sharing of electrons is exactly equal, and an
ionic bond, in which the transfer of the electron(s) is nearly complete.
Let US consider one more example, a water molecule H₂O. The electronegativity value
difference between oxygen and hydrogen (3.5-2.1 = 1.4) tells US the H-O bond is
polar. The magnitude of the electronegativity difference tells US how strongly polar
the H-O bond is. Unlike CO₂, the shape of a water molecule is a bent or V-shape and
unlike CO2 the net charge in H₂O will not cancel out each other. Thus, water is a polar
covalent molecule.
8-.8-
δ+ δ-
H
H
H-F
or
H-F
δ+
δ⁺
Other examples of polar molecules include ammonia (NH₃), sulfur dioxide (SO₂),
hydrogen sulfide (H₂S), methanol (CH O), and ethanol (C2H₆O).
The Distinction between Polar and Non-polar Covalent Bond and Ionic Bond
There is no sharp distinction between a polar covalent bond and an ionic bond,
but the following rules are helpful as a rough guide. An ionic bond results when
the electronegativity difference between the two bonding atoms is 2.0 or more.
This rule applies to most ionic compounds. A polar covalent bond forms when the
electronegativity difference between the atoms is in the range 0.5-2.0. If the
electronegativity difference is below 0.5, the bond is normally classified as a covalent
bond, with little or no polarity. Generally, ionic compounds are highly polar. Atoms of
elements with comparable electronegativities tend to form moderately polar covalent
bonds with each other because the shift in electron density is usually small. Atoms of
the same element, which have the same electronegativity, can be joined by a pure
nonpolar covalent bond.
162
Chemical Bonding
Example
Classify the following bonds as ionic, polar covalent, or covalent:
a. The bond in HCI,
b. The bond in KF, and
C. The C-C bond in H3CCH3.
Strategy: We follow the rule of electronegativity difference and look up the values in
the periodic table of electronegativity values.
Solution:
a. The electronegativity difference between H and CI is 0.9, which is appreciable
but not large enough (by the 2.0 rule) to qualify HCI as an ionic compound.
Therefore, the bond between H and CI is polar covalent.
b. The electronegativity difference between K and F is 3.2, which is well above the
2.0 mark; therefore, the bond between K and F is ionic.
C. The two C atoms are identical in every respect. They are bonded to each other
and each is bonded to three other H atoms. Therefore, the bond between them
is purely covalent since the electronegativity value difference between the two
carbon atoms is zero.
++++++++++++
Exercise 5.8
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Which of the following bonds is nonpolar covalent, which is polar covalent,
and which is ionic? (a) the bond in CsCl, (b) the H-N bond in NH3, (c) the NN
bond in H2NNH2.
2. Explain your answers to question number 1.
3. Explain why CO2 is non-polar whereas SO2 is polar covalent bond?
5.3.4 Coordinate Covalent Bond (Dative Bond)
At the end of this section, you will be able to
define coordinate covalent (dative) bond;
elucidate the formation of a coordinate covalent bond using suitable examples.
163
Chemistry Grade 9
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. The cost of a "doro wet" meal in a certain hotel is
80 Birr. Person "A" has 200 Birr in his/her pocket
and he/she bought three "doro wet" by sharing 40
Birr with his/her friends. The same day evening he/
she met with his/her friend. Unfortunately, person
"A" and his/her friend became hungry and wanted
to eat dinner. Person "A"s friend, however, had no
money in his/her pocket. The only food they found in
the restaurant was "Tibs" and its cost is 80 Birr. How
?
could a person "A" and his/her friend eat dinner?
2. Is there another possible way for two atoms to form
a covalent bond other than through the equally
sharing of electrons between two atoms? Explain.
Activity 5.9
In the previous sections, we have discussed ionic and covalent bonding. There is a
third possibility in which unstable atom becomes stable and it is by sharing electrons.
However, the sharing is only from one atom. A coordinate covalent bond or sometimes
known as a dative bond is a covalent bond where the electron pair is provided by
only one of the bonded atoms but shared by both atoms after bond formation (Figure
5.13). The atoms are held together because both of the nuclei attract the electron
pair in similar fashion to that of a covalent bond. Once the coordinate covalent bond
is formed, it is impossible to distinguish the origin of the electrons. There are two
necessary conditions for a coordinate covalent bond to take place:
i.
One of the atoms must have a pair of electrons, in most cases lone pair electrons.
Examples of such molecules include H2O, NH3, and H2S.
ii.
The other atom must have an empty space in its valence shell in order to accept
a pair of electrons. Examples of such molecules include BF₃, AICI₃, and H+.
Pair of valance electrons
Sharing of valance electrons
available for bonding
coming from atom 1
+
Atom 1
Atom 2
Covalent molecule
(Electron donor) (Electron acceptor) (Coordinate covalent bond)
Figure 5.13 Atomic diagram that shows the formation of coordinate covalent bond
between atoms 1 and 2.
164
Chemical Bonding
Consider the reaction between BF₃ and NH₃. As we have discussed previously, boron
is one of the group IIIA elements that become stable without fulfilling the octet rule.
In BF₃, the number of valence electrons of boron is only 6. Thus, boron has a space
to hold two more electrons in its valence shell. On the other hand, in NH3, nitrogen
has a lone pair electron. Although boron trifluoride is stable, it readily forms a bond
with ammonia. This reaction takes place in such a way that nitrogen shares its pair of
electrons to boron forming a coordinate covalent bond as shown below. In this case,
both boron and nitrogen share the shared electrons of nitrogen.
H
F
H F
H
N:
B - F
H-N:B-F
H
F
HF
The second example of a coordinate covalent bond is the formation of ammonium
ion from hydrogen ion (H⁺) and ammonia (NH₃). The hydrogen ion has no electrons on
its valence shell and can accommodate two electrons in order to fulfil the electronic
configuration of the noble gas element helium. Ammonia shares its lone pair electrons
to hydrogen ions and forms a coordinate covalent bond as shown below.
H
H
H-N;
+
H+
H-N
H
or
NH₄⁺
H
H
The third example is the formation of AI2CI₆. The bonding in aluminium chloride (AICI₃)
is essentially covalent. Each aluminium (Al) atom has a deficit of two electrons in its
valance shell, and chlorine (CI) has a lone pair. Aluminium forms a coordinate covalent
bond with the CI atom on an adjacent AICI₃ group. As each of two aluminium atoms
does this, then aluminium chloride is a covalent dimer molecule with the formula AI₂Cl₆.
CI
CI
:CI
CI-AI:CI
CI:
Al-CI
CI:AI-CI
CI
CI
Although the properties of a coordinate covalent bond do not differ from those of a
normal covalent bond (because all electrons are alike no matter what their source),
the distinction is useful for keeping track of valence electrons.
!!!!!!!!!!!!
Exercise 5.9
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Show the formation of carbon monoxide (CO) using Lewis's formula.
2. Explain the formation of hydronium ion (H₃O⁺).
165
Chemistry Grade 9
5.3.5 General Properties of Covalent Compounds
At the end of this section, you will be able to
explain the general properties of covalent compounds;
investigate the properties of given samples of covalent compounds.
Students, please form groups and discuss on the
following questions. Present your discussion points to
the rest of the class, when asked by your teacher.
1. Consider the covalent molecule water and the ionic
?
compound table salt. Compare them in terms of
state, melting point, boiling point and conductivity
of electricity.
2. Based on the above comparison, what general
properties can you suggest about covalent
Activity 5.10
compounds?
In the previous sections, we have discussed that covalent compounds are formed by
sharing electrons between two atoms. They have different physical and chemical
properties compared to ionic compounds. In this section, we are going to discuss about
the general properties of covalent compounds.
Physical Properties of Covalent Compounds
Covalent compounds form discrete molecules that can exist independently from each
other. Therefore, the physical properties of covalent molecules depend heavily on the
nature of their interaction with other molecules (intermolecular forces which will be
discussed in grade 11). Depending on the nature of these intermolecular interactions,
covalent compounds have the following properties.
a. At room temperature, most covalent compounds are gases or liquids. Some
covalent compounds are soft solids. The intermolecular force between most covalent
molecules is the weak van der Waal's force and will be discussed in grade 11.
b. Most covalent compounds have low melting and boiling points. The melting
point and boiling point of substances are also dependent on the intermolecular
forces between covalent molecules. Diamond is an exception. Its melting point is
very high (about 4027 °C).
c. Most covalent compounds are poor conductors of electricity. This is because
they cannot form ions in their solution form or molten state. Graphite, an allotrope
of carbon, has covalent bonds and is an exception as it is a good conductor.
Some covalent compounds like HCI that ionise in an aqueous solution are good
conductors of electricity as well.
d. Most covalent compounds are soluble in non-polar solvents and are insoluble
in polar solvents like water. The reason behind this is most covalent compounds
166
Chemical Bonding
are either non-polar or moderately polar. Water is a highly polar solvent and
cannot dissolve non-polar or moderately polar covalent molecules. Few polar
covalent compounds, however, dissolve in polar solvents such as methanol and
ethanol. The principle "like dissolves like" works in the solubility of substances.
e. Reactions of covalent compounds are slow compared to that of ionic
compounds. This is because of the existence of bond breaking in chemical
reactions wherein breaking a covalent bond needs high energy. In reactions of
ionic compounds, dissolution of ionic compounds releases ions relatively easily.
Hence, a relatively fast reaction occurs.
f. They have low density. The existence of a covalent compound in the liquid or
gaseous state makes the number of molecules per unit volume less, thereby leading
to low density.
************
Exercise 5.10
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Describe the properties of covalent compounds.
2. Compare the properties of covalent compounds with ionic compounds.
Intermolecular forces and their relationship to the states of matter will be discussed
in grade 11.
5.4 Metallic Bonding
In the previous sections, we have discussed about the two types of bonding known
as ionic and covalent. Coordinate covalent bond is a covalent bond but the way it
forms is different. These, however, are not the only types of bonding atoms can form.
There is a third type of bonding that occurs between metallic atoms. This bond unlike
other types of bonds will only occur between atoms of the same element. This section,
therefor, deals with the formation of metallic bonding and its properties.
5.4.1 Formation of Metallic Bond
At the end of this section, you will be able to discuss the formation of metallic bonds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following
?
questions. Present your discussion points to the rest of
the class, when asked by your teacher.
1. Have you ever heard about metal molecules? Why?
2. Can two identical or different metal atoms form
molecule?
Activity 5.11
167
Chemistry Grade 9
A metal atom generally has either 1, 2, or 3 electrons in its valence shell. It can easily
lose these electrons and gain stability in the course of a chemical reaction. Metals are
thus highly electropositive in nature. These electrons lost by the metal are called free
electrons.
Metallic bonds occur among the same metal atoms. A sheet of aluminium foil and a
copper wire are good examples where you can see metallic bonding in action.
Sodium metal has the electronic configuration 2,8,1. When sodium atoms come
together, the electron in the outermost shell of one sodium atom shares space with the
equivalent valence electron on a neighbouring atom outermost shell, in much the same
way that a covalent bond is formed. The difference between a covalent bond and the
metallic bond in sodium atoms, however, is that each sodium atom is being touched by
eight other sodium atoms and the sharing occurs between the central atom and the
outermost shell on all of the eight other atoms. Each of these eight atoms, in turn, is
being touched by eight sodium atoms, which in turn are touched by eight atoms and so
on and so on, until all the atoms in that lump of sodium are taken. All of the outermost
shells on all of the sodium atoms overlap to give a vast number of molecular shells that
extend over the lamp of metal.
The electrons freely move within these molecular outermost shells, and therefore
each electron becomes detached from its parent atom. The electrons are said to be
delocalized. The metal is held together by the strong forces of attraction between the
positive nuclei and the delocalized electrons (Figure 5.14).
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 5.14 Metallic bonding: The Electron Sea Model: Positive atomic nuclei (orange
circles) surrounded by a sea of delocalized electrons (small yellow circles).
Such type of metallic bonding is sometimes described as "an array of positive ions in
a sea of electrons". Each positive centre in the diagram represents all the rest of the
atom apart from the outer electron, but that electron has not been totally lost from the
atoms. It may no longer have an attachment to a particular atom, but it's still there in
the structure. Sodium metal is therefore written as Na, not Na⁺.
Problem: Discus the metallic bonding in magnesium and explain why it has a higher
melting point than sodium metal.
168
Chemical Bonding
Strategy: Use the sea of electrons model to explain why magnesium has a higher
melting point (650°C) than sodium (97.79°C).
Solution
Magnesium has the electronic configuration 2, 8, 2. Both of the valence electrons
become delocalized, so the "sea" has twice the electron density as it does in sodium.
The remaining "ions" also have twice the charge and so there will be more and
strong attraction between "ions" and "sea". Each magnesium atom has 12 protons in
the nucleus compared with sodium's 11. In both magnesium and sodium, the nucleus
is screened from the delocalized electrons by the same number (10) of electrons in
the inner shells (2 + 8). This means that there will be a stronger attraction from the
magnesium nucleus of 2+ than the sodium nucleus which has only a 1+ nucleus.
So, there will be a greater number of delocalized electrons in magnesium which leads
to a greater attraction by the magnesium nuclei. The smaller radius of magnesium
atoms leads to stronger attractions of the delocalized electrons than sodium, as they
are closer to the magnesium nuclei. Each magnesium atom also has a greater number
(twelve) of near neighbours than sodium (eight). These factors, therefore, increase
further the strength of the bond in magnesium metal.
Transition metals tend to have particularly high melting points and boiling points. The
reason is that they can involve more valence electrons in the delocalization. The more
electrons involved the stronger the attractions tend to be.
<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 5.11
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Define metallic bond.
2. Discuss the metallic bond in aluminium metal. (Hint: one aluminium atom will
be surrounded by 12 atoms).
3. Compare the metallic strength between magnesium and aluminium metals.
Justify your answer.
4. Draw the electron sea model of magnesium metal.
5.4.2 Properties of Metallic Bond
At the end of this section, you will be able to
explain the electrical and thermal conductivity of metals in relation to metallic
bonding;
make a model to demonstrate metallic bonding.
169
Chemistry Grade 9
Students, please form groups and discuss the
following questions. Present your discussion points to
the class.
1. Which of the following substances conduct
electricity? Dry cloth, plastic, dry wood, a piece
of metal.
?
2. Of the substances listed under question number 1,
what is the reason that all except one substance
do not conduct electricity?
3. Which of the substances mentioned under question
Activity 5.12
number 1 is the hardest? Why?
Metals have unique qualities, such as the ability to conduct electricity and heat. Metals
have other bulk properties which will be discussed in grade 10.
Conductivity: Since the electrons in metals are free to move between the positively
charged "ions". Pushing electrons from an outside source into a metal wire at one end
(Figure 5.15) would move the free electrons through the wire and come out at the other
end at the same rate. Such movement of charge is known as conductivity. These freely
moving electrons transfer electric charge as well as heat across the metallic structure.
This freedom of the valence electrons accounts for the high thermal conductivity in
metals as well.
is
+
e-
+
+Q
A
o-
+
.e-
+
e-
e
+
+
d.
+
e-
+
Figure 5.15 The "sea of electrons" (small bluish circles) is free to flow about the crystal of positive
metal ions (the large reddish circles). These flowing electrons can conduct electrical change when
an electric field is applied (e.g., a battery).
170
Chemical Bonding
++++++++++++
Exercise 5.12
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. List the properties of metals.
2. What are the three factors that determine the strength of a metallic
bond?
3. Why metals have high melting and boiling points compared to the non-
metals?
Key Terms
Anion
Electronegativity
Multiple bond
Anode
Homonuclear
Noble gases
Bond polarity
Heteronuclear
Nonbonding electron
Boiling point
Immiscible liquids
Nonpolar molecule
Cation
lon
Octet rule
Cathode
lonic bond
Polar molecule
Chemical bond
lonic compound
Polyatomic molecule
Conductivity
lonization
Polyatomic ion
Covalent bond
lonization energy
Single bond
Covalent molecule
Lewis formula
Triple bond
Coordinate covalent bond
Lone pair electron
Unshared electron
Diatomic molecule
Melting point
Dot formula
Metallic bond
Double bond
Monoatomic ion
Unit Summary
In this unit, the association of the electrons and the properties of the elements in
chemical bond formation are discussed thoroughly. Elements are distinguishable
from each other due to their electrons. Because each element has a distinct number
of electrons, this determines their chemical properties as well as the extent of their
reactivity. In chemical bonding, only valence electrons are involved.
Except a few elements, the atoms of most of the elements have a characteristic
tendency to combine and form molecules or compounds. The atoms that form the
molecules are held together by attractive forces. A chemical bond is, therefore, the
force that holds atoms together to form molecules or compounds.
The octet rule states that atoms tend to form compounds in ways that give them eight
valence electrons, and thus the electron configuration of a noble gas. Most elements
follow the octet rule in chemical bonding, which means that in order to become stable
an element should have eight valence electrons in a bond or exactly fill up its valence
shell.
171
Chemistry Grade 9
In the course of chemical bond formation, atoms attain octet by sharing, loosing,
or gaining valence electrons. Metals tend to lose all their valence electrons while
nonmetals gain or share some of their valence electrons.
Any atom or molecule with a net charge, either positive or negative, is known as an
ion. Net electric charge of an ion is calculated as follows:
Net electric charge = number of protons - number of electrons
Anions are atoms or group of atoms having a net negative electric charge and cations
are atoms or group of atoms having a net positive electric charge. lons can be formed
by ionization, which is the process of a neutral atom losing or gaining its valence
electrons.
A bond formed by two oppositely charged ions due to electrostatic force is known
as an ionic bond. The process of forming such a bond is called ionic bonding. As a
general rule, ionic bond is formed between metallic and non-metallic elements.
In the Lewis symbol for an atom, the chemical symbol of the element with their valence
electrons is represented as dots surrounding it. The Lewis dot formula can also be
represented using the atomic diagram.
The properties of ionic compounds depend on how strongly the cations and anions
attract each other in an ionic bond. lonic compounds form crystals, have high melting
and boiling points, are hard and brittle, are soluble in polar solvents, conduct electricity
when dissolved in water or in a molten state, and have high density.
A covalent bond is formed when two atoms share one or more electron pairs. Based on
the number of pairs of shared electrons, the covalent bonds formed can be classified
into three:
Single bond: one pair of electrons is shared
Double bond: share two pairs of electrons and
Triple bond: share three pairs of electrons
In a heteronuclear molecule like HF, the shared electron pair between the two atoms
gets displaced more towards fluorine since the electronegativity of fluorine is far
greater than that of hydrogen. The resultant covalent bond is a polar covalent bond.
The molecule is termed as polar molecule.
An ionic bond results when the electronegativity difference between the two bonding
atoms is 2.0 or more. A polar covalent bond forms when the electronegativity
difference between the atoms is in the range 0.5-2.0.
A coordinate covalent bond or sometimes known as a dative bond is a covalent bond
where the electron pair is provided by only one of the bonded atoms but shared by
both atoms after bond formation. Once the coordinate covalent bond is formed, it is
172
Chemical Bonding
impossible to distinguish the origin of the electrons.
Depending on the nature of intermolecular interactions, covalent compounds are gases
or liquids, low melting and boiling points, poor conductors of electricity, soluble in non-
polar solvents and insoluble in polar solvents, less reactive than ionic compounds, and
have low density.
Metallic bonds occur among the same metal atoms. In metallic bonding the metal is
held together by the strong forces of attraction between the positive core and the
delocalized valence electrons of the metal. Metals have several unique qualities, such
as the ability to conduct electricity and heat.
Review Exercise
Part I: Basic Level Questions.
Choose the correct answer for the following questions.
1.
Which of the following does not contain ionic bond?
a. Sulfur dioxide
C. Silicon dioxide
b. Sodium oxide
d. Silver oxide
2.
Which substances has ions in its bonding model?
a. Copper
C. Copper oxide
b. Carbon dioxide
d. Carbon
3.
Which of the following is ionic compound
a. HCI
C. CO2
b. NaCl
d. HBr
4.
Which of the following molecules doesn't follow octet rule?
a. CH₄
C. BCI₃
b. CCI₄
d. CO2
5.
Which of the following compounds does not contain lone pair electrons?
a. H2O
C. HF
b. NH3
d. CCI₄
Part II: Intermediary Level Questions.
Tell whether the following statements are true or false.
6.
An Octet rule states that an element should have eight valence electrons in a
bond or exactly fill up its valence shell.
7.
Many elements in the third-row and beyond have been observed to form
compounds in which the central atom is surrounded by more than eight electrons.
8.
An ionic compound is denoted by writing its net negative charge in superscript
immediately after the chemical structure for the atom/molecule.
9.
lons can be formed by ionization, which is the process of a neutral atom losing
or gaining electrons.
10. As a general rule, ionic bond is formed between non-metallic elements.
11. An ionic bond forms when the electronegativity difference between the two
bonding atoms is less than 2.0.
173
Chemistry Grade 9
12. The properties of covalent compounds relate to how strongly the positive and
negative ions attract each other, in a covalent bond.
13. Most of the ionic compounds are crystalline solids.
14. Considerable heat energy is required to separate the strong electrostatic
attraction force between the positive and negative ions in ionic compounds.
15. The number of bonds that an atom can form can often be predicted from the
number of electrons needed to reach an octet.
16. A non-polar covalent bond forms when the electronegativity difference between
the atoms is in the range of 0.5-2.0.
17. Once the covalent bond is formed, it is possible to distinguish the origin of the
electrons.
Fill in the blank spaces.
18. There are two ways in which atoms can satisfy the octet rule. One way is by
their valence electrons with other atoms. The second way is
by
valence electrons from one atom to another.
19. Losing, gaining or sharing of the valence electrons is always accompanied
by
.
20. Atoms of
tend to lose all of their valence electrons, which leave
them with an octet from the next lowest principal energy level.
21. Any atom or molecule with a net charge, either positive or negative, is known as
.
22. A bond formed by two oppositely charged ions due to electrostatic force is
known as
.
23. In the
for an atom, the chemical symbol of the element is
written, and the valence electrons are represented as dots surrounding it.
24. Polar solvents dissolve polar compounds and non-polar solvents dissolve non-
polar compounds. This is commonly referred to as
.
25. Bonds sharing more than one pair of electrons are called
.
26.
occur between identical atoms or between different atoms
whose difference in electronegativity is insufficient to allow the transfer of
electrons to form ions.
27. Only atoms of the same element, which have the same electronegativity, can be
joined by a
bond.
28. A property that helps US distinguish a non-polar covalent bond from a polar
covalent bond is
.
29. When molecules share electrons equally in a covalent bond, there is no net
electrical charge across the molecule. Such type of covalent molecule is known
as
molecule.
30. A
is a covalent bond where the electron pair is provided by
only one of the bonded atoms but shared by both atoms after bond formation.
174
Chemical Bonding
Part III: Challenge Level Questions
Give appropriate answers to the following questions.
31. How many types of chemical bonds are there? What are they?
32. Name one solvent in which most of the ionic compounds dissolve.
33. In which state do ionic compounds conduct electricity?
34. Why do the nonpolar covalent compounds not conduct electricity?
35. What type of chemical bonds are found in each of the following compounds?
a.
Potassium chloride
g.
Methane
b.
Carbon dioxide
h.
Sodium chloride
C.
Hydrogen chloride
i.
Ammonia
d.
Water
i.
Phosphorus pentachloride
e.
Magnesium oxide
k.
Sulphur hexachloride
f.
Calcium fluoride
36. In what type of solvents do the a) polar compounds and b) nonpolar compounds
dissolve?
37. Why are molecules more stable than atoms?
38. What are the criteria due to which a covalent bond becomes polar or nonpolar?
39. Why are the partial positive and negative charge developed within a polar
covalent molecule?
40. What is a coordinate covalent bond?
41. Define a) polar covalent compound and b) nonpolar covalent compound.
42. Give some examples in which coordinate covalent bond formation takes place.
43. Draw the Lewis dot formulae for the bond formations in the following compounds.
a.
NaCl
d.
O₂
g.
NH₃
b.
CaF₂
e.
N₂
h. CH₄
C.
H2
f.
H2O
44. What are the factors responsible for the formation of covalent bond and ionic
bond?
45. Why do the noble gases not take part in a chemical reaction?
46. What type of bond formation takes place between a) a metal and a nonmetal
and b) two nonmetals?
47. Why do most of the ionic compounds exist in solid state while the covalent
compounds are mostly in gaseous or liquid state?
48. Why is the density of ionic compounds high and that of covalent compounds low?
49. Why are the melting points and boiling points of the ionic compounds high and
those of covalent compounds low?
50. Why do pure covalent compound not conduct electricity?
51. Why are ionic compounds soluble in water?
52. Why do polar covalent compounds dissolve in water?
53. What types of bonds exist in the following ions? a) ammonium ion b) hydronium
ion?
175