Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
discuss the development of Dalton's Atomic Theory and Modern Atomic
Theory;
explain the discovery of the proton, electron, neutron and the nucleus;
differentiate the terms like atomic number, mass number, atomic mass,
isotope, energy level, valence electrons and electronic configuration;
develop skills in determining the number of protons, electrons and neutrons
of atoms from atomic numbers and mass numbers;
develop skills in
calculating the atomic masses of elements that have isotopes;
writing the ground-state electron configurations of atoms using main
energy levels and drawing diagrammatic representations of atoms;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, comparing and contrasting,
communicating, asking questions, and applying concepts.
Chemistry Grade 9
Students make groups and discuss on the following
questions and present your discussion points to the class.
1. What is the smallest seed you have ever known?
2. What is it made of?
Start-up Activity
3. Did you know what its inside and outside looks like?
4. How easy is it to draw its inside and outside?
The existence of atoms has been proposed since the time of early Indian and Greek
philosophers (400 B.C.) who were of the view that atoms are the fundamental building
blocks of matter. According to them, the continued subdivisions of matter would
ultimately yield atoms which would not be further divisible. The word 'atom' has been
derived from the Greek word 'a-tomos' which means 'uncutable' or 'non-divisible'.
These earlier ideas were mere speculations and there was no way to test them
experimentally. These ideas remained dormant for a very long time and were revived
again by John Dalton in the beginning of nineteenth century in terms of his atomic
theory. The atomic theory of matter was first proposed on a firm scientific basis by
John Dalton, a British school teacher in 1808. His theory, called Dalton's atomic theory,
regarded the atom as the ultimate particle of matter.
3.1 Historical Development of the Atomic Theories of Matter
At the end of this section, you will be able to state briefly the history of development
of atomic nature of substances.
Students, form groups and discuss the following questions.
Present your discussion points to the class when you are asked
by your teacher.
1. What are the simplest components of wood, rocks, and
living organisms? In other words, what could you find if you
split these materials to the least possible limit?
2. The Universe in which we live is so vast and contains the
stars, the Sun, the Moon, the planets, dust, air, water, soil
and other materials. Do you know what all these things are
made of?
3. What do you think is the importance of knowing the nature
of substances?
Activity 3.1
52
Structure of the Atom
A scientific theory is a well-tested, broad explanation of a natural phenomenon. In
everyday life, we often use the word theory to mean a hypothesis or educated guess,
but a theory in the context of science is not simply a guess. It is an explanation
based on extensive and repeated experimentation. Because it is so well supported, a
scientific theory has a very good chance of being a correct explanation for events in
nature. Since it is a broad explanation, it can explain many observations and pieces
of evidence. In other words, it can help connect and make sense of many phenomena in
the natural world. Chemistry is full of abstract concepts that deal with the microscopic
world. To explain these abstract and microscopic concepts, scientists spent a lot of time
and energy. In this section, we are going to see the origin of the Atomic Theory.
All modern scientists accept the concept of the atom, but when the concept of the atom
was first proposed about 2,500 years ago, ancient philosophers laughed at the idea.
It has always been difficult to convince people bout the existence of things that are
too small to see. We will spend some time considering the evidence (observations) that
convinced scientists of the existence of atoms.
The Indivisible Atom
Greek philosophy was emerged early in the 6th century BC, centered in the city of
Miletus on the lonian coast in Asia Minor (now called Turkey). In the middle of the 5th
century BC, an ancient Greek philosopher, Empedocles, thought that all materials are
made up of four things called elements: earth, air, water, and fire.
Plato (student of Socrates and teacher of Aristotle) adopted Empedocles' Theory, and
coined the term element to describe these four substances. His successor, Aristotle, also
adopted the concept of four elements. He introduced the idea that elements can be
differentiated based on properties such as hot versus cold, and wet versus dry. For
example, heating clay in an oven could be thought of as driving off water and adding
fire, transforming clay into a pot. Similarly, water (cold & wet) falls from the sky as
rain, when air (hot and wet) cools down. The Greek concept of four elements existed
for more than two thousand years.
Democritus (460-370 B.C) was a Greek philosopher born in Abdera in the North of
Greece. Democritus was a student of Leucippus, who proposed the atomic theory of
matter; however, there is little documentation on the philosophy of Leucippus. It was
Democritus, who elaborated extensive works on his theories on the atomic structure of
the physical world, of the universe, and the void of space. Although Democritus was a
philosopher, he is included among the list of great pioneers of physics and chemistry
of the 19th and 20th centuries. This is because many of his teachings on the structure of
matter were demonstrated by scientists over 2000 years after his death.
Democritus taught the theory of atomism, which held the belief that indivisible and
indestructible atoms are the basic components of all matter in the universe. Thus the
word atom is derived from the Greek word atomos meaning indivisible.
53
Chemistry Grade 9
Figure 3.1 From left to right: Democritus and Leucippus.
Exercise 3.1
++++++++++++
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. According to the Greek philosopher Empedocles, what are the four elements
that all materials are made up of?
2. What is the contribution of Plato and Aristotle to the Atomic Theory?
The Greek Concept of 'Atomos'
Students, discuss in groups of two or three the following
questions and present your discussion points to the class.
1. If you were given the right to name the smallest
?
thing you obtained after splitting a substance to the
possible limit, what do you call it?
2. Why do you give that name?
3. Do you think it is the right term to describe the
smallest particle from which every substance is
Activity 3.2
made up of?
About 2,500 years ago, early Greek philosophers believed the entire universe was
a single, huge, entity. In other words, "everything was one." They believed that all
objects all matter and all substances were connected as a single big unchangeable
'thing'.
Around 440 BC, Leucippus originated the atom concept. He and his pupil, Democritus
(c 460 - 371 BC) refined and extended it in future years. The work of Leucippus and
Democritus was further developed by Epicurus (341- 270 BC), who made the ideas
more generally known. There are five major points to their atomic idea.
54
Structure of the Atom
i.
All matter is composed of atoms, which are bits of matter too small to be seen.
These atoms cannot be further split into smaller portions. Democritus reasoned that
if matter could be infinitely divided, it was also subjected to complete disintegration
from which it can never be put back together. In Greek, the prefix 'a' means 'not'
and the word 'tomos' means 'cut'. Our word atom, therefore, comes from atomos,
a Greek word meaning uncuttable.
ii. There is a void, which is an empty space between atoms.
Leucippus believed in the existence of an empty space between atoms. Given
that all matter is composed of atoms, then all changes must be as a result of the
movement of atoms. However, to move there must be a void; a space entirely
empty of matter through which atoms can move from place to place. The problem
with this assumption is that, if there is an entirely void space between atoms, then
what held the atoms together? Leucippus and Democritus did not answer this
question.
iii. Atoms are completely solid.
This means that there can be no void inside an atom itself. An atom would be
subjected to changes from outside and could disintegrate, otherwise. Then, it
would not be an atom.
iv. Atoms are homogeneous, with no internal structure.
The absolute solidity of the atoms also leads to the notion that atoms are
homogeneous, or the same all the way through. Another way to express this is that
an atom would have no internal structure.
V. Atoms are different in their sizes, shapes, and weight.
Democritus then reasoned that changes occur when the many atomos (now known as
atoms) in an object were reconnected or recombined in different ways. Democritus
even extended this theory suggesting that there were different varieties of atomos
with different shapes, sizes, and masses. The generally accepted atomic model of
Democritus is called 'the solid sphere'.
However, since Aristotle and other prominent thinkers of the time strongly opposed
their idea of the atom, their theory was disregarded and essentially buried until
the 16th and 17th centuries. In time, Lavoisier's innovative 18th-century experiments
accurately measured all substances involved in the burning process, proving that
"when substances burn, there is no net gain or loss of weight." Lavoisier established
the science of modern chemistry, which gained greater acceptance. This is because
of the efforts of John Dalton, who modernized the ancient Greek ideas of element,
atom, compound, and molecule. Dalton also provided a means of explaining chemical
reactions in quantitative terms.
55
Chemistry Grade 9
Drawbacks of the Early Greek Philosophers
The early Greek philosophers tried to understand the nature of the world through
reason and logic, but not through experiment and observation. As a result, they had
some very thought-provoking ideas, but they felt no need to justify their ideas based
on life experiences. In a lot of ways, you can think of the Greek philosophers as being
"all thought and no action." It's truly amazing how much they achieved using their
minds, but because they never performed any experiments, they missed or rejected a
lot of discoveries that they could have made, otherwise. Greek philosophers dismissed
Democritus' Theory entirely. Sadly, it took over two millennia before the theory of
atomos (or 'atoms' as they are known today) was fully appreciated.
<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 3.2
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Where, by whom, and when was the concept 'atom' originated?
2. What does the word 'atom' mean?
3. What are the five major points of the atomic ideas, according to the Greek
philosophers?
4. According to the ancient Greek philosophers, what do you think is an atom
like? Can you draw it in your exercise book?
5. What example can you give, from a local material around you, that you
think looks like an atom?
3.2 Fundamental Laws of Chemical Reactions
We are living in a world full of laws. Laws are generalized observations about a
relationship between two or more things in the natural world. Scientific laws or laws of
science are statements, based on repeated experiments or observations, that describe
or predict a range of natural phenomena. They don't explain why the phenomenon
exists or what causes it. The explanation of a phenomenon is called a scientific theory.
Chemical Laws are those laws of nature relevant to chemistry. In this section, we are
going to discuss some of the chemical laws.
3.2.1 The Law of Conservation of Mass
At the end of this section, you will be able to
state the law of conservation of mass and illustrate using examples.
describe the law of conservation of mass using simple experiments.
56
Structure of the Atom
Students, form a group of two or three and discuss
the following questions. Present your discussion points
to the class.
1. Which direction is water flowing in your locality,
high to low or from low to high altitude?
2. Will the direction of flow of water change in places
other than your locality? Why?
3. If you dissolve 3g of sugar in 20 g of water, how
many grams of a sugar solution will you get? Is it
correct if we write: sugar (3g) + water (20 g) =
sugar solution (23 g)?
4. What will happen to the mass of pieces of campfire
wood after burning it? Do you think the mass of the
pieces of the campfire wood is equal to the mass
of the ash we get from burning it? Why?
Activity 3.3
In science, a law is a general statement that explains a large number of observations.
Before being accepted, a law must be verified many times under many conditions.
Laws are, therefore, considered the highest form of scientific knowledge, and are
generally supposed to be unbreakable. Scientific laws form the core of scientific
knowledge. One scientific law that provides the foundation for understanding in
chemistry is the Law of Conservation of Mass. The law of conservation of mass is also
known as the 'Law of Indestructibility of Matter'. It states that in any given system that
is closed to the transfer of matter (in and out), the amount of matter in the system stays
unchanged. A simple way of expressing this law is to say that the amount of matter in
a system is conserved.
The Law of Conservation of Mass dates from Antoine Lavoisier's 1789 discovery that
mass is neither created nor destroyed in chemical reactions. In other words, the mass
of any one element at the beginning of a reaction will equal the mass of that element
at the end of the reaction. If we account for all reactants and products in a chemical
reaction, the total mass will be the same at any point in time in any closed system.
These laws are called the Laws of Chemical Combination. Ten years later, Joseph
Louis Proust proposed the Law of Definite Proportions, which states that the masses of
elements in a compound always occur in the same proportion. Lavoisier's finding laid
the groundwork for modern chemistry and revolutionized science.
These theories didn't reference atoms, yet John Dalton built upon them to develop the
Law of Multiple Proportions, which states that the ratios of masses of elements in a
compound are small whole numbers. Dalton's Law of Multiple Proportions drew from
experimental data. He proposed that each chemical element consists of a single type
57
Chemistry Grade 9
of atom that could not be destroyed by any chemical means. These ultimately formed
the basis of Dalton's Atomic Theory of Matter. His work marked the beginning of the
scientific atomic theory.
According to the Law of Conservation of Mass, during any chemical change, the total
mass of the products remains equal to the total mass of the reactants. The mass of
Reactants 1 & 2 is equal to the mass of Products 1 & 2.
Reactant 1 + Reactant 2
Product 1 + Product 2
The Law of Conservation of Mass holds true because naturally occurring elements
are very stable at the conditions found on the surface of the Earth. In the everyday
world of Earth, from the top of the highest mountain to the lowest point of the deepest
ocean, atoms are not changed to other elements during ordinary chemical reactions.
Exercise 3.3
++++++++++++
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Define the term 'law'.
2. What is a 'scientific law'?
3. What is the difference between a 'scientific law' and a 'scientific theory'?
4. What is a Chemical Law?
5. Who discovered the Law of Conservation of Mass?
6. State The Law of Conservation of Mass.
Experiments on The Law of Conservation of Mass
The objective of the experiments is to practically show the application of the Law
of Conservation of Mass in chemical reactions. These experiments could help you
developing a scientific attitude, in working together, and in being honest.
Experiment 3.1
The reaction between silver nitrate solution and dilute hydrochloric acid
HCl(aq) + AgNO₃(aq)
AgCI(s) + HNO3(I)
Materials: conical flask, thread, cotton, test tube, safety goggles, gloves, balance
and glass road.
Chemicals: hydrochloric acid, silver nitrate solution.
Precaution: Hydrochloric acid and nitric acid are corrosive. Avoid contact with
skin.
58
Structure of the Atom
Procedure: Please follow the following procedures.
1. Place dilute HCI in a conical flask to a depth of about 1 cm.
2. Tie a thread of cotton around the top of a test tube.
3. Half fill the test tube with silver nitrate solution.
4. Place the test tube inside the conical flask so that it is held on a slant by the
thread and place a bung in the top of the flask to hold the thread in place.
5. Weigh the conical flask and contents.
6. Tilt the flask so that the silver nitrate solution should be poured into the dilute
hydrochloric acid. This will result in a white precipitate of silver chloride is
produced (Figure 3.2).
7. Reweigh the conical flask and contents.
8. Remove the test tube from the inside of the conical flask. Discard the contents
of the conical flask into the waste tank prepared for this purpose. Discard the
thread, the cotton, and the gloves on the proper dust bin prepared for this
purpose.
9. Wash the test tube and the conical flask and dry them in an oven. Put them
on their proper places.
Silver nitrate
Hydrochloric acid
Figure 3.2 Set up for the reaction between silver nitrate solution (AgNO₃) and
dilute hydrochloric acid (HCI).
Observation and analysis questions
1. What is the mass of the conical flask and its contents before the reaction?
2. What is the mass of the conical flask and its contents after the reaction?
3. Does this experiment confirm the Law of Conservation of Mass?
59
Chemistry Grade 9
Experiment 3.2
The reaction between barium nitrate and sodium sulphate
BaSO₄(s) + 2NaNO₃(aq)
Materials: beakers (250 & 150 mL), Whatman filter paper, Erlenmeyer flask,
funnel, sand bath, metal stand, metal ring, clamps, Bunsen burner, balance, glass
road.
Chemicals: Barium nitrate, sodium sulphate, distilled water.
Procedure: Please follow the following procedures
1. To 150 mL beaker add100 mL distilled water and 2.61 g of of Ba(NO₃)₂ and
stir vigorously until it dissolves. This will make a 0.1M Ba(NO₃)₂ solution.
2. To 150 mL beaker add100 mL distilled water and 1.42 g of Na2SO₄ and stir
vigorously until it dissolves.
3. Mix the solutions in 250 mL beaker and stir the contents very well.
4. Filter off the white insoluble BaSO₄ using filter paper and dry it in an oven at
40 °C. Weigh the BaSO₄.
5. Evaporate the water from the filtrate on a sand bath and weigh the residue
of NaNO₃. Do not heat it to complete dryness.
6. Keep the BaSO₄ and NaNO₃ in separate bottles, label them and put it on the
chemical shelf.
7. Clean, dry and put the beakers on the cupboard.
Distilled
Barium
Distilled
Sodium
water
nitrate
water
sulphate
1
2
Sand
3
4
5
Figure 3.3 Set up for the reaction between barium nitrate (Ba(NO₃)₂) and sodium
sulphate (Na₂SO₄).
60
Structure of the Atom
Observation and analysis questions:
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What is the mass of the barium sulphate?
2. What is the mass of the sodium nitrate?
3. What is the mass of the water used in the experiment?
4. Is this experiment in agreement with the Law of Conservation of Mass?
5. Express the Law of Conservation of Matter in your own words.
6. Explain why the concept of conservation of matter is considered a scientific
law.
7. Potassium hydroxide (KOH) readily reacts with carbon dioxide (CO2) to
produce potassium carbonate (K2CO₃) and water (H₂O). How many grams of
potassium carbonate is produced if 224.4 g of KOH reacted with 88.0 g of
CO2. The reaction also produced 36.0 g of water.
3.2.2 The Law of Definite Proportions
At the end of this section, you will be able to state the Law of Definite Proportions.
Before directly delving into The Law of Definite Proportions we shall see how to
calculate the molecular weights and moles of molecules. First we hall discuss how
to calculate the molecular weights of molecules. In the previous unit you have come
across the concept of average atomic mass of elements (the detail shall be discussed
in 3.5.3). The molecular weight of a substance is the sum of the atomic masses of all
atoms in a molecule, based on a scale in which the atomic masses of hydrogen, carbon,
nitrogen, and oxygen are 1, 12, 14, and 16, respectively.
Problem: Calculate the molecular weight of ammonium ion (NH₄⁺).
Solution: First calculate the atomic masses of the atoms in ammonium.
Mass of nitrogen = 14 and we have only one nitrogen atom.
Mass of hydrogen = 1 however we have four hydrogens and therefore the total mass
of hydrogen in ammonia will be 1 X 4 = 4.
Now add all the atomic masses.
Mass of ammonia = mass of nitrogen + mass of hydrogen = 14 + 4 = 18.
The mole is defined as the amount of substance of a system which contains as many
elementary entities as there are atoms in 0.012 kilogram of carbon 12; its symbol is
"mol". One can calculate the number of moles of a compound or molecule by dividing
the mass of the compound by its molecular mass. The number of moles will be discussed
further in Grade 10, unit 2 under ways of expressing concentrations of solutions.
61
Chemistry Grade 9
given mass
Number of moles =
molecular mass
Problem: Calculate the number of moles of 2 g of ammonium ion (NH₄⁺).
Solution
given mass of NH₄⁺
Number of moles =
molecular mass of NH₄⁺
= (2 g)/(18 g/mol) = 0.1 1mol
Law of Definite Proportions, also known as Proust's Law or the Law of Constant
Composition states that every chemical compound contains fixed and constant
proportions (by mass) of its constituent elements. To understand this, let US consider the
following examples.
Example 3.1: Carbon dioxide (CO₂) is composed of one carbon atom and two oxygen
atoms. Therefore, by mass, carbon dioxide can be described by the fixed ratio of 12
(mass of carbon) : 32 (mass of oxygen) or simplified as 3:8.
Example 3.2: Let US take, for example, a water molecule (H₂O). Whatever the source
of water, its composition is that of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen.
If we calculate the molecular weight of water, we come up with 18 g/mol. In 1 mole
of water, there are 2 grams of hydrogen and 16 grams of oxygen. In other words,
hydrogen and oxygen are in a ratio of 1:8 in water. The Law of Definite Proportions
illustrates that whatever the amount of water, whether it be 2 g or 54 g, the ratio of
the amount of hydrogen to oxygen by weight will always be the same.
*************
Exercise 3.4
Give the correct answers for the following questions.
1. Define Proust's Law or the Law of Definite Proportions.
2. What is the ratio of hydrogen to oxygen (by weight) in 25 g H2O?
3. What is the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen (by weight) in 25 g
ethanol (C2H₆O)?
62
Structure of the Atom
3.2.3 The Law of Multiple Proportions
At the end of this section, you will be able to state the Law of Multiple Proportions.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Mention the two compounds that are formed from
hydrogen and oxygen.
?
2. The atomic mass of hydrogen is 1 g and mass
of oxygen is 16 g. What are the mass-ratios of
the two elements in the compounds mentioned in
question #1?
3. What is a whole number? Can you give examples
Activity 3.4
of small whole numbers?
The Law of Multiple Proportions states that, when two different compounds are formed
from the same two elements, the masses of one element, which react with a fixed
mass of the other, are in a ratio of small whole numbers. Let US consider the following
examples so that we could understand this law.
Example 3.3: Let US consider the two compounds formed by carbon and oxygen. In
one of them (carbon monoxide; CO), we find 1.33 g of oxygen combined with 1.00
g of carbon while in the second (carbon dioxide; CO₂), there are 2.66 g of oxygen
combined with 1.00 g of carbon. What is the ratio of the masses of oxygen in CO and
CO2 that combines with a fixed mass of carbon (1.00 g)?
Solution: We observe the ratio of small whole numbers by dividing the masses of
oxygen by the smallest of the two. i.e., by 1.33
In CO (1.33 g) = 1.33/1.33 = 1; and in CO2 (2.66 g) = 2.66/1.33 = 2
Therefore, the ratio of the masses of oxygen in CO and CO2 is 1:2, which is a small
whole number. This is consistent with the atomic theory if we consider that CO contains
one atom of carbon and one atom of oxygen whereas CO2 contains one atom of
carbon and two atoms of oxygen. Since carbon dioxide has twice as many oxygen
atoms bound to a carbon atom as does carbon monoxide, the weight of oxygen in
a molecule of carbon dioxide must be twice the weight of oxygen in a molecule of
carbon monoxide (Figure 3.4).
63
Chemistry Grade 9
1gC
+
+
1.333 g O
2.666 g O
CO
CO2
Figure 3.4 The law of Multiple Proportion in CO and CO₂.
Example 3.4: Nitrogen forms seven different compounds with oxygen. In one of its
compounds, it is observed that 2.62 g of nitrogen are combined with 1.50 g of
oxygen while in another, 0.656 g of nitrogen are combined with 1.50 g of oxygen.
Show that these data demonstrate the Law of Multiple Proportions.
Solution:
In both cases, we are dealing with a mass of nitrogen that combines with 1.50 g of
oxygen. If these data are in agreement with the Law of Multiple Proportions, the
ratio of the masses of nitrogen in the two compounds should be a ratio of small whole
numbers. Let US, therefore, take the ratio 2.62/0.656 and 0.656/0.656; dividing the
numerator and denominator by 0.656, we get 4:1, which is, indeed, a ratio of small
whole numbers.
<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 3.5
Calculate
1. The ratio of the elements in one mole of H2O2 and H2O. Your teacher will
provide you with a scheme that will help you answer this question.
2. The ratio of molar masses of N:O.
3. The mass of oxygen combining with 1g of nitrogen.
4. The small whole number ratio of oxygen combining with 1g of nitrogen for
NO, NO₂, N2O, N2O₄, N₂O₅. Your teacher will provide you with a table that
will help you answer questions 2 to 4.
3.3 Atomic Theory
A scientific theory is an explanation of an aspect of the natural world and universe
that can be repeatedly tested and verified by the scientific method, using accepted
protocols of observation, measurement, and evaluation of results. The word 'theory'
refers to the way how we interpret facts. Atomic Theory is, therefore, the way how
we interpret facts about atoms. In this section we are going to discuss the historical
64
Structure of the Atom
development of atomic theory.
3.3.1 Dalton's Atomic Theory
At the end of this section, you will be able to describe Dalton's Atomic Theory.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Assume that you have a friend that doesn't know
?
orange. How do you describe an orange for your
friend?
2. Describe why an orange has basically two distinct
colors.
3. Give a title for what you have done so far about
Activity 3.5
orange.
Under section 3.1, we have discussed the concept that atoms are the fundamental
building blocks of matter, and it dates back to very ancient times. The ideas regarding
atoms of those times, however, had no experimental evidence and continued as mere
speculation. These ideas, therefore, had to lay latent for a long period until the English
man, John Dalton (Figure 3.5) proposed his atomic theory around 1803, based on
certain observations and experimental results.
Figure 3.5 John Dalton, an English chemist, meteorologist and physicist.
Democritus, many more scientists, philosophers, and others studied the composition of
matter. A major leap forward in our understanding of the composition of matter took
place in the 1800s with the work of the British scientist, John Dalton.
Dalton studied the weights of various elements and compounds. He perceived that
matter is always combined in fixed ratios based on weight or volume in the case
of gases. Chemical compounds always contain the same proportion of elements by
mass, regardless of amount. This provided further support for Proust's Law of Definite
Proportions. Dalton also observed that there could be more than one combination of
two elements.
65
Chemistry Grade 9
From his experiments and observations, as well as the work from peers of his time,
Dalton proposed a new theory of the atom. This later became known as Dalton's
Atomic Theory. The general tenets of this theory were the following:
i.
Elements are made of small particles called atoms.
ii.
Atoms can neither be created nor destroyed.
iii.
All atoms of the same element are identical and have the same mass and size.
iv.
Atoms of different elements have different masses and size.
V.
Atoms combine in small whole numbers to form compounds
<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 3.6
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What is the difference between Democritus and Dalton in terms of
discovering an atom?
2. State the five tenets of Dalton's Atomic Theory.
3. What led Dalton to his atomic theory?
Dalton's effort was not limited to formulating atomic theory, but he proposed symbols
for elements and compounds (Figure 3.6). The symbols of elements proposed by Dalton,
however, were difficult to remember and draw. Therefore, an alternative method of
representing elements was proposed by Berzelius. He suggested alphabets could be
used as symbols to represent elements.
Hydrogen
Soda
Ammonia
Nitrogen
Pot Ash
Olefiant
Carbon
Oxygen
Carbonic Oxide
Sulphur
c
Copper
Carbonic Acid
Phosphorus
L
Lead
Alumina
Sulphuric Acid
Water
Figure 3.6 Dalton's 1808 AD symbols and formulae.
============
Exercise 3.7
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What are the successes of Dalton's Atomic Theory?
2. Dalton thought that atoms are the smallest particles of matter. Scientists
now know that atoms are composed of even smaller particles. Does this
mean that the rest of Dalton's Atomic Theory should be thrown away?
66
Structure of the Atom
3.3.2 Modern Atomic Theory
At the end of this section, you will be able to
describe the Modern Atomic Theory
compare and contrast Dalton's Atomic Theory and the Modern Atomic Theory.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the rest of
the class.
1. Are you satisfied with the Greeks proposal of the
origin of matter? Why?
2. What do you suggest if you were asked to tell
someone about the smallest substance from which
?
matter is made up of? What are its components
known as?
3. In your grade 8 chemistry lessons, you were learned
about the subatomic particles. Did you know who
Activity 3.6
and how they were discovered?
The ancient Greeks proposed that matter consists of extremely small particles called
atoms. Dalton postulated that each element has a characteristic type of atom that
differs in properties from atoms of all other elements. Although the attempt made
to describe the concept atom was good atoms were wrongly understood. Several
other scientists were engaged in determining the essence of atoms and a better
understanding of atoms was reached. The Modern Atomic theory establishes the
concepts of atoms, and how they compose matter.
Development of the Modern Atomic Theory
Several scientists worked many experiments and have made various observations
on atoms. The chronological discoveries of some of them are presented hereunder.
The presence of protons was predicted by Eugene Goldstein in his anode ray
experiment, in 1886.
The first person who discovered the electron as a sub-atomic particle and its
charge to mass ratio was the British physicist, J.J. Thomson, in 1897.
Following this in 1904, Thomson developed the 'Plum pudding' model of the
atom.
Subsequently, in 1909, the American scientist; Robert Millikan found the charge
and mass of the electron.
The British physicist, Ernest Rutherford and his students Geiger and Marsden
discovered the planetary model of an atom, in 1911.
In 1913, Niels Bohr, a student of Rutherford's, proposed that electrons are
arranged in concentric circular orbits around the nucleus.
67
Chemistry Grade 9
Subsequently, in 1920, Rutherford discovered the existence of the proton in the
nucleus.
In 1932, James Chadwick discovered the neutron which is another sub-atomic
particle.
The detailed discussions of all the aforementioned discoveries of the sub-atomic
particles are presented in section 3.4, below. All of these discoveries proved Dalton's
Atomic Model wrong by revealing the following facts about atom.
Drawbacks of Dalton's Atomic Theory
The indivisibility of an atom was proved wrong: an atom can be further subdivided
into protons, neutrons, and electrons. However, an atom is the smallest particle
that takes part in chemical reactions.
According to Dalton, the atoms of the same element are similar in all respects.
However, atoms of some elements vary in their masses and densities. These atoms
of different masses are called isotopes. For example, chlorine has two isotopes
with mass numbers 35 and 37.
Atoms of different elements differ in mass. This has been proven wrong in certain
cases: argon and calcium atoms each have an atomic mass of 40 amu. These
atoms are known as isobars.
According to Dalton, atoms of different elements combine in simple whole-number
ratios to form compounds. This is not observed in complex organic compounds
like sugar (C₁₂H₂₀₁₁) and protein molecules.
The discoveries of the above facts about atoms led to the modified Modern Atomic
Theory postulates.
Modern Atomic Theory Postulates
i.
Elements are made of small particles called atoms.
ii. Atoms cannot be created or destroyed during ordinary chemical reactions.
iii. All atoms of the same element have the same atomic number but may vary in
mass number due to the presence of different isotopes.
iv. Atoms of different elements are different.
v.
Atoms combine in small whole numbers to form compounds.
68
Structure of the Atom
************
Exercise 3.8
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Compare and contrast Dalton's Atomic theory with Modern Atomic Theory.
2. State the postulates of Modern Atomic Theory.
3. Near the end of the 18th century, the first atomic theory was developed.
Which of the following was not part of that early understanding?
a. All matter is made up of atoms.
b. Elements are composed of only one type of atom.
C. Atoms can combine with other atoms to make more complex substances.
d. Electrons orbit the nucleus in electron clouds.
e. All of above concepts were understood in the 18th century.
4. What are the drawbacks of Dalton's Atomic Theory, in your own words?
3.4 Discoveries of the Fundamental Subatomic Particles
and the Atomic Nucleus
Following Dalton's Atomic Theory, several scientists investigated the nature of substances.
More specifically, the nature of the atom. This section deals with the discoveries of the
sub-atomic particles known as electrons, protons, neutrons, and the nucleus.
3.4.1 Discovery of the Proton
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of protons.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. What will happen to two objects having the same
charge, if you bring them together?
?
2. According to Thomson electrons are negatively
charged particles contained by an atom. Based on
your answer for question one what do you expect
to happen to these electrons?
3. What held these electrons from flying away from
Activity 3.7
the atom?
The presence of positively charged particles in an atom has been predicted by
Goldstein (1886) based on the electrical neutrality of an atom. The discovery of the
proton by Goldstein was done based on the cathode ray experiment conducted by
using a perforated cathode (Figure 3.7). In his experiment some rays were found to
69
Chemistry Grade 9
emanate from an anode and pass through the perforations in the cathode, without
deflection by the cathode. These are called anode rays or canal rays.
Now days we understand Goldstein's experiment as follows. When an electric
discharge is passed through the gas, some of the molecules of the gas ionised and
produce cathode rays. Cathode rays consist of electrons. These electrons move with
high speed towards the anode. As they move, they collide with the remaining molecules
of the gas in the tube causing them to lose electrons resulting in positive ions. The
positive ions formed are attracted by the perforated cathode. The stream of these
positive ions causes a glow on the glass wall of the discharge tube. On the other side
of the discharge tube, the cathode rays produce a green light. The stream of positive
ions so formed constitutes the positive or anode rays.
Positive
Cathode
Positive
rays from
rays from
rays
Red glow
anode
cathode
Anode
Perforated cathode
High-voltage source
Figure 3.7 Anode rays traveling through perforations in the cathode resulting in red
glow on the cathode ray tube.
When the cathode ray tube contained hydrogen gas, the particles of the canal rays
obtained were the lightest and their charge to mass ratio (e/m ratio) was the highest.
Rutherford showed that these particles were identical to the hydrogen ion (hydrogen
atom from which one electron has been removed). Due to this fact these particles were
named as protons and were shown to be present in all matter. This is the first leap
towards the discovery of the positively charged proton as part of the atomic structure.
Today we know that the only positively charged species in an atom is the proton.
Properties of anode rays:
i. Anode rays travel in straight lines.
ii. They consisted of material particles.
iii. They are deflected in electric and magnetic field in opposite to that of cathode
rays.
iv. The nature or e/m ratio of anode rays depends upon the nature of gas present
in the cathode ray tube.
v. They are (particles of anode rays) simply positively charged gaseous ions.
70
Structure of the Atom
<<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 3.9
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Define anode rays or canal rays.
2. What is the other name of anode rays?
3. Mention the properties of anode rays.
3.4.2 Discovery of the Electron
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of electron.
Students form groups and discuss the following
?
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. What happens to the electric bulb when you turn on
the switch in your home?
2. What do you think happened inside the bulb?
3. Why do some electric bulbs give yellowish light
Activity 3.8
and others white light?
The Crooke's Discharge Tube or Cathode Ray Tube
In 1855, the German inventor Heinrich Geissler developed the mercury pump and
produced the first good vacuum tubes. These tubes, as modified by Sir William Crookes,
became the first to produce cathode rays, leading eventually to the discovery of the
electron. Sir William Crookes was the first scientist who designed the discharge tube
which was called the Crooke's Discharge Tube or Cathode Ray Tube. The discharge
tube consists of a glass tube from which most of the air has been evacuated having
two metal plates sealed at both ends. These metal plates are called electrodes.
These electrodes are connected to positive and negative terminals of a battery. The
electrode connected to the positive terminal is known as anode and the electrode
connected to the negative terminal is known as cathode (Figure 3.8).
71
Chemistry Grade 9
Cathode
Anode
Cathode rays
Exhaust pump
+
High-voltage sources
Figure 3.8 The Crooke's Discharge Tube or Cathode Ray Tube.
The electrodes are connected to high voltage for the current to flow. The high voltage
provides energy for the atoms of a gas to further split or break up. When both
electrodes are connected to high voltage, current starts flowing. At high pressure no
electricity flows through the air in the discharge tube, so low pressure is used. Low
pressure helps in conduction of electricity. At high voltage of (10,000 - 20,000 volts)
and at normal atmospheric pressure there is no effect. But keeping the same voltage
if pressure is reduced to 0.0001 mm of Hg, a greenish glow was observed at anode.
The rays are emitted from the direction of the cathode, and are called cathode rays.
A good example of a cathode ray would be a fluorescent bulb in your home (Figure
3.9). These bulbs give white light where as those bulbs with tungsten filament give
yellowish light due to the glowing of the tungsten filament when electric current passes
through them.
Figure 3.9 Compact fluorescent lamps.
The electron was one of the fundamental subatomic particle that was discovered by
the British physicist, J.J. Thomson, in 1897. In the discovery of electrons J. J. Thomson
performed several experiments which are presented below.
Thomson's Experiment on the Path of Cathode Rays
J. J. Thomson conducted some experiments with a discharge tube for studying the
properties of cathode rays. The first experiment he has done is studying how cathode
rays travel in the discharge tube by placing a small object between the cathode
and the anode. The formation of a shadow of the object on the opposite side of
72
Structure of the Atom
the cathode revealed that the cathode rays travel in straight lines. The cathode rays
travel towards the node because they are attracted by the positively charged anode.
When an object is placed opposite to the direction of the cathode rays, a sharp
shadow having the shape of the object is formed on the surface of the discharge tube
glass. This concludes that cathode rays travel in straight lines (Figure 3.10).
Metal object
Shadow of object
Cathode
Anode
High-voltage sources
Figure 3.10 Cathode rays creating a shadow of small object on the cathode ray tube
screen.
Thomson's Experiment on the Particle Nature of the Cathode Rays
J. J. Thomson's second experiment was performed by placing a light paddle wheel
between cathode and anode to study the particulate nature of the cathode rays
(Figure 3.11). He expected to see if the cathode rays could move the paddle wheel.
If they do so, then they have a particle nature. He observed the rotation of the light
paddle wheel which revealed that the cathode rays are small particles having mass
and kinetic energy.
Light paddle wheel
Cathode
Anode
High-voltage sources
Figure 3.11 Cathode rays rotating light paddle wheel between cathode and anode.
When cathode rays are allowed to fall on a paddle wheel, it rotates. This is possible
only when the rays striking it have some material particles. From this, it can be
concluded that cathode rays consist of some material particles. Today we know that
the electron has both particle and wave nature (the wave nature of electrons will be
discussed in grade 11). Its weight, however, is too small compared to the other sub-
atomic particles. Therefore Thomson's contribution to the modern atomic structure is
significant in this regard.
73
Chemistry Grade 9
Thomson's Experiment on the Charge of the Cathode Ray
William Crookes experimented with cathode rays and magnets for the first time. His
observations on the deflection of the rays by magnetic fields led him to conclude
that they were composed of negatively charged molecules. Years later J. J. Thomson
determined the molecules hypothesized by Crookes were actually negatively charged
subatomic particles that he called corpuscles, but which were eventually named
electrons.
J. J. Thomson performed the third experiment to investigate the charge of the cathode
ray by passing cathode rays through electric and magnetic fields (Figures 3.12 &
3.13). Upon passing through an electric field, the cathode rays bent towards the
positive plate. This proved that cathode rays are negatively charged particles.
Thomson concluded that the particles had a net negative charge; these particles are
now called electrons. We know from our knowledge of electricity, in physics, when an
electric field is applied perpendicularly to the path of a negatively charged species,
they deflect towards positive plate. As opposite charges attract, the cathode ray
particles are negatively charged. Today we know that the only negatively charged
fundamental particle of an atom is the electron. JJ Thomson's contribution is immense
in this regard.
Cathode
Anode
Fluorescent
material
(ZnS)
+
+
Bright spot
H.V.
Electric field
Figure 3.12 Cathode rays bend passing through electric field.
Passing cathode rays through magnetic field applied perpendicular to the path of
the cathode rays (Figure 3.13). This resulted in the deflection of the cathode rays
perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. From our electromagnetism lessons,
in physics, we know that a moving electric charge generates a magnetic field. A
magnetic field induces electric charge movement, producing an electric current. In an
electromagnetic wave, the electric field and magnetic field are perpendicular to one
another. When the magnetic field is applied perpendicularly to the path of cathode
rays, they get deflected towards the north pole of the magnet which is expected of
negatively charged particles. This further confirms that cathode rays are negatively
charged.
74
Structure of the Atom
Cathode Anode
Fluorescent
material
S
(ZnS)
N
+
magnetic field
Bright spot
H.V.
Figure 3.13 Cathode rays bend passing through a magnetic field.
Thomson carried out the above experiments with different gases, at low pressure to
decrease the interaction between gas molecules, in the discharge tube. No change in
the properties of the cathode rays was observed despite the use of different gases
in the discharge tube.
J. J. Thomson proved that atoms were not the most basic form of matter. He
demonstrated that cathode rays could move a paddle wheel placed between two
electrodes, could be deflected, or bent, by magnetic or electric fields, which indicated
that cathode rays consist of charged particles. More important, by measuring the
extent of the deflection of the cathode rays in magnetic or electric fields of various
strengths, Thomson was able to calculate the mass-to-charge ratio of the particles to
be 1.76 X 10⁸ C/g. These particles were emitted by the negatively charged cathode
and repelled by the negative terminal of an electric field. Because like charges repel
each other and opposite charges attract, Thomson concluded that the particles had a
net negative charge; these particles are now called electrons.
Summary of the properties of cathode rays:
They travel in a straight line from the cathode and cast shadows of metallic
objects placed in their path.
They cause mechanical motion of small puddle-wheel placed in their path; they
possess kinetic energy and must be material particles.
Their properties are independent of the electrodes, and the gas present in the
cathode ray tube.
The charge/mass ratio of the rays is constant.
Upon passing through electric field, the cathode rays bend towards the positive
plate showing that they are negatively charged.
Cathode rays are negatively charged and affected by magnetic field.
Cathode rays affect ZnS screen. When cathode rays are allowed to strike ZnS
screen, they produce a faint greenish fluorescence.
Cathode rays ionises the gases. When cathode rays are allowed to pass through
gases, different glows are seen in the tube. These different glows are due to the
ionisation of gases.
Cathode rays have penetrating power. When cathode rays are allowed to pass
through thin metal foils, a glow is seen behind the metal foil indicating that they
75
Chemistry Grade 9
have good penetrating power.
Cathode rays produce X-rays. When cathode rays are allowed to fall on metals
such as tungsten, copper, X-rays are observed.
+++++++++++++
Exercise 3.10
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Why was the ray bended? Shadow seen? The paddle rotated?
2. Why did Thomson take gas at low pressure while conducting the
experiments?
3. How did Thomson discover the particle nature of electrons?
4. What happened to the cathode rays when they were allowed to pass
through electric and magnetic fields? What does this prove?
J. J. Thomson's Atomic Model
Students, form a group and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
?
1. What is your understanding about atomic model?
2. According to Democritus, what would an atom look
like?
3. What do you expect Dalton's Atomic Model to be
Activity 3.9
like, based on his experimental findings?
Following the discovery of the electron, J.J. Thomson developed what became known
as the 'plum pudding' model in 1904 (Figure 3.14). Plum pudding is an English dessert
similar to a blueberry muffin. In Thomson's plum pudding model of the atom, the
electrons were embedded in a uniform sphere of positive charge like blueberries
stuck into a muffin. The positive matter was thought to be jelly-like or similar to a thick
soup. The electrons were somewhat mobile. As they got closer to the outer portion
of the atom, the positive charge in the region was greater than the neighbouring
negative charges, and the electron would be pulled back more toward the centre
region of the atom. The best example of locally available material for Thomson's
Model is watermelon. The seeds of the watermelon would mimic the electrons, and the
watery soft reddish part is the positively charged matter (Figure 3.14).
76
Structure of the Atom
(-)
+
(+)
+
+
+
Figure 3.14 J. J. Thomson's atomic model (left); the "plum pudding" model (centre);
watermelon (right).
Validity of Thomson's Atomic Model
Thomson's Atomic Model could successfully explain the electrical neutrality of an atom.
It, however, failed to explain how the positively charged particles are shielded from
the negatively charged electrons without getting neutralized. Today we know that the
positively charged protons exist in the nucleus of an atom which of course is at the
centre of the atomic structure and the electrons are revolving around them. Therefore,
Thomson's prediction is not negligible although it lacks some knowledge.
Millikan's Oil Drop Experiment
Subsequently, an American scientist, Robert Millikan (1909) carried out a series of
experiments using electrically charged oil droplets. In this experiment some fine oil
droplets were allowed to be sprayed into the chamber by an atomizer. The air in the
chamber is subjected to ionization by X-rays. The electrons produced by the ionization
of air attach themselves to the oil drops. When a sufficient amount of electric field is
applied, which can just balance the gravitational force acting on an oil drop, the drop
remains suspended in the air.
From this experiment, Millikan observed that the smallest charge found on the cathode
rays was approximately 1.59 X 10⁻¹⁹ coulombs, and the charge on each drop was
always an integral multiple of that value. Based on this observation, he concluded that
1.59 X 10⁻¹⁹ coulomb is the smallest possible charge, and considered that value as
the charge of the electron. With this information and Thomson's charge-to-mass ratio
(1.76 X 10°C/g), Millikan determined the mass of an electron (Figure 3.15):
Mass of electron = e/m e
1.59 X 10⁻¹⁹C = 9 X 10⁻²⁸g
1.76 X 10⁸ C/g
77
Chemistry Grade 9
Oil spray
Atomizer ro produce
(+)
oil droplets
X rays produce
charges on
Microscope
the oil drops
Electrical charged plates
I
Figure 3.15 The apparatus used by Millikan to determine the charge of an electron.
From our understanding of electricity today, it is obvious that the force on any electric
charge in an electric field is equal to the product of the charge and the electric field.
Millikan was able to measure both the amount of electric force and magnitude of
electric field on the tiny charge of an isolated oil droplet. From this data he determined
the magnitude of the charge itself.
============
Exercise 3.11
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Mass of the electron is calculated from
and
values of electron.
2. Describe Millikan's oil drop experiment in brief.
3. Describe J. J. Thomson's Atomic Model.
4. According to
, the charges in an atom are arranged like the
pulp and seeds of a watermelon.
3.4.3 Discovery of the Nucleus
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of the nucleus.
Students, form groups and discuss the following questions.
Present your discussion points to the class.
1. From your grade 8 science lessons you know that the
planets revolve around the Sun, in the Solar System.
Assume that you have made a model of the Solar
System from locally available materials by representing
the planets and the Sun by stones. If you hang the model
and throw a small stone towards it, is it always possible
to hit the stones that represent the planets and the Sun?
If your answer is no why? If your answer is yes how?
78
Structure of the Atom
2. What do you think will happen to the probability
of hitting the Sun if the number of stones you throw
at the same time is 5? Does it increase or decrease?
Why?
3. What will happen to those stones that hit the Sun in
question three? What about those that did not hit
the sun?
Activity 3.10
By 1920, with the discovery of electron and proton, it was thought that the inner
structure of the atom was complete. The mass of the electron is negligible; hence the
mass of atom should be equal to the mass of protons concentrated inside the nucleus.
Different atoms have different number of protons, hence different atomic masses.
However, it was observed that there was a discrepancy between the actual atomic
mass and the calculated atomic mass.
For example, an atom of carbon has 6 protons; therefore its mass should be six times
the mass of hydrogen atom which has one proton. But, experimentally, it was found
that the mass of carbon atoms is twelve times the mass of hydrogen atom. A similar
problem was encountered with regard to the mass of other atoms. Then, what was the
reason for this discrepancy?
Rutherford was the first scientist to predict the reason for this discrepancy. He predicted
that along with protons, there were some other neutral particles present inside the
nucleus. In a single famous experiment, the British physicist Ernest Rutherford showed
explicitly that Thomson's model of the atom was incorrect. He used α-particles in his
experiment. α-particles are composite particles consisting of two protons and two
neutrons tightly bound together. In 1920, Rutherford targeted a stream of positively
charged α-particles at a very thin gold foil target (Figure 3.17a) and inspected
how the α-particles were scattered by the foil. The particles were produced by a
sample of radium. Gold was chosen since it could be easily hammered into very thin
sheets, minimizing the number of atoms in the target. If Thomson's model of the atom
was correct, the positively charged α-particles should smash through the regularly
dispersed mass of the gold target like cannonballs (see Figure 3.16).
Figure 3.16 A regularly distributed cannonballs.
79
Chemistry Grade 9
They might be traveling a little slower when they appeared, but they should pass
essentially straight through the target (Figure 3.17b). However, a small fraction of the
α-particles were deflected at large angles, and some were reflected directly back at
the source (Figure 3.17c).
Photographic film of
luminescent screen
Lead container
α particles
Gold atoms
(b) What Rutherford expected if
Thomson's model were correct
Stream of α particles
Positively charged
Radium
Thin gold foil
nucleus
Gold atoms
(a) Rutherford's experiment
(b) What Rutherford actually
observed
Figure 3.17 A Summary of Rutherford's Experiments.
Rutherford's results were not consistent with Dalton's atomic model in which the mass and
positive charge are distributed uniformly throughout the volume of an atom. Instead,
they strongly suggested that both the mass and positive charge are concentrated in a
tiny minute fraction of the volume of an atom, which Rutherford called the nucleus. It
made sense that a small fraction of the α-particles collided bumped with the dense,
positively charged nuclei. This resulted in large deflections, or almost head-on, causing
them to be reflected straight back at the source.
Rutherford's explanation for the stability of nucleus and atom: After the success of
bringing out a successful atomic model, Rutherford was cornered by the other scientists
by the question: "Why does the nucleus not disintegrate in spite of repulsion among
the protons?" To explain the stability of the nucleus, Rutherford predicted the presence
of neutral particles. The presence of these neutrons between the protons neutralises
the repulsion among the protons. Rutherford predicted the presence of the neutron
even before it was discovered, which he proved it later on.
Coming to the stability of the atom, he explained that the revolving electron is under
the influence of two types of forces.
i.
The electrostatic force of attraction between the nucleus and the electron and
ii.
The centrifugal force directed away from the revolving electron.
These two forces are equal and opposite and hence keep the electron in equilibrium in
the path. This is the reason why electrons do not fall into the nucleus in spite of inward
nuclear pull, according to Rutherford.
80
Structure of the Atom
Today, it is known that strong nuclear forces, which are much stronger than electrostatic
interactions, hold the protons and the neutrons together in the nucleus. For this and
other insights, Rutherford was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, in 1908.
Rutherford's Atomic Model
The atom is mostly composed of empty space. The whole positive charge and mass
of the atom are concentrated in a small central part known as the nucleus. The size
of the nucleus is so small that its diameter is 10⁵ times less than that of an atom. The
diameter of the nucleus has been estimated by Rutherford as 10⁻¹³ cm in contrast to
that of an atom to be 10⁻⁸ cm. The electrons existing outside the nucleus rotate around
the nucleus with high velocities to counterbalance the electrostatic forces of attraction
between protons and electrons. Rutherford's atomic model bear a resemblance to
the planetary motion in the solar system (grade 8). Rutherford's model of an atom is,
therefore, also called the Planetary Model (see Figure 3.18).
Nucleus
Electron
Figure 3.18 Rutherford's Model of an Atom in contrast to the Planetary Model.
Rutherford's Atomic Model also became known as the nuclear model. In the nuclear
atom, the protons and neutrons, which contain nearly all of the mass of the atom, are
situated in the nucleus at the centre of the atom. The electrons are dispersed around
the nucleus and occupy most of the volume of the atom. It is worth stressing just how
small the nucleus is compared to the rest of the atom. If we could inflate an atom to
be the size of a large professional football stadium, the nucleus would be about the
size of a cat's eye.
Rutherford's Model proved to be an significant step towards a full understanding of
the atom. It did not, however, fully address the nature of the electrons, and how they
reside in the vast space around the nucleus. It was not until some years far ahead
that a full understanding of the electron was realized. This proved to be the key to
understanding the chemical properties of elements.
Rutherford's experiments discovered the following aspects of the nucleus:
The nucleus of an atom is positively charged.
Most of the mass of an atom is concentrated in the nucleus.
There are large spaces within an atom.
81
Chemistry Grade 9
Legitimacy of Rutherford's Atomic Model
Rutherford's Atomic Model could wonderfully explain the presence of a positively
charged nucleus and the presence of electrons outside the nucleus in an atom. The
failure of Rutherford's theory, however, stemmed from two major objections:
This model is inconsistent to the principle of classical electro-dynamics.
According to this theory, any charged particle in circular motion releases energy
uninterruptedly. The electron being a charged particle in circular motion loses
energy. This should finally result in its curved path towards the nucleus and the
atom should then collapse.
The second major objection to Rutherford's model came from the pattern of
atomic spectra. The detailed explanation of this would be dealt with in the
syllabi in grade 11.
#############
Exercise 3.12
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Why is Rutherford's Model called the nuclear model?
2. Who discovered the protons? Based on what experiment was he able to
discover these protons?
3. According to Rutherford's Atomic Model, where are the protons and
electrons located in an atom?
4. What are the drawbacks of Rutherford's Atomic Model?
5. Describe Rutherford's Atomic Model.
6. If Rutherford's Atomic Model is correct, then the atom should collapse.
Explain?
The Niels Bohr Atomic Model
In 1913, a Danish scientist, Niels Bohr could overcome the limitation of Rutherford's
atomic model effectively based on the Quantum Theory of Radiation proposed by
Max Planck. The concept of Quantum Theory is, however, beyond the scope of this
subject. You will learn about it in grade 11. At this level, we will only present the
principles associated with Bohr's Atomic Model.
Bohr, a student of Rutherford's, developed a new model of the atom. The Bohr Model
can be summarized by the following five principles:
Electrons are arranged in concentric circular orbits around the nucleus (see Figure
3.19).
Electrons occupy only certain orbits around the nucleus. Those orbits are stable
and are called 'stationary' orbits or shells.
Each orbit or shell is associated with a definite fixed amount of energy. Hence
these are also called energy levels and are designated K, L, M, N respectively.
The energy associated with a certain energy level increases with the increase of
82
Structure of the Atom
its distance from the nucleus. Hence if the energy associated with the K, L, M, N
shells are E1, E2, E3,
,
etc. respectively, then E1 < E2 < E3,
etc.
,
As long as the electron revolves in a particular orbit, the electron does not lose
its energy.
Orbits
Nucleus
NMLK
1234
Electrons
Figure 3.19 Neil Bohr's Atomic Model.
#############
Exercise 3.13
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which model can be described as negatively charged electrons orbiting
a positively charged nucleus in definite paths?
a.
The Bohr Model.
d.
The Democritus Model.
b.
The J.J. Thomson Model.
e.
The Leucippus Model.
c.
The Rutherford Model.
2. The circular paths in which electrons revolve are called
.
3. On what basis did Bohr propose his atomic model?
4. What are the orbits and why are they called stationary orbits?
5. Explain Bohr's Atomic Model.
3.4.4 Discovery of the Neutron
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of neutron.
?
Students, form groups and discuss the following points.
Present your discussion points to the class.
1. From your physics lessons you know that like charges
repel each other. So, how do the positively charged
Activity 3.11
protons exist in harmony in the tiny nucleus?
After the discovery of the proton, physicists had predicted that there were likely other
particles in the atomic nucleus. This was seen from the fact that elements heavier than
hydrogen had a larger atomic mass than their atomic number (the number of protons).
83
Chemistry Grade 9
Theories for the additional particles included additional protons whose charge was
shielded by electrons in the nucleus or an unknown neutral particle. In 1932, French
physicists, Frederic and Irene Joliot-Curie bombarded beryllium nuclei with α-particles
and observed that unknown radiation was released that in turn ejected protons from
the nuclei of various substances. Alpha particles, also called α-rays or α-radiation,
consist of two protons and two neutrons bound together into a particle identical to
a helium-4 nucleus. They are emitted from the nucleus of some radio nuclides (e.g.,
Polonium) during a form of radioactive decay, called α-decay. The Joliot-Curies
hypothesized that this radiation was γ-rays.
Beryllium
Paraffin wax
Neutrons
Protons
Alpha particles source
N
P
N
N
P
N
P
Alpha particles
Figure 3.20 James Chadwick's beryllium bombardment experiment.
The English physicist, James Chadwick (Figure 3.21) was convinced that α-particles did
not have sufficient energy to produce such powerful γ-rays. During an experiment it
was found that, when α-particles bombarded Beryllium nuclei, some radiations were
observed. These radiations were found to be undeflected in an electric field. So, the
earlier scientist thought these radiations could be γ-rays and hence discarded it. But
Chadwick repeated the experiment and made the following observations.
i.
A paddle wheel was placed behind the Beryllium nucleus and the nucleus was
bombarded with α-particles. It was observed that the paddle wheel rotates. From
this, it was concluded that the beryllium nucleus emits some invisible radiations
having material particles.
ii.
When these invisible radiations were allowed to pass through an electric field,
there was no deviation seen. This confirmed the fact that these rays contained
neutral particles. These neutral particles were called neutrons, by James
Chadwick.
That discovery provided a new tool for making atomic disintegration, since neutrons,
being electrically uncharged, could enter undeflected into the atomic nucleus, and led
to a new model of the atomic nucleus being composed of protons and neutrons (Figure
3.22). Neutrons could be captured by hydro-carbons or wax as shown in Figure 3.20.
84
Structure of the Atom
Figure 3.21 J.J. Thomson (left), Ernest Rutherford (centre), and James Chadwick (right).
The discovery of fundamental particles has ultimately resulted in the formation of
a basic atomic model. The basic model of an atom encompasses a small positively
charged nucleus (where protons and neutrons reside) at the centre of the atom and
the electrons revolving around the nucleus in orbits.
Electron
Proton
Neutron
Nucleus
Figure 3.22 James Chadwick's Atomic Model.
#############
Exercise 3.14
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Who discovered the neutrons?
2. Neutrons were discovered by bombarding beryllium with
.
3. Why the presence of the neutrons in an atom was predicted?
4. How were the neutrons discovered?
3.5 Composition of an Atom and the Isotopes
Atoms have different properties based on the arrangement and the number of their
sub-atomic particles. Some elements have the same number of protons, but a different
number of neutrons. This resulted in same elements having different masses, which
in turn led to different properties. In this section, we are going to discuss about the
electrons, the protons, and the neutrons in relation to the atomic structure, mass, and
charge. We will also discuss about isotopes.
85
Chemistry Grade 9
3.5.1 Electrons, Protons and Neutrons
At the end of this section, you will be able to
Write the relative charges of an electron a proton and a neutron;
Tell the absolute and relative masses of an electron, a proton and a neutron.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class
when asked by your teacher.
1. From your previous lessons you understood that the
mass of proton and neutron is far exceeding the
mass of an electron. What local materials can you
?
give as an example that represents these three sub-
atomic particles?
2. Can you describe how these three sub-atomic
particles coexist in an atom, by considering their
charge and mass?
Activity 3.12
Electrons
Electrons are one of three fundamental particles that make up the atoms (Figure 3.24).
Electrons are extremely small (Figure 3.23). The mass of an electron is only about
1/2000 the mass of a proton or a neutron, which is about 0.00054897 amu or 9
X 10⁻³¹ Kg. So, electrons contribute almost nothing to the total mass of an atom. The
electric charge of an electron is -1, which is equal but opposite to the charge of a
proton. All atoms have identical number of electrons and protons, so the positive and
negative charges 'cancel out' making atoms electrically neutral.
penny
:
Bowling ball
Figure 3.23 Comparison of an electron (penny or cent) with proton (bowling ball).
The Protons
The proton is one of the three sub-atomic particles that make up the atom. They are
found in the nucleus of the atom (Figure 3.24). It is a tiny, compact region at the center
of the atom. Protons have a positive electrical charge of one (+1) and a mass of
1.0073 atomic mass unit (amu), which is about 1.67x10⁻²⁷ Kg. Together with neutrons,
they make up virtually all of the mass of an atom.
86
Structure of the Atom
The Neutrons
Atoms of all elements apart from most atoms of hydrogen, have neutrons in their
nucleus (Figure 3.24). Unlike the protons and the electrons, which are electrically
charged, neutrons have no charge. That's why the neutrons in Table 3.1 are labeled
n°. The zero stands for 'zero charge'. The mass of a neutron (1.0087 amu) is a little
greater than the mass of a proton, which is 1 atomic mass unit (amu). An atomic mass
unit equals about 1.67x10⁻²⁷ Kg. A neutron also has about the same diameter as a
proton, or 1.7x10⁻¹⁵ meters.
electron
(-)
neutron
(+)
nucleus
proton
(-)
Figure 3.24 The sub atomic particles.
Table 3.1 Physical properties of sub atomic particles.
Particle
Symbol
Charge
Mass (Kg)
Relative
Mass (amu)
Location
(coulombs)
charge
Proton
P⁺
+1.59x10⁻¹⁹
1.673x10⁻²⁷
+1
1.0073
Inside the
nucleus
Neutron
n°
No charge
1.675x10⁻²⁷
o
1.0087
Inside the
nucleus
Electron
e⁻
-1.59x10⁻¹⁹
9x10⁻³¹
-1
5.4858 X 10⁻⁴
Outside the
nucleus
<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 3.15
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Tell the mass and charge of the fundamental particles of an atom.
2. Compare the masses of protons and neutrons.
3. Compare the charges of electrons and protons.
4. Neutrons are neither attracted to nor repelled from the objects; they don't
interact with protons or electrons. Explain?
5. Why is the mass of an atom depends only on the mass of protons and
neutrons?
87
Chemistry Grade 9
3.5.2 Atomic Number and Mass Number
At the end of this section, you will be able to
tell the number of protons and electrons in an atom from the atomic number of
the element;
determine the number of neutrons from given values of atomic numbers and
mass numbers.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. How do elements arrange in the periodic table?
?
2. In the previous section we have discussed about the
masses of electrons, protons and neutrons. So, which
particles account for the mass of an atom?
3. How is it possible to distinguish atoms of one
Activity 3.13
element from atoms of another element?
It is important to be able to differentiate atoms of one element from atoms of another
element. Elements are pure substances that make up all other matter, so each one is
given a different name. From your grade 7 science lessons you know that the names
of elements are represented by unique one- or two-letter symbols, such as H for
hydrogen, C for carbon, or He for helium. However, it would be more authoritative
if these names could be used to identify the numbers of protons and neutrons in the
atoms. That's where atomic numbers and mass numbers are useful.
Scientists are always interested in atomic number and how it differs between different
elements since an atom of one element can be distinguished from an atom of another
element by the number of protons in its nucleus. The number of protons in an atom is
called its atomic number (Z). This number is very important because it is unique for
atoms of a given element. All atoms of an element have identical number of protons,
and every element has a diverse number of protons in its atoms (Table 3.2). If an atom
has only one proton, we know that it's a hydrogen atom. An atom with two protons
is always a helium atom. If scientists count four protons in an atom, they know it's a
beryllium atom. An atom with three protons is a lithium atom, an atom with five protons
is a boron atom, an atom with six protons is a carbon atom
the list goes on.
88
Structure of the Atom
Table 3.2 Atoms of the first six elements.
Name
Protons
Neutrons
Electrons
Atomic
Mass
Number (Z)
Number (A)
Hydrogen
1
0
1
1
1
Helium
2
2
2
2
4
Lithium
3
4
3
3
7
Beryllium
4
5
4
4
9
Boron
5
6
5
5
11
Carbon
6
6
6
6
12
Of course, since neutral atoms have the same number of electrons to that of proton,
an element's atomic number also tells you how many electrons are in a neutral atom
of that element. Atoms are neutral in electrical charge because they have the same
number of negative electrons as positive protons (Table 3.2). For example, hydrogen
has an atomic number of 1. This means that an atom of hydrogen has one proton,
and, if it's neutral, has one electron as well. Carbon, on the other hand, has an atomic
number of 6, which means that an atom of carbon has 6 protons, and, if it's neutral,
has 6 electrons as well.
Mass Number
The mass number (A) of an atom is the total number of protons and neutrons in its
nucleus. It is also known as the total number of nucleons in the atom's nucleus. Do
not confuse atomic mass with mass number because it is the average weight of an
element. Counting the number of protons and neutrons tells scientists about the total
mass of an atom.
Mass number A = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
An atom's mass number is very easy to calculate, provided that you know the number
of protons and neutrons in an atom.
Example 3.1: What is the mass number of an atom of helium that contains 2 neutrons?
Solution
(Number of protons) = 2 (Remember that an atom of helium always has 2 protons)
(Number of neutrons) = 2
Mass number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
Mass number = 2 + 2 = 4
Example 3.2: How many protons, electrons, and neutrons are in an atom of K (mass
number of 40)?
Solution
Atomic number = (number of protons) = 19
89
Chemistry Grade 9
For all atoms with no charge, the number of electrons is equal to the number of protons.
Therefore, number of protons = number of electrons = 19
The mass number, 40, is the sum of the number of protons and the neutrons.
To find the number of neutrons, subtract the number of protons from the mass number.
Number of neutrons = 40 19 = 21
Example 3.3: What is the atomic number, number of electrons, and neutrons in an
atom of zinc having a mass number of 65 and 30 protons?
Solution
Number of protons = Atomic number = 30
For all atoms with no charge, the number of electrons is equal to the number of protons.
Number of protons = Number of electrons = 30
The mass number, 65, is the sum of the number of protons and the neutrons.
To find the number of neutrons, subtract the number of protons from the mass number.
Number of neutrons = 65 - 30 = 35
Representation of Mass Number and Atomic Number in a Nuclear Symbol of an
Element
There is a common way in which scientists commonly express the mass number and the
atomic number of an atom. To write a nuclear symbol, the mass number is placed at
the upper left (superscript) of the chemical symbol, and the atomic number is placed
at the lower left (subscript) of the symbol.
Mass number =
A = Z + N
A
X
Chemical symbol
for the element
Atomic number =
Z
number of protons
N
= neutron number
Example 3.4: The complete nuclear symbol for hydrogen mass number 1, helium mass
number 4, lithium mass number 7, beryllium mass number 9, boron mass number 11
and carbon mass number 12 is given below:
1 1 H, 4 2 He, 3 7 Li, 4 9 Be, 11 5 B, 12 6 C
In the carbon nucleus represented above, the atomic number 6 indicates that the
nucleus contains 6 protons, and therefore, it must contain 6 neutrons to have a mass
number of 12. The beryllium nucleus has 4 protons and 5 neutrons in order to have a
mass of 9.
90
Structure of the Atom
############
Exercise 3.16
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which of the following pairs has almost similar masses?
a. Proton and electron
b. Neutron and electron
c. Electron and hydrogen(protium)
d. Neutron and hydrogen (protium)
2. Aluminium has 13 protons and 14 neutrons. What is its mass number?
3. Silicone's mass number is 28 and its atomic number is 14. What is its
proton and neutron number?
4. Chlorine has 18 neutrons and it has a mass number of 35. What is its
proton number?
5. Write the nuclear symbol of aluminium, silicon and chlorine.
3.5.3 Atomic Mass and Isotope
At the end of this section, you will be able to
explain the terms atomic mass and isotope;
calculate the atomic masses of elements that have isotopes.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. In the drawbacks of Thomson's Atomic Theory, we
have seen that atoms of the same element are not
always alike. What was the reason for this?
2. In the previous sections we have thoroughly discussed
about the mass of an atom being concentrated in the
nucleus. So how is it possible to get the atomic mass
?
of an element?
3. Considering question number one above do you think
the atomic mass of an element will always be the
same? Why?
4. What is the difference between mass number and
Activity 3.14
atomic mass of an element?
All atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, but some may have
different numbers of neutrons. For example, all carbon atoms have six protons, and
most have six neutrons as well. But some carbon atoms have seven or eight neutrons
91
Chemistry Grade 9
instead of the usual six. Atoms of the same element that differ in their numbers of
neutrons are called isotopes. Many isotopes occur naturally. Usually, one or two
isotopes of an element are the most stable and common. Different isotopes of an
element generally have the same physical and chemical properties because they have
the same numbers of protons and electrons.
Example 3.5: Hydrogen Isotopes
Hydrogen is an example of an element that has isotopes. Three isotopes of hydrogen
are modelled in Figure 3.25. Most hydrogen atoms have just one proton, one electron,
and lack a neutron. These atoms are just called hydrogen. This isotope of hydrogen is
also known as protium. Some hydrogen atoms have one neutron as well. These atoms
are the isotope named deuterium. Other hydrogen atoms have two neutrons. These
atoms are the isotope named tritium. They are also known as heavy hydrogen.
'H
Protium
Deuterium
Tritium
Figure 3.25 The three most stable isotopes of hydrogen: protium (A = 1), deuterium (A
= 2), and tritium (A = 3).
For most elements other than hydrogen, isotopes are named for their mass number. For
example, carbon atoms with the usual 6 neutrons have a mass number of 12 (6 protons
+ 6 neutrons = 12), so they are called carbon-12. Carbon atoms with 7 neutrons have
an atomic mass of 13 (6 protons + 7 neutrons = 13). These atoms are the isotope
called carbon-13.
Stability of Isotopes
Atoms need a certain proportion of neutrons to protons to have a stable nucleus. Having
too many or too few neutrons relative to protons, results in an unstable, or radioactive,
nucleus that will sooner or later breakdown to a more stable form. This process is
called radioactive decay. Many isotopes have radioactive nuclei, and these isotopes
are referred to as radioisotopes. When they decay, they release particles that may
be destructive. This is why radioactive isotopes are risky and why working with them
requires special suits for protection. The isotope of carbon known as carbon-14 is an
example of a radioisotope. In contrast, the carbon isotopes called carbon-12 and
carbon-13 are stable.
This whole discussion of isotopes brings US back to Dalton's Atomic Theory. According
to Dalton, atoms of a given element are identical. But if atoms of a given element can
have different numbers of neutrons, then they can have different masses as well. How
did Dalton miss this? It turns out that elements found in nature exist as constant uniform
92
Structure of the Atom
mixtures of their naturally occurring isotopes. In other words, a piece of lithium metal
always contains both types of naturally occurring lithium (the type with 3 neutrons and
the type with 4 neutrons). Moreover, it always contains the two in the same relative
abundance. In a lump of lithium, 93% will always be lithium with 4 neutrons, while the
remaining 7% will always be lithium with 3 neutrons.
Calculating mass number of isotopes
Problem 1: Lithium Isotopes
a. What are the atomic number and the mass number of an isotope of lithium
containing 3 neutrons?
b. What are the atomic number and the mass number of an isotope of lithium
containing 4 neutrons?
Solution
A lithium atom contains 3 protons in its nucleus irrespective of the number of neutrons
or electrons.
a. Atomic number = (number of protons) = 3
(number of neutrons) = 3
Mass number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
mass number = 3+3=6
a. Atomic number = (number of protons) = 3
(number of neutrons) = 4
Mass number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
mass number = 3+4=7
Note that because the lithium atom always has 3 protons, the atomic number for
lithium is always 3. The mass number, however, is 6 in the isotope with 3 neutrons, and
7 in the isotope with 4 neutrons. Naturally, only certain isotopes exist. For instance,
lithium exists as an isotope with 3 neutrons, and as an isotope with 4 neutrons, but it
doesn't exist as an isotope with 2 neutrons, or as an isotope with 5 neutrons.
Atomic Mass
Masses of separate atoms are very, very small. Using a modern device called a
mass spectrometer; it is possible to measure such tiny masses. An atom of oxygen-16,
for example, has a mass of 2.66x10⁻²³ g. While comparisons of masses measured
in grams would have some utility, it is far more practical to have a system that will
permit US to more easily compare relative atomic masses. Scientists decided on using
the carbon-12 nuclide as the reference standard by which all other masses would be
compared. By definition, one atom of carbon-12 is assigned a mass of 12 atomic
mass units (amu). An atomic mass unit is defined as a mass equal to one-twelfth the
mass of an atom of carbon-12 or 1.992646547 X 10⁻²³ g, which is assigned an
atomic mass of 12 units. In this scale, 1 amu corresponds to 1.660539040x10⁻²4 g.
The atomic mass unit is also called the Dalton (Da), after English chemist John Dalton.
The mass of any isotope of any element is expressed in relation to the carbon-12
93
Chemistry Grade 9
standard. For example, one atom of helium-4 has a mass of 4.0026 amu. An atom of
sulfur-32 has a mass of 31.972 amu.
Average Atomic Mass
Since many elements have some isotopes, chemists use average atomic mass. If we
know the natural abundance and the mass of all the isotopes, we can find the average
atomic mass. The natural abundance of an isotope of an element is the percent of
that isotope as it occurs in a sample on earth. The average atomic mass is merely
a weighted average of the masses of all the isotopes. We can calculate this by the
following equation:
Average Atomic Mass = [(% isotope 1)(mass of isotope 1)] ÷ 100 + [(% isotope 2)
(mass of isotope 2)] ÷ 100 + ...
Problem 2: Find the average mass of lithium (Li-7, 93% and Li-6, 7%).
Solution: We follow the following calculation:
Lithium with 4 neutrons has a mass number of 7 and its percentage abundance is 93%.
Lithium with 3 neutrons has a mass number of 6 and its percentage abundance is 7%.
Average mass of lithium = (7 X 93) ÷100 + (6 X 7) ÷100
6.51 + 0.42 = 6.93
The average atomic mass of lithium is, therefore, 6.93 amu.
Problem 3: Boron has two naturally occurring isotopes. In a sample of boron, 20%
of the atoms are B-10, which is an isotope of boron with 5 neutrons and a mass of
10 amu. The other 80% of the atoms are B-11, which is an isotope of boron with 6
neutrons and a mass of 11 amu. What is the atomic mass of boron?
Following the same approach as lithium, the average atomic mass of boron is:
Atomic mass of boron = [(10 X 20) ÷100] + [(11 X 80) ÷100]
= 2 + 8.8
= 10.8
The average atomic mass is, therefore, 10.8 amu.
Problem 4: Neon has three naturally occurring isotopes. In a sample of neon, 90.92%
of the atoms are Ne-20, which is an isotope of neon with 10 neutrons and a mass of
19.99 amu. Another 0.3% of the atoms are Ne-21, which is an isotope of neon with
11 neutrons and a mass of 20.99 amu. The remaining 8.85% of the atoms are Ne-22,
which is an isotope of neon with 12 neutrons and a mass of 21.99 amu. What is the
atomic mass of neon?
Solution
Neon has three isotopes. We will use the equation:
Atomic mass = [(% isotopel) (mass of isotope1)] ÷100 + [(% isotope 2) (mass of
94
Structure of the Atom
isotope 2)] ÷100 + [(% isotope 3) (mass of isotope 3)] ÷100
We can also follow the following alternative way.
% Isotope 1 = 0.9092 (write all percentages as decimals), mass of isotope 1
= 19.99
% Isotope 2 = 0.003, mass of isotope 2 = 20.99
% Isotope 3 = 0.0885, mass of isotope 3 = 21.99
Substituting these into the equation, and we get:
Atomic mass of neon =
= [(0.9092) (19.99)] + [(0.003) (20.99)] + [(0.0885) (21.99)]
= 20.17 amu
The average atomic mass of neon atom is, therefore, 20.17 amu.
Dalton always experimented with large element-chunks that contained all of the
naturally occurring isotopes of that element. As a result, when he performed his
measurements, he was in fact perceiving the averaged properties of all the different
isotopes in the sample. We will do the same thing for most of our purposes in chemistry,
and deal with the average mass of the atoms. Fortunately, other than having different
masses, most other properties of different isotopes are similar.
Exercise 3.17
============
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. In an element that has isotopes, which of the sub-atomic particles are
different, and which remain unchanged?
2. How many protons, electrons, and neutrons are there in each of the
following atoms?
60
45
a.
Co
b. Na-24
c.
Ca
d. Sr-90
27
20
3. Calculate the average atomic mass of copper: Cu-63, 69.15% & Cu- 5,
30.85%.
4. Calculate the average atomic mass of chlorine: CI-35, 75% & CI-37,
25%.
3.5.4 Main Energy Levels
At the end of this section, you will be able to describe main energy level.
95
Chemistry Grade 9
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Who discovered energy levels? What is the other
?
name of energy levels?
2. In the Bohr's atomic model, why do electrons
disperse themselves?
3. According to Bohr's atomic model, how do electrons
Activity 3.15
arrange themselves?
The concept of orbits in which electrons revolve around the nucleus was proposed by
a student of Rutherford named Niels Bohr in 1913. Refer the five principles of Bohr's
atomic model discussed under section 3.4.3. Today, in chemistry, the principal energy
level or the main energy level of an electron refers to the shell in which the electron is
located relative to the atom's nucleus. This level is denoted by the principal quantum
number n. The principal quantum number could also be denoted by the whole numbers
1,2,3,4, ... or by the letters K, L, M, N, etc. (Figure 3.26)
n = 6
n=5
n=4
n=3
n=2
KLMNOP
+
Figure 3.26 Main energy levels.
The energy of the orbit sometimes known as the shell increases upon moving away
from the nucleus i.e., it follows the increasing order K<L<M<N or 1<2<3<4,
etc.
<<<<<<<<<<<>
Exercise 3.18
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What is the main energy level of an electron?
2. How many main energy levels does each of the first twenty elements (H
to Ca) have?
96
Structure of the Atom
3.5.5 Electronic Configuration on Main Shells
At the end of this section, you will be able to
define electronic configuration;
write the ground state electronic configuration of the elements;
draw diagrams to show the electronic configuration of the first 20 elements;
write electronic configuration of the elements using noble gas as a core.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. In a certain class room, there are 2 seats in the first
row, 8 seats in the second row, 18 seats in the third
row, and 32 seats at the back of the room.
If the rows with small seats are closer to the teacher
i.e., 2, 18, 32 respectively and all students must sit
beginning from the seats closer to the teacher, how
will 35 students take seat?
?
2. How would you arrange 20 electrons on an atom
that can hold 2 electrons on K-shell, 8 electrons on
L-shell, 18 electrons on M-shell, and 32 electrons on
N-shell? (Hint begin arranging electrons from the
lowest shell, in energy.
Activity 3.16
We picture an atom as a small nucleus surrounded by a much larger volume of space
containing the electrons. This space is divided into regions called principal energy
levels. Each principal energy level can contain up to 2n² electrons, where n is the
number of the level (n = 1, 2, 3, etc.). Thus, the first level can contain up to 2 electrons,
2(1²) = 2; the second up to 8 electrons, 2(2²) = 8; the third up to 18, 2(3²) = 18, and
so on. Only seven energy levels are needed to contain all the electrons in an atom of
any of those elements known thus far. The systematic arrangement of electrons in the
various shell or orbits in an atom is called electronic configuration.
The electron configuration of an element describes how electrons are distributed in
their energy levels or shells. Electron configurations of atoms in the main energy levels
follow a standard notation in which the number of electrons arranged in all electron-
containing atomic shells is placed in a sequence. Filling energy levels with electrons
begins from the lower in energy or the shell closer to the nucleus i.e., K shell and goes
on sequentially to L, M, N, etc.
The last shell or the outermost shell from the nucleus with electrons is called the
valence shell. The shell inner to this is called the penultimate shell, and the one inner to
penultimate shell is called the anti-penultimate shell.
97
Chemistry Grade 9
Shell
2n²
K
2
L
8
M
18
N
32
o
50
The maximum number of electrons that can be filled in the valence shell is 8, that in the
penultimate shell is 18, and the anti-penultimate shell has a maximum capacity of 32
electrons. The filling of electrons till atomic number 30 follows the following pattern.
K
L
M
N
2
2
8
2
8
8
2
8
8
2
2
8
18
2
Example 3.6: The atomic number of calcium is 20. Write the electronic configuration
of calcium.
Solution:
The first shell (K) can hold 2(1²) = 2,
The second shell (L) can hold 2(2²) = 8,
The third shell (M) can hold 2(3²) = 18 but since calcium has only 20 electrons; the
first two shells held 10 (2 + 8) electrons. Hence the number of electrons left from these
shells will be 20 - 10 = 10. Therefore, the M shell is left with 10 electrons. However,
according to the above rule the valence shell cannot hold more than 8 electrons. We
can then write the electronic configuration of Ca = 2, 8, 8, 2.
Example 3.7: Write the electronic configuration of Argon (electrons 18).
Solution: Following the same procedure as calcium, the electronic configuration of
argon will be: Ar = 2, 8, 8.
The electronic configuration of the elements could also be drawn using atomic diagrams.
For example, the diagrammatic representation of the electronic configurations of some
elements is shown in Figure 3.27, below.
98
Structure of the Atom
H
He
Li
C
F
Ne
Na
Si
CI
Ar
::
::
Figure 3.27 Electronic configuration of H, He, Li, C, F, Ne, Na, Si, CI, and Ar using
energy diagrams.
<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 3.19
1. Define the term electronic configuration of an element.
2. Write the electronic configurations of the first 20 elements (H to Ca) in the
periodic table.
3. Draw the electronic configuration of the first 20 elements (H to Ca) using the
energy diagrams.
3.5.6 Valence Electrons
At the end of this section, you will be able to describe valence electrons.
Students, form groups and discuss the following
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
An atom X has atomic number 20, its electronic
?
configuration is K=2,L = 8,M = 8 and N = 2. Which
shell electrons are
1. Valence electron
2. Penultimate electrons and
Activity 3.17
3. Antipenultimate electrons?
As stated earlier, the energy related with an energy level increases as the distance
from the nucleus increases. An electron in the seventh energy level has more energy
associated with it than does one in the first energy level. The lesser the number of the
principal energy level, the closer the electron in it is to the nucleus, and the more tough
99
Chemistry Grade 9
it is to remove this electron from the atom, due to strong electrostatic attraction.
In section 3.5.5, we have discussed about writing the electronic configuration of
elements. The electrons that occupy the outermost shell of an atom are called valence
electrons. Valence electrons are furthest from the nucleus of the atom. They are the
most easily lost, and the ones that determine the element's chemical properties, and
how an atom will react. Atoms lose, gain, or share their valence electrons during
chemical reactions. By writing an electronic configuration, you will be able to see how
many electrons occupy the highest energy level.
Example 3.8: The electronic configuration of silicon (Si) is 2, 8, 4. The first two electrons
occupy the inner shell (K), the next 8 electrons occupy the middle shell (L), and the
remaining 4 electrons occupy the outermost shell (M) known as the valence shell (see
Figure 3.28).
(Empty energy level)
Valence
Fourth orbit
electrons
Third orbit
Si
+14
Second
Silicon
orbit
core
First orbit
Figure 3.28 An energy diagram showing the valence electrons of Silicon.
Example 3.9: The electronic configuration of argon (Ar) is 2, 8, 8. The valence shell of
the argon atom is the M shell having 8 valence electrons (see Figure 3.29).
Nucleus
Valence electron
Figure 3.29 An energy diagram showing the valence electrons of Argon atom.
100
Structure of the Atom
Exercise 3.20
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What are valence electrons?
2. What is the purpose of identifying valence electrons?
3. Identify the number of valence electrons for the first 20 elements (H to Ca).
4. Which electron is difficult to remove from a neutral atom, the inner or outer
electron?
Key Terms and Equations
Atom
Magnetic Field
Tritium
Theory
Electric field
Radioactive
Atomic Theory
α particle
Radioactive decay
Chemical Law
X-ray
Radioisotopes
Scientific Law
Canal rays
Average atomic mass
Electron
Perforated cathode
Natural abundance
Proton
Nuclear model
Energy level
Neutron
Atomic model
Shell
Nucleus
α-Radiation
Orbit
Cathode ray
α-Decay Isotope
Principal quantum number
Anode ray
Atomic mass unit
Electronic configuration
γ-ray
Atomic mass
Valence shell
Discharge tube
Mass number
Valence electron
Cathode-ray tube
Atomic number
Penultimate shell
Anode
Protium
Anti-penultimate shell
Cathode Fluorescent
Deuterium
Atomic diagram
Mass Number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
Average Atomic Mass = [(% isotope 1) (mass of isotope 1)] 100 + [(%isotope
2)(mass of isotope 2)] ÷ 100 +
Unit Summary
In this unit we have discussed about how the atomic structure was proposed in
conjunction with the discoveries of the atom and the fundamental subatomic particles
known as protons, neutrons, electron and the nucleus. This then led US to the definitions
of terms like atomic number, mass number, isotope, energy level, valence electrons,
and electronic configuration of atoms. We have also discussed how to calculate the
number of protons, electrons, and neutrons of atoms from atomic and mass numbers
of atoms. We have discussed about the calculation of the atomic masses of elements
that have isotopes. Finally we have briefly seen how to arrange electrons on the main
energy levels of the atoms which is commonly known as the electronic configuration
of atoms.
101
Chemistry Grade 9
Atomic theory originated as a philosophical concept in ancient India and Greece. The
word "atom" comes from the ancient Greek word atomos, which means indivisible.
According to atomism, matter consists of discrete particles. However, the theory was
one of many explanations for matter and wasn't based on experiential data.
In the middle of the 5th century BC, an ancient Greek philosopher, Empedocles, thought
that all materials are made up of four things called elements: earth, air, water, and
fire. Plato, student of Socrates and teacher of Aristotle, adopted Empedocles' Theory,
and coined the term element to describe these four substances. His successor, Aristotle,
also adopted the concept of four elements. The Greek philosophers' concept of four
elements existed for more than two thousand years. In the 5th century BC, Democritus
proposed that matter consists of indestructible, indivisible units called atoms. However,
since Aristotle and other prominent thinkers of the time strongly opposed their idea
of the atom, their theory was disregarded and essentially buried until the 16th and
17th centuries.
It took until the end of the 18th century for science to provide concrete evidence of the
existence of atoms. In 1789, Antoine Lavoisier formulated the Law of Conservation of
Mass, which states that the mass of the products of a reaction is the same as the mass
of the reactants. Ten years later, Joseph Louis Proust proposed the Law of Definite
Proportions, which states that the masses of elements in a compound always occur in
the same proportion.
These theories didn't reference atoms, yet John Dalton built upon them to develop the
Law of Multiple Proportions, which states that the ratios of masses of elements in a
compound are small whole numbers. His work marked the beginning of the scientific
atomic theory.
Up to this point, atoms were believed to be the smallest units of matter. In 1897, J.J.
Thomson discovered the electron. Thomson also discovered the charge to mass ratio
of the electron. He proposed a plum pudding model of the atom (1904), in which
electrons were embedded in a mass of positive charge to yield an electrically neutral
atom. Subsequently in 1909, the American scientist Robert Millikan found the charge
and mass of the electron, in his oil drop experiment.
Ernest Rutherford, one of Thomson's students, disproved the plum pudding model in
1909. Rutherford found that the positive charge of an atom and most of its mass were
at the center, or nucleus, of an atom. In 1911, Rutherford together with his students
Geiger and Marsden described a planetary model in which electrons orbited a small,
positive-charged nucleus.
In 1913, Niels Bohr proposed the Bohr model, which states that electrons only orbit
the nucleus at specific distances from the nucleus. According to his model, electrons
couldn't spiral into the nucleus but could make quantum leaps between energy levels.
Subsequently, in 1920, Rutherford discovered the existence of the proton in the nucleus.
102
Structure of the Atom
In 1932, James Chadwick discovered the neutron which is another sub-atomic particle.
His atomic model encompasses a small positively charged nucleus (where protons
and neutrons reside) at the centre of the atom and the electrons revolving around the
nucleus in orbits, which is the basic atomic model.
The discoveries of the above facts about atoms led to the modified Modern Atomic
Theory postulates.
The presence of positively charged particles in an atom has been predicted by
Goldstein (1886) based on the electrical neutrality of an atom. The discovery of the
proton by Goldstein was done based on the cathode ray experiment conducted by
using a perforated cathode.
The electron was one of the fundamental subatomic particle that was discovered by
the British physicist, J.J. Thomson, in 1897. In the discovery of electrons J. J. Thomson
performed several experiments on the cathode rays.
The first experiment he has studied was the straight line travel of cathode rays
in the discharge tube by placing a small object between the cathode and the
anode.
J. J. Thomson's second experiment was performed by placing a light paddle
wheel between cathode and anode to study the particulate nature of the
cathode rays.
J. J. Thomson performed the third and fourth experiments to investigate the
negative charge of the cathode ray by passing cathode rays through electric
and magnetic fields. Thomson concluded that the particles had a net negative
charge; these particles are now called electrons.
In 1920, in his discovery of the nucleus, Rutherford targeted a stream of positively
charged α-particles at a very thin gold foil target and inspected how the α-particles
were scattered by the foil. He inspected that a small fraction of the α-particles were
deflected at large angles, and some were reflected directly back at the source.
Rutherford's results suggested that both the mass and positive charge are concentrated
in a minute fraction of the volume of an atom, which Rutherford called the nucleus.
Rutherford, however, was cornered by the other scientists by the question: "Why does
the nucleus not disintegrate in spite of repulsion among the protons?" To explain the
stability of the nucleus, Rutherford predicted the presence of neutral particles.
The English physicist, James Chadwick bombarded Beryllium nuclei with α-particles
and observed some radiations that possess material particles and did deflect in an
electric field. This confirmed the fact that these rays contained neutral particles. He
called these neutral particles neutrons.
Electrons are one of three fundamental particles that make up the atoms. Electrons are
extremely small (5.4858 X 10⁻⁴ amu) and contribute almost nothing to the total mass
of an atom. The electric charge of an electron is -1.
103
Chemistry Grade 9
The proton is one of the three sub-atomic particles found in the nucleus of an atom.
Protons have a positive electrical charge of one (+1) and a mass of 1.0073 atomic
mass unit (amu).
Neutrons are subatomic particles found inside the nucleus of an atom. They have no
charge. The mass of a neutron is a little greater (1.0087 amu) than the mass of a
proton. Together with protons, they make up virtually all of the mass of an atom.
Scientists are always interested in atomic number and how it differs between different
elements since an atom of one element can be distinguished from an atom of another
element by the number of protons in its nucleus. The number of protons in an atom is
called its atomic number (Z).
The mass number (A) of an atom is the total number of protons and neutrons in its
nucleus. It is also known as the total number of nucleons in the atom's nucleus. It is
calculated by using the formula:
Mass number A = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
To write a nuclear symbol, the mass number is placed at the upper left (superscript)
of the chemical symbol, and the atomic number is placed at the lower left (subscript)
of the symbol.
All atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, but some may
have different numbers of neutrons. Atoms of the same element that differ in their
numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Different isotopes of an element generally
have the same physical and chemical properties because they have the same numbers
of protons and electrons.
Mass of a single atom is very, very small. Using a modern device called a mass
spectrometer; it is possible to measure such tiny masses. By definition, one atom of
carbon-12 is assigned a mass of 12 atomic mass units (amu).
Since many elements have some isotopes, chemists use average atomic mass. The
average atomic mass is merely a weighted average of the masses of all the isotopes.
We can calculate this by the following equation:
Average Atomic Mass = (%isotope )(mass of isotopel) + (%isotope2)(mas of
isotope 2) + ....
Today, in chemistry, the principal energy level or the main energy level of an electron
refers to the shell in which the electron is located relative to the atom's nucleus. This
level is denoted by the principal quantum number n (1, 2, 3, etc or K, L, M, N, etc).
The electron configuration of an element describes how electrons are distributed in
their energy levels or shells. Filling energy levels with electrons begins from the lower
in energy or the shell closer to the nucleus i.e., K shell and goes on sequentially to L,
M, N, etc.
104
Structure of the Atom
The electrons that occupy the outermost shell of an atom are called valence electrons.
They are the most easily lost, and the ones that determine the element's chemical
properties, and how an atom will react.
Review Exercise
Part I: Basic Level Questions
Provide short answer for the following questions.
1. Which postulate of Dalton's Atomic Theory is considered to be correct even
today?
2. "Like atoms are identical in all respects". This statement of Dalton's Atomic
Theory was contradicted. What discovery did contradict this?
3. What was the basis for the proposal of Dalton's Atomic Theory?
4. List the three statements that make up the Modern Atomic Theory.
5. Explain how atoms are composed.
6. Why was gas at low pressure taken by Thomson while experimenting?
7. Tell the mass and the charge of the fundamental particles of an atom.
8. Which is larger, a proton or an electron?
9. Which is larger, a neutron or an electron?
10. What is an atomic model?
11. Who discovered the protons? Based on what experiment was he able to discover
these protons?
12. Where are most of the mass of an atom located?
13. With the increase in the radius of the orbit, the energy of an electron
.
14. What is an α particle?
15. Describe J. J. Thomson's Atomic Model.
16. What are the observations and conclusions drawn by J.J. Thomson while
conducting experiments with dischage tube for studying the properties of
cathode rays?
17. Sketch a diagram of a boron atom, which has five protons and six neutrons in
its nucleus.
18. Sketch a diagram of a helium atom, which has two protons and two neutrons in
its nucleus.
19. Define an atomic number. What is the atomic number for a boron atom?
20. What is the atomic number of helium?
21. Define an isotope and give example(s).
22. What is the difference between deuterium and tritium?
23. Which pair represents isotopes?
a.
4 2 He and 3 2 He
d.
40 20 CA and 40 19 K
b.
56 26 Fe and 56 Mn
e.
56 26 Fe and 58 26 Fe
C.
28 14 Si and 31 15P P
f.
238 92 U and 235 92 U
105
Chemistry Grade 9
24. Write complete symbols of each atom, including their atomic number and the
mass number.
a. An oxygen atom with 8 protons and 8 neutrons
b. A potassium atom with 19 protons and 20 neutrons
C. A lithium atom with 3 protons and 4 neutrons
d. A magnesium atom with 12 protons and 12 neutrons
e. A magnesium atom with 12 protons and 13 neutrons
f. A xenon atom with 54 protons and 77 neutrons
25. Americium-241 (Am-241) is an isotope used in smoke detectors. What is the
complete symbol for this isotope?
26. Carbon-14 is an isotope used to perform radioactive dating tests on previously
living material. What is the complete symbol for this isotope?
Part II: Intermediary Level Questions
Tell whether the following statements are True or False.
27. According to Thomson's Atomic Model, electrons revolve around the nucleus.
28. In a discharge tube, anode rays originate when electrons collide with gas
molecules.
29. 1680 and 1880 are isotopes while 40 20 Ca and 40 18 Ar are isobars.
30. α-ray scattering experiment proved that the positive particles are present in
the extra nuclear part of an atom.
Fill in the Blanks.
31. Anode rays are deflected towards the negative plate in the presence of an
electric field because they consist of
particles.
32. Some of the α-rays' deflection in acute and obtuse angles are due to the
presence of the
in the center of the atom.
33. The energy of an electron present in the first orbit of an atom is
than
the energy of an electron in the other orbits.
Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives
34. Which of the following concepts was not considered in Rutherford's Atomic
Model?
a. The electrical neutrality of an atom.
b. The quantization of energy.
C. The electrons revolve around the nucleus at very high speeds.
d. The existence of nuclear forces of attraction on the electrons.
106
Structure of the Atom
35. When alpha particles are sent through a thin metal foil ,only one out of ten
thousand of them are rebounded. This observation led to the conclusion that
a. Positively charged particles are concentrated at the centre of the atom.
b. More number of electrons are revolving around the nucleus of the atom.
C. Unit positive charge is only present in an atom.
d. The massive sphere with a more negative charge and unit positive charge
is present at the center of the atom.
36. Canal ray experiment lead to the discovery of
.
a. protons
C. electrons
b. neutrons
d. nucleus
37. In which of the following pairs of shells that energy difference between two
adjacent orbits is minimum?
a. K, L
C. M,N
b. L,M
d. N,O
38. Assertion A: An electron in the inner orbit is more tightly bound to the nucleus.
Reason B: The greater the absolute value of the energy of an electron ,the more
tightly the electron is bound to the nucleus.
a. Both A and B are true but B is not the appropriate reason for A.
b. Both A and B are individually correct and B is the correct reason for A.
C. A is correct but B is not correct.
d. Both A and B are not correct.
39. If two naturally occurring isotopes of an element are 1⁵X and ¹⁷ˣ what is the
percentage composition of each isotope of X occurring respectively if the
average atomic weight accounts for 14?
a. 95, 5
C. 75, 25
b. 80, 20
d. 65, 35
40. An element has two isotopes with mass numbers 16 and 18. The average atomic
weight is 16.5. The percentage abundance of these isotopes is
and
respectively.
a. 75, 25
C. 50, 50
b. 25, 75
d. 33.33, 66.67
41. Which among the following are isobars?
ax, a+1y
ax, bᵃY
a.
C.
b. abX,bY
d. ax, a-1y b-1
42. Some of the elements have fractional atomic masses. The reason for this could
be
a. the existence of isobars.
C. the nuclear reactions.
b. the existence of isotopes.
d. the presence of neutrons in the
107
Chemistry Grade 9
nucleus.
43. Which of the following concepts, was not considered in Rutherford's atomic
model?
a.
The electrical neutrality of atom.
b. The quantization of energy.
C.
Electrons revolve around the nucleus at very high speed.
d. Existence of nuclear forces of attraction on the electrons.
44. ¹⁵₇X, ¹¹⁷X are two naturally occurring isotopes of an element X. What is the
percentage of each isotope of X if the average atomic mass is 14?
a. 95, 5
C.
75, 25
b.
80, 20
d. 65, 35
45. Rutherford's α-particle scattering experiment eventually led to the conclusion
that
a. Mass and energy are related.
b. The point of impact with matter can be precisely determined.
C.
Neutrons are buried deep in the nucleus.
d. Electrons are distributed in a large space around the nucleus.
46. The number of electrons present in the valence shell of an atom with atomic
number 38 is
a. 2
b. 10
C.
1
d. 8
108
Main-Group Elements
Main-Group Elements
Atomic number
is
H
Symbol
VIRA
1
.0079 Atomic mass
HA
VA
2
Transition Metals
4
3
Period
5
6
7
UNIT
Inner Transition Metals
Metals
Lonthandes
Metalloids
Actinides
11
101/81
NonMetals
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS
