Unit Outcomes
After completing the unit, you will be able to
define chemistry;
describe its' scope;
discuss the relationships between chemistry with physics, biology, medicine
geology and other subjects;
describe the application of chemistry in the field of agriculture, medicine,
food production and building construction;
name some common chemical industries in Ethiopia and their Product.
1
Chemistry Grade 9
Make groups and discuss on the following questions and
present your discussion points to the class.
1. What do you think that the following materials are
made of?
Start-up Activity
the air you breath,
the water you drink,
the cloth you wear, and
the food you eat?
2. Why is everything in this world changing from time
to time?
3. Is it important to know the materials from which
everything is made up of? Why?
4. Mention some of the materials you are using
commonly. Did you know who manufactured them?
Since chemistry is so fundamental to our world, it plays a role in everyone's lives and
touches almost every aspect of our existence in some way. Chemistry is essential for
meeting our basic needs such as food, clothing, shelter, health, energy, clean air, water,
and soil. The question is how?
In this unit, the definition and the scope of chemistry, the relationship between chemistry
and other natural sciences, the role it plays in production and in the society, and some
common chemical industries in Ethiopia and their products are presented thoroughly.
1.1 Definition and Scope of Chemistry
In this section two aspects of chemistry are going to be dealt with. The first is definition
of chemistry, which will be followed by the scope of chemistry. We shall begin by
defining chemistry first.
1.1.1 Definition of Chemistry
At the end of this section, you will be able to define chemistry.
Students, form a group of three or four and discuss the
question given below. Present your discussion points to the
class when asked by your teacher.
1. Did you know what the composition of the salt you are
adding to your meal is?
2
Chemistry and its Importance
?
2. What do you think will happen to the sugar crystals
when you add a teaspoon of it in a cup of tea and
stir it?
3. How can you distinguish table salt from sugar?
4. What happens to the wood when you burn it?
Activity 1.1
Chemistry is the science that deals with the properties, composition, and structure
of substances (elements and compounds), the transformations they undergo, and the
energy that is released or absorbed during these processes.
A substance is a particular kind of matter with uniform properties. Example, gold,
silver, water, soap, table salt, etc (Figure 1.1).
Matter is a physical substance, that which occupies space and possesses rest mass.
Example, book, pencil, television, stool, etc.
The property of a substance is its attribute, quality, or characteristic. Every substance,
in the universe in which we live, has its own properties by which we can distinguish it
from other substances. This is because every substance has its own unique composition
and structure. Example, water is a substance that has no color, taste, and shape.
Composition is the nature of something's ingredients or constituents; how a whole
or mixture is made up. Example, table salt is chemically composed of the elements
sodium and chlorine. The stainless-steel spoons are solid solution (alloy) of chromium,
carbon and other elements.
The arrangement and relationships between the parts or elements of something
complex is known as its structure. Example, the school buildings are made up of roof,
ceiling, doors, windows, walls, and floor arranged in a certain order. The arrangement
of each of these parts are known as the structure of the school building.
SALT
Salt
Sulphur
Gold
Silver
Figure 1.1 Substances around US.
Every substance in our environment is continuously changing from time to time due to
both external and internal forces. Due to this change, it transforms from one form into
the other. The transformation of a substance is a marked change in form, nature, or
appearance. These transformations are accompanied by energy changes.
3
Chemistry Grade 9
<<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 1.1
1. Define the term chemistry.
2. Explain the meaning of the following phrases.
property of a substance
composition of a substance
structure of a substance
transformation of a substance
1.1.2 Scope of Chemistry
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the scope of chemistry.
Students, form groups of three or four. Discuss the
following questions and present your discussion points to
the class.
1. How do you clean: your cloth when it gets dirt, the
dishes after eating meal, and your hand?
2. How does the butcher in your town measure the weight
of beef before selling it?
3. Do you know how the clothes and shoes you wear, the
tyres of automobiles, the different medicines you take
when you are ill, and the glasses in the windows of
your house are made?
4. What happens to the food in your body, after you
ate it?
Activity 1.2
The study of modern chemistry has many branches, but can generally be broken down
into five main disciplines, or areas of study:
i. Physical chemistry: It is the study of macroscopic properties, atomic properties,
and phenomena in chemical systems. A physical chemist may study such things as
the rates of chemical reactions, the energy transfers that occur in reactions, or the
physical structure of materials at the molecular level.
ii. Organic chemistry: It is the study of substances containing carbon. Carbon is one
of the most abundant elements on Earth and is capable of forming a tremendously
vast number of chemicals (over twenty million so far). Most of the chemicals found
in all living organisms are based on carbon.
4
Chemistry and its Importance
iii. Inorganic chemistry: It is the study of substances that are not primarily based
on carbon. Inorganic chemicals are commonly found in rocks and minerals. One
current important area of inorganic chemistry deals with the design and properties
of materials involved in energy and information technology.
iv. Analytical chemistry: It is the study of the composition of matter. It focuses on
separating, identifying, and quantifying chemicals in samples of matter. An
analytical chemist may use complex instruments to analyze an unknown material
in order to determine its various components.
V. Biochemistry: It is the study of chemical processes that occur in living things. It may
cover anything from basic cellular processes up to understanding disease states so
that better treatments can be developed.
All of the aforementioned disciplines of Chemistry are highly engaged in taking
measurements, making observations, and using them to come to conclusions. Chemistry
is about looking for patterns in the way substances behave. Because living and non-
living things are made of matter Chemistry affects all aspects of life and most natural
events. The scope of Chemistry can be extended to explaining the natural world,
preparing people for career opportunities, and producing informed patriot citizens.
The scope of chemistry includes agriculture, medicine food production, and building
construction (Figure 1.2).
III
SOAP
Figure 1.2 Some chemical products.
Chemistry, however, is not only involved in providing useful substances in the
areas of development and technology, but it can also result in very dangerous
substances that can negatively affect human being's life and the environment
(eg. fluorochlorohydrocarbons, oxides of nitrogen, carbon, and sulphur).
5
Chemistry Grade 9
++++++++++++
Exercise 1.2
Provide correct answer for the following questions.
1. List down examples of chemicals or chemical products that are used in the
following areas:
Agriculture
Medicine
Food production
Building construction
Hint: Refer Figure 1.2 above.
2. Search on the internet, and write down some of the problems caused by
dangerous chemicals affecting the environment.
3. Which of the problems you find in question #2 above are observed in your
locality?
4. What do you think is the solution to the problem(s)? Remember that you are
an Ethiopian citizen, and have the responsibility of protecting the nation from
the problems caused due to chemical substances.
1.2 The Relationship Between Chemistry and Other Natural Sciences
At the end of this section, you will be able to discuss the relationship of chemistry
with physics, biology, medicine, geology and other subjects.
Students, form groups of three or four, and discuss the
following questions. Then, present your discussion points to
the class, when asked by your teacher.
1. List down the subjects that are categorized under
?
natural science.
2. In biology class you may studied about photosynthesis.
Is it possible to explain photosynthesis without having
the knowledge of a chemical reaction? Reason out
Activity 1.3
why?
Chemistry is one branch of science. Science is the process by which we learn about
the natural universe by observing, testing, and then generating models that explain
our observations. Because the physical universe is so vast, there are many different
branches of science (Figure 1.3). Thus, biology is the study of living things, and geology
is the study of rocks and the earth. Physics is the branch of science concerned with the
nature and properties of matter and energy.
6
Chemistry and its Importance
Biology
Biochemistry
Chemicalphysics
Physics
Chemistry
Geochemistry
Geology
Figure 1.3 The relationships between natural sciences and chemistry.
Although we divide science into different fields, there is much overlap among them.
For example, some biologists and chemists work in both fields so much that their
work is called Biochemistry. Biochemistry is the study of the chemical processes
occurring in living matter. To give you a specific example, there are chemists who
are working on the isolation, characterization and biological activities of compounds
from medicinal plants. Similarly, Geology and Chemistry overlap in the field called
Geochemistry. Geochemistry is defined as the study of the processes that control
the abundance, composition, and distribution of chemical compounds and isotopes
in geologic environments. Chemistry and Physics overlap in the areas of atomic and
small molecule properties. Both of them deal with matter and energy.
Physical chemistry is the branch of chemistry concerned with the application of the
techniques and theories of physics to the study of chemical systems. Chemical physics is
a sub discipline of chemistry and physics that investigates physicochemical phenomena
using techniques from atomic and molecular physics and condensed matter physics. It is
the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.
Chemistry and Medicine are related in the area of Medicinal chemistry.
Figure 1.3 shows how many of the individual fields of science are related. At some
level, all of these fields depend on the matter as they all involve 'stuff'. Because of
this, chemistry has been called the 'central science' linking them all together.
Exercise 1.3
Provide correct answer the following questions.
1.
What aspects of nature are studied in
Physics?
Geochemistry?
Biology?
Biochemistry?
Geology?
Physical chemistry?
2.
What are the regions of an overlap between
Chemistry and biology?
Chemistry and geology?
Chemistry and physics?
7
Chemistry Grade 9
1.3 The Role Chemistry Plays in Production and in the Society
At the end of this section, you will be able to describe the application of chemistry in
the field of agriculture, medicine, food production and building construction.
Students, form groups of two or three and discuss the
questions below. Present your discussion points to the class
when asked by your teacher.
1. What are the common types of fertilizers the Ethiopian
farmers employ to increase their crop productivity?
2. Give some examples of household materials that are
used for cleaning, baking 'diffo dabbo', disinfecting
salad, preserving raw meat, and hair treatment.
3. What types of medications (traditional and modern)
are used to treat the various diseases you know?
4. What are the common types of fuels that are sold in
the gas stations?
Activity 1.4
There are many instances in your everyday life that involves the knowledge of
chemistry, its applications, and its rules. Let US look at some of them one by one.
A. Agriculture
The study of chemistry has brought the world with chemical fertilizers such as calcium
super phosphate, urea, ammonium sulphate, and sodium nitrate. These chemicals
have assisted greatly in increasing the yield of fruits, vegetables, and other crops
(Figure 1.4). Chemistry has been effective in the manufacture of pesticides, which
have lessened the crop damage. Depending on the targeted pest, pesticides include
fungicides, herbicides, and insecticides. Thus, we can supply to the ever-growing
demand for food. Chemistry has also an important role in the manufacturing of better-
quality plastic pipes for irrigation, and is commonly used in farming. This has massively
increased irrigation resulting in a better climate in which the crops grow.
B. Food Production
Other than its great contribution in the production of different agricultural products,
chemistry has led to the discovery of different kinds of food preservatives. These
chemicals have greatly assisted to preserve food products for a longer period. It has
given methods to test the presence of adulterants which ensure the supply of pure
foodstuff. Consumers have benefited from new technologies that have increased their
food's availability, appearance, nutritional contents and flavor. A local example of
food processing and keeping it for a longer period of time is the preservation of raw
meat.
8
Chemistry and its Importance
Figure 1.4 Agricultural products.
Students, form groups of two or three and discuss the
questions below. Present your discussion points to the class
when asked by your teacher.
1. What are the common pests that damage crops in
?
your locality?
2. What are the common herbs that reduce the production
of food in your locality?
3. What are the commercial and traditional pesticides
and herbicides used by the local farmers?
Activity 1.5
C. Medicine
Chemistry has provided mankind with a large number of life-saving medicines. We
could find a cure for dysentery and pneumonia as a result of the discovery of Sulphur
drugs and penicillin. Besides this, life-saving drugs like cisplatin and Taxol are effective
for cancer therapy, and AZT is used for AIDS victims. Although AZT does not cure HIV-
AIDS, it fights the multiplication of the virus thereby prolonging the life of the victim.
HIV-AIDS as we know is a pandemic that has no curative medication. We need to
prevent ourselves from this killer disease by being Abstain, Be faithful or reduce the
number of your sex partners, and/or use a Condom.
9
Chemistry Grade 9
Common Drugs Chemistry Provided
Disinfectants
Analgesics
Anesthetics
Antibiotics
Antiseptics
Tranquilizers
Disinfectants: Are used to kill the microbe present in toilets, floors, and drains.
The sanitizers we use for Covid-19 belong to this group.
Analgesics: An analgesic or painkiller is any member of the group of drugs used
to achieve analgesia, relief from pain.
Anesthetics: Has made medical operations more and more effective via relieving
pain.
Antibiotics: Are used to control infection and cure diseases.
Antiseptics: Are used to contamination of the wounds by bacteria.
Tranquillizers: To reduce tension and bring about calm and peace to patients
suffering from mental diseases.
Students, form groups of two or three and discuss the
questions below. Present your discussion points to the
class when asked by your teacher.
1. Search on the Internet or from other sources
and find examples of analgesics, antibiotics,
tranquilizers, antiseptics, disinfectants, anesthetics,
and insecticides.
2. Describe the composition and preparation of hand
disinfectant or hand sanitizer.
Activity 1.6
D. Building Construction Materials
By providing building resources such as glass, steel and cement, chemistry helps in the
construction of safer houses and multi-story structures. It also helps in the construction
of long-lasting and durable dams and bridges. The best example here could be
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) which is under construction in the
Benishangul-Gumuz Region (Figure 1.5). The GERD is a 6,450 MW hydro power
project nearing completion on the Blue Nile in Ethiopia, located about 30 km upstream
of the border with Sudan. It will be the largest hydro power project in Africa.
10
Chemistry and its Importance
Figure 1.5 The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, Benishangul Gumuz Region, Ethiopia.
Agriculture
Building
Chemistry
Medicine
construction
Food
production
Figure 1.6 The role of chemistry in different sectors.
<<<<<<<<<<<<<
Exercise 1.4
Provide correct answer for the following questions.
1. List down the role of chemistry in your locality. Draw a spider diagram of
your own.
2. What problems, do you think, will be observed in the livelihood of the
community in which you are living in the absence of enough knowledge of
chemistry?
3. In your opinion, what further roles can chemistry play?
11
Chemistry Grade 9
1.4 Some Common Chemical Industries in Ethiopia
At the end of this section, you will be able to name some common chemical industries
found in Ethiopia and their products.
Students, make groups of how two or three and do
the following activities. Present your answers to the
class when asked by your teacher.
1. List down some of the house hold chemicals?
?
2. Do you know which industry is producing them?
3. List down the common chemical industries
(enterprises) found in your locality or in the vicinity
of your town. Which chemicals or chemical products
are they producing?
Activity 1.7
An industry is defined as an economic activity concerned with the processing of raw
materials and the manufacture of goods in factories. It can also be interpreted as
a group of companies that are linked based on their primary business activities.
Individual companies are generally categorized into an industry based on their
largest sources of revenue. The Ethiopian government is highly engaged in expanding
industries in the past two decades. As part of this expansion several industrial parks
have been under construction (Figure 1.7).
Figure 1.7 One of the industrial parks found in Ethiopia.
The chemical industries comprise the companies that manufacture inorganic- and
organic-industrial chemicals, explosives, fragrances, agrochemicals, polymers and
12
Chemistry and its Importance
rubber, ceramic products, petrochemicals, oleochemicals (oils, fats, and waxes), and
flavors. Central to the world economy, it converts natural resources (oil, natural gas,
air, water, metals, and minerals) into diverse products. They are further categorized
into industrial inorganic chemicals; plastics, materials, and synthetics; drugs; soap,
cleaners, and toilet goods; paints and allied products; industrial organic chemicals;
agricultural chemicals; and miscellaneous chemical products.
The chemical products mean products manufactured, processed, sold, or distributed
by the company that are chemical substances, or that contained chemical substances.
Three general classes of products are (1) basic chemicals such as alkalis, acids, organic
chemicals, and salts (2) chemical products to be used in further manufactures such as
plastic materials, synthetic fibers, pigments, and dry colors, and (3) finished chemical
products to be used for ultimate consumption such as cosmetics, drugs, and soaps; or
to be used as materials or supplies in other industries such as fertilizers, paints, and
explosives.
Currently, there are several medium and large-scale chemical and chemical products
industries (enterprises) in Ethiopia (Table 1.1). These enterprises produce chemicals
like aluminum sulphate, caustic soda, soda ash, carbon dioxide, bleaching chemicals,
magnesium oxide, pesticides, and chemical products like soap and detergent, cement,
paints, building materials, cosmetics, plastic, natural gum, candle, glass, sugar, tyre,
pulp and paper, pharmaceuticals and tobacco.
Table 1.1 Some of the large and medium scale chemical enterprises in Ethiopia.
No.
Name of the Enterprise
City
Product
1
Chorra Gas & Chemical
A.A
Plastic, chemicals, petroleum products
products
2
Chorra Gas & Chemical
A.A
Aluminum sulphate and sulphuric acid
products
3
Ziway Caustic Soda
Ziway
Sodium hydroxide
factory
4
Abijata Soda Ash
Bulbula
Trona (Na₃H(CO₃)₂.2H2O)
Factory
5
Repi Soap & Detergent
A.A
Soap and detergent
P.L.C
6
Adola Magnesium
Adolla
Magnesium oxide
Oxide Factory
7
Adami Tulu Pesticide
Adami-Tulu
Formulates malathion, endosulfan,
Processing Plant
diazinon, fenitrothion and dimethoate
8
Nefas Silk Paints
A.A
Paints, varnishes, antirusts and glues
factory
13
Chemistry Grade 9
No.
Name of the Enterprise
City
Product
9
Modern Building
A.A
Cement and cement products,
Industries
ceramics, paints, sanitary ware,
adhesives, glues, plastic rubber,
terrazzo tiles, cultured marble
10
Kadisco Chemical
A.A
Paints, coatings and adhesives
Industry
11
Tadesse Filatea PLC
Woliso
Soap, detergent, corrugated iron,
nail, infant milk formula
12
Etab Laundry Soap
Hawassa
Soap and detergent
Factory
13
Get-Eshet Detergent
Bishoftu
Detergent products and Leather
Manufacturing and
chemical inputs
Packing P.L.C
14
Ethio-Asia Industries S.C
A.A
Soap and detergent
15
Y.B Cosmetics
Sheger city
Cosmetics and perfume
16
Mekab PLC (Cosmetics)
A.A
Hair oil, shampoo, conditioner, body
oil, vaseline, body lotion, detergents
and plastic mouldings
17
BEKAS Chemicals PLC
A.A
Detergents, cosmetic products,
plastic packing materials, industrial
surfactants and putty
18
Arbaminch Textile
Arbaminch
Textile and fabric products
Share compary
19
Teamco Soap Factory
Burayu
Soap and detergent
Note: A.A stands for Addis Ababa.
Other chemical product industries in Ethiopia.
Cement (Mugher, Diredawa, Mesobo, Derba, Midroc, Dangote)
Sugar (Metehara, Wonji, Finchaa, Omokuraz)
Paper and pulp (Wonji)
Pharmaceuticals (Addis, Ethiopia, Adigrat)
Tyre (Horizon Addis Tyre)
14
Chemistry and its Importance
++++++++++++
Exercise 1.5
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. List the common names together with the chemical names, formula, and use
of 10 household chemicals.
2. Browse the Internet or use other sources and find out 10 other household
chemicals that are commonly used in different homes with their corresponding
molecular formula, chemical names, and use.
3. List at least 15 chemical industries that are found in Ethiopia.
Project work 1.1
An industrial trip to the local industries
In this project, you will be able to visit a local chemical industry and present your
observations to the class in group.
Students, your teacher will arrange an industrial tour so that you will practically
observe the raw materials, the chemical processes involved, and the finished products
in the industries that are located in your vicinity. You are required to write a report
and present it to the class in group.
Key Terms of the Unit
Analgesics
Composition
Metallurgy
Antibiotics
Disinfectants
Property
Anesthetics
Energy
Structure
Antiseptics
Industry
Substance
Chemistry
Insecticides
Tranquilizers
Chemical products
Matter
Chemical industry
Unit Summary
Chemistry is the science that deals with the properties, compositions, and structures
of substances, the transformations they undergo, and the energy that is released or
absorbed during these processes.
The study of modern chemistry has many branches, but can generally be broken down
into five main disciplines, or areas of study: Organic chemistry, Inorganic chemistry,
Physical chemistry, Analytic chemistry and Biochemistry. The scope of chemistry includes
agriculture, medicine, food production, and building construction. Because living and
non-living things are made up of matter, chemistry affects all aspects of life, and most
natural events. The scope of chemistry can also be extended to explaining the natural
world, preparing people for career opportunities, and producing informed patriot
citizens.
15
Chemistry Grade 9
Chemistry is the central science in the natural sciences. Being one of the basic sciences
Chemistry is related to other natural sciences like Biology, Physics, Geology, Medicine,
and Mathematics. Chemistry and Biology are related by the metabolic processes
occurring inside living matter known as Biochemistry. Chemistry and Geology are
related by the processes that control the abundance, composition, and distribution of
chemical compounds and isotopes inside the crust of the earth known as Geochemistry.
A sub-discipline of chemistry and physics that investigates physicochemical phenomena
using techniques from atomic and molecular physics and condensed matter physics
is known as Chemical physics. Chemistry and Medicine are related by a discipline
that encloses the design, development, and synthesis of pharmaceutical drugs called
Medicinal chemistry.
Since Chemistry is so fundamental to our world, it plays a role in everyone's lives
and touches almost every aspect of our existence in some way. Chemistry is essential
for meeting our basic needs such as food, clothing, shelter, health, energy, and clean
air, water, and soil. Chemistry, however, can also affect our environment negatively
through production of toxic substances. The release of theses toxic substances into the
environment results in climate change, the prime issue the world is facing currently.
It is, therefore, high time to seek for solution to this problem by using our chemical
knowledge.
Chemistry plays a significant role in the advancement and growth of several industries.
There are several chemical and chemical products industries that produce a number
of chemicals and chemical products. One way of categorizing them is into industrial
inorganic chemicals; plastics, materials, and synthetics; drugs; soap, cleaners, and
toilet goods; paints and allied products; industrial organic chemicals; agricultural
chemicals; and miscellaneous chemical products.
The Ethiopian government is working hard in establishing Industrial Zones throughout
the nation. Currently, there are several medium and large-scale chemical and chemical
products industries (enterprises) in Ethiopia. These enterprises produce chemicals like
aluminum sulphate, caustic soda, soda ash, carbon dioxide, bleaching chemicals,
magnesium oxide, pesticides; and chemical products like soap and detergent, cement,
paints, building materials, cosmetics, plastic, natural gum, candle, glass, sugar, tyre,
pulp and paper, pharmaceuticals and tobacco.
Review Exercise
Part I: Basic Level Questions.
Identify each of the following statements as 'True' or 'False'. Give your reason(s) for
false statements.
1.
Chemistry is a science that deals with the study of the way living things behave.
2.
Every substance in the universe, in which we live, has its own properties by which
we can distinguish it from other substances.
16
Chemistry and its Importance
3.
The transformation of a substance is a marked change in form, nature, or
appearance.
4.
The study of chemistry involves only microscopic information.
5.
Organic chemistry is the study of chemicals that are not based on carbon.
Part II: Intermediary Level Questions.
Fill in the blank spaces.
6.
The property of a substance is its
1
or
.
7.
is the nature of something's ingredients or constituents; the way in
which a whole or mixture is made up.
8.
The arrangement of and relations between the parts or elements of something
complex is known as its
.
9.
is a power derived from the utilization of physical or chemical
resources, especially to provide light and heat.
10.
is the study of macroscopic properties, atomic properties, and
phenomena in chemical systems.
11.
is the study of the composition of matter.
Part III: Challenge Level Questions.
Provide appropriate answers to the following questions.
12. Define the terms industry, chemical industry, and chemical products.
13. What are the roles chemistry played in production and society?
14. How does chemistry play a role in increasing comfort, pleasure, and luxuries?
15. Mention at least 10 chemical industries found in Ethiopia and their chemical
products.
16. Which branch of chemistry has the highest scope? Why?
17. What are the five fields of chemistry?
18. What will be the future efforts of chemistry?
19. What jobs can you do with chemistry?
17
80
70
60
50
30
UNIT
20
1 liter
10
Triple-beam balance
Buret
Pipet
Graduated cylinder
Volumetric flask
MEASUREMENTS AND SCIENTIFIC METHODS
