
STATE
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 10
MINISTRY VIICATION EDUCA OF
4
13
Temperature
12
Exothermic
Surroundings
Heat
10
System
6
8
Temperature
Endothermic
9
Surroundings
Heat
5
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
System
CH3
0
CHEMISTRY STUDENT TEXTBOOK GRADE 10
ISBN 978-99990-0-017-8
9 789999 000178>
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
1. Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic,
old newspapers or magazines.
Students
2. Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3. Be sure your hands are clean when you use the book.
4. Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5. Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
CHEMISTRY
6. Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
7. Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8. Pack the book carefully when you place it in your
school bag.
9. Handle the book with care when passing it to another
person.
10. When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its
back. Open only a few pages at a time. Press lightly
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
along the bound edge as you turn the pages. This will
keep the cover in good condition.
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 10
Writers:
Alemayehu Paulos (Ph.D.)
Adelew Estifanos (Ph.D.)
Editors:
Tesfaye Semela (Ph.D.) (Curriculum Editor)
Kenenisa Beresa (M.A.) (Language Editor)
Ahmed Awel (M.Sc.) (Content Editor)
Illustrator:
Abinet Tilahun Nigusie (M.Sc.)
Designer:
Konno B. Hirbaye (M.Sc.)
Evaluators:
Amare Aregahegn Dubale (Ph.D.) (Reviewer)
Nega Gichile (B.Sc., M.A.) (Evaluator)
Sefiw Melesse (M.Sc.) (Evaluator)
Tolessa Mergo (B.Sc., M.Sc.) (Evaluator)
ФЕНДУС
UPA
RZACA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
NSSVMVH UNIVERSITY
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Hawassa University
Ministry of Education
First Published August 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia,
Ministry of Education, under the General Education Quality Improvement Program for
Equity (GEQIP-E) supported by the World Bank, UK's Department for International
Development/DFID-now merged with the Foreign, Common wealth and Development
Office/FCDO, Finland Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the Royal Norwegian Embassy,
United Nations Children's Fund/UNICEF), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE),
and Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through a Multi Donor Trust Fund.
© 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education. All
rights reserved. The moral rights of the author have been asserted. No part of this
textbook reproduced, copied in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by
any means including electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the Ministry of Education or licensing
in accordance with the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia as expressed in the
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Proclamation No. 410/2004 - Copyright and Neighboring
Rights Protection.
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the many individuals, groups and other
bodies involved - directly or indirectly - in publishing this Textbook. Special thanks
are due to Hawassa University for their huge contribution in the development of this
textbook in collaboration with Addis Ababa University, Bahir Dar University and
Jimma University.
Copyrighted materials used by permission of their owners. If you are the owner of
copyrighted material not cited or improperly cited, please contact the Ministry of
Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (P.O.Box 1367), Addis Ababa Ethiopia.
Printed by:
GRAVITY GROUP IND LLC
13th Industrial Area,
Sharjah, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Under Ministry of Education Contract no. : MOE/GEQIP-E/LICB/G-01/23
ISBN: 978-99990-0-017-8
CONTENTS
Unit
1
:
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
1
1.1 Introduction
2
Volume of
Gas (STP)
1.2 Chemical Equations
3
22.4L
1 mot
22.4L
1.3 Types of Chemical Reactions
11
1 mol
1.4 Oxidation and Reduction Reactions
20
Moles
1 mol
6.02 particles
molar
mass
1 mol
1.5
1 mol
molar mass
Molecular and Formula Masses, the Mole
moil
10" particles
Mass
Concept and Chemical Formulas
28
1.6 Stoichiometry
34
Unit Summary
47
Review Exercises
48
Unit 2:
SOLLUTIONS
51
2.1 Heterogeneous and Homogeneous Mixtures
53
Step 2
Step
2.2 The Solution Process
59
2.3 Solubility as an Equilibrium Process
73
Step 3
Step
3
2.4 Ways of Expressing Concentration of Solution
Solution
81
2.5 Preparation of Solutions
94
2.6 Solution Stoichiometry
98
2.7 Describing Reactions in Solution
101
Unit Summary
103
Review Exercises
105
Unit
3:
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COMPOUNDS
109
3.1
Introduction
110
Stomach
Drain
Battery
Lemon
Tomato
Milk
Blood
Tablets
Soap
Cleaner
3.2 Oxides
111
Decreasing
PH
Increasing
3.3 Acids
122
0
I
2
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Acidic
Neutral
Alkaline
3.4
Bases
140
8
3.5 Salts
148
Stomach Acid
Vinegar
Coffee
Water
Baking
Ammonia
Bleach
Soda
Solution
Unit Summary
162
Review Exercises
163
Unit
4:
:
ENERGY CHANGES AND ELECTROCHEMISTRY
166
4.1
Introduction
167
4.2 Energy Changes in Electrochemistry
174
4.3 Electrochemical Cells
182
LECTROCHEMIS TRY
4.4 Electrolysis
187
Unit Summary
194
Review Exercises
195
Unit 5 :
METALS AND NONMETALS
198
5.1
Introduction
199
5.2 General Properties of Metals and Production of
Some Metals
200
5.3 Production of Some Important Nonmetals
218
Unit Summary
230
Lead
Gold
Diamond
Carbon
Review Exercises
231
Silver
Copper
Sulfur Phosphorus
Unit
6:
HYDROCARBONS AND THEIR NATURAL SOURCES 234
6.1
Introduction
235
6.2 Saturated Hydrocarbons: Alkanes (CₙH₂ₙ₊₂)
240
6.3 Unsaturated Hydrocarbons: Alkenes, Alkynes
and Aromatic Hydrocarbons
262
6.4 Aromatic Hydrocarbons: Benzene
285
6.5 Natural Sources of Hydrocarbons
290
Unit Summary
295
Review Exercises
295
Volume of
Gas (STP)
22.4L
1 mol
1 mol
22.4L
1
Moles
1 mol
6.02 X 10" particles
molar mass (g)
1 mol
1 mol
molar mass (g)
1 mol
6.02 10" particles
Mass
Number of
UNIT
Particles
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
define the basics of chemical reaction;
describe the four major types of reactions;
develop skills in writing and balancing chemical equations;
define oxidation - reduction reactions
analyse redox reactions by specifying the oxidizing agent, the reducing
agent, the substance reduced or oxidized;
explain molecular mass, formula mass, molar mass, empirical and
molecular formulas;
determine molecular mass, formula mass, molar mass, empirical and
molecular formulas
describe the mole concept
solve problems related to moles of substances
develop skills in solving problems based on chemical equations (mole-
mole, mass - mass, volume - volume and mass - volume problems);
develop skills in determining the limiting reactant, theoretical yield, actual
yield and percentage yield;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, inferring, predicting,
classifying comparing and contrasting, communicating, measuring, asking
questions designing experiments, interpreting data, drawing conclusions,
applying concepts, relating cause and effect and problem - solving.
Chemistry Grade 10
Start-up Activity
Discuss the following questions in groups of three or four
students, then share your findings with the class.
1. Changes in our daily lives include fruit ripening, which
involves the transformation of raw fruit (containing
starting substance) into ripe fruit (containing new
substance), and the fermentation of injera (new
material) from teff flour (starting material).
a. What are the differences between the raw
and ripened fruit?
b. What are the differences between the
fermented injera and the teff flour?
c. Are these changes reversible? Make a list of
at least three more changes that occur in your
day-to-day activities, and note the differences
between the starting materials and new
materials in each.
2. Are the following changes reversible?
a. Dough is changed to bread through baking.
b. Firewood changed to ash through burning.
3. Explain whether the following refer to the quality or
quantity of substances.
a. A farmer determines the amount of fertilizer
for his farm.
b. A nurse calculates the dose of a medicine for
a patient.
c. A chef mixes the right amounts of ingredients
for cooking food.
1.1 Introduction
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define chemical reaction;
give some examples of chemical reactions.
explain physical and chemical changes using examples
Change is the law of nature. We observe various types of changes around US. The
growth of seed in to a plant, the burning of wood in a fire place, the rusting of iron
articles in moist air, the rotting of food and the evaporation of liquids are some
of the changes that we see taking place around US. Scientists categorize changes as
physical and chemical changes. A physical change is a change that does not involve
2
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
the formation of a new substance with a new chemical composition. Examples of
physical changes are evaporation of liquids, powdering of sugar and melting of ice.
The change which results in the formation of one or more new substances with new
chemical composition is known as a chemical change. Examples of chemical changes
are turning of milk into curd, photosynthesis by green plants and rotting of egg by
bacteria. Chemical changes occur due to chemical reactions between substances.
In general, a change is called a chemical reaction if it exhibits all or part of the
following characteristics.
i.
Formation of new substances
ii.
Production of heat or light or both
iii.
Change in color
iv.
Change in temperature and etc.
Chemical reaction is the process in which reacting substances, called reactants, are
converted into new substances, called products. The characteristics of the products are
completely different from those of the reactants.
For example, if you burn sulphur with oxygen, the sulphur and oxygen are completely
converted to sulphur dioxide. Sulphur dioxide is a colourless gas with a pungent
odour. These characteristics of sulphur dioxide are completely different from the
characteristics of the original substances, sulphur and oxygen. A chemical reaction is
represented by a short hand notation called chemical equation as:
Reactants
Products
A chemical equation uses chemical symbols to show what happens during a chemical
reaction. A balanced chemical equation can be used to describe the relationships
between the amounts of reactants and products. The quantitative study of reactants
and products in a chemical reaction is called reaction's stoichiometry. In this unit you will
study, the types of chemical reactions, chemical equations, redox reactions, chemical
formulas, masses of compounds, mole concepts, and reaction's stoichiometry.
Exercise 1.1
a. What is a chemical reaction?
b. Explain the meanings of chemical and physical changes using examples.
C. Give two examples of evidences for chemical reactions not mentioned in the
text.
1.2
Chemical Equations
At the end of this section, students will be able to
explain the conventions used to write chemical equation;
write the chemical equations of varieties of chemical reactions;
3
Chemistry Grade 10
balance chemical equations using;
The Inspection method,
The Least Common Multiple (LCM) method,
The Algebraic method.
Form a group and discuss each of the following and
present your conclusion to the rest of the class.
1. How can you show chemical symbols, physical
states and quantities of substances involved in a
?
chemical reaction?
2. What is the difference between a chemical
equation and a chemical reaction?
3. Which law is applied when a chemical equation
Activity 1.1
is balanced?
A chemical equation is a shorthand representation of an actual chemical reaction in
terms of chemical symbols and formulas. In a chemical equation the starting substances
are called reactants; and the new substances produced are known as products.
In a chemical equation, reactants are written on the left side and products on the
right side of the equation. An arrow
()
is placed between the two sides to indicate
transformation of reactants into products.
Reactants
products
1.2.1 Writing Chemical Equation
In writing chemical equation, instead of using words, chemical symbols and formulas
are used to represent the reaction.
Steps to write a chemical equation
1.
Write a word equation: A word equation is stated in words. For example, the
word equation for the reaction between hydrogen and nitrogen to produce
ammonia is written as:
Hydrogen + Nitrogen
Ammonia (Word equation)
Note that we read the '+' sign as 'reacts with' and the arrow can be read as 'to
produce', 'to form', 'to give' or 'to yield'.
2.
Write the symbols and formulas for the reactants and products in the word
equation.
H2 + N2
NH3 (Unbalanced equation)
3.
Balance the equation
4
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
3H2 + N2
2NH3 (Balanced equation)
Chemically reactive substances might be solids, liquids, gases, or they can dissolve in a
solvent. Particularly ionic compounds commonly react in aqueous solution, or dissolve in
water. Sometimes this information is added to an equation by placing the appropriate
symbols after the formulas:
(s) - Solid
(I) - Liquid
(g) - Gas
(aq) - Aqueous solution
Example 1.1: Write the chemical equation for the reaction that occurs between
calcium carbonate and sulfuric acid.
1.
Word equation:
Calcium carbonate + Sulphuric acid
Calcium sulphate + Water + Carbon dioxide
2.
Chemical equation: CaCO₃(s) + H2SO4(I)
CaSO₄(s) + H₂O(I) + CO₂(g)
3.
The equation is balanced
Example 1.2: Write the chemical equation for the reaction of sodium chloride
and silver nitrate.
1. Word equation:
Silver nitrate + Sodium chloride
Silver chloride + Sodium nitrate
2. Chemical equation: AgNO₃(aq) + NaCl (aq)
AgCI(s) + NaNO₃ (aq)
3. The equation is balanced.
Generally, any chemical equation must fulfill the following conditions:
A. An equation must represent a true and possible chemical reaction.
B. The symbols and formulas must be written correctly. The elements - hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine exist as diatomic
molecules. For example, these elements should be written as molecules in the
equation. The equation must be balanced.
A chemical equation has both qualitative and quantitative meanings. Qualitatively, a
chemical equation indicates the types of the reactants and products in the reaction.
Quantitatively, a chemical equation expresses the relative number (amount) of moles,
molecules or masses of the reactants and products. For example, the balanced
chemical equation : 2H₂ + O2
2H2O has both qualitative and quantitative meaning.
Qualitatively, it shows that the reaction between hydrogen and oxygen forms water.
Quantitatively, it indicates that two units of hydrogen combine with one unit of oxygen
to form two units of water. The quantities may be expressed in terms of grams, number
of moles or number of molecules ( see for more details in subsection 1.6.1).
5
Chemistry Grade 10
1.2.2 Balancing Chemical Equations
At the end of this section, students will be able to
balance chemical equations using:
The Inspection method
The Least Common Multiple (LCM) method
The Algebraic method
According to the Law of Conservation of Mass, atoms are neither created nor destroyed
during a chemical reaction (refer to grade 9 chemistry). As a result, the number of
atoms of each element should remain the same before and after the reaction. To
balance a chemical equation means to equalize the number of atoms on both sides of
the equation by putting appropriate coefficients in front of the formulas.
A. Balancing Chemical Equations by Inspection Method
The most common way to balance chemical equations is to use inspection method. It
is exactly what the name states. You balance the equation by inspecting it. It is also
known as a trial and error method or a hit and trial method.
Follow four easy steps, given below, to balance a chemical equation by inspection
method:
1. Write the word equation.
2. Write the correct symbols or formulas for the reactants and products (unbalanced
equation).
3. Start with the most complicated compound count and tabulate the number of each
type of atoms on the two sides of the unbalanced equation.
4. Make the number of each type of atoms on the left side equal to the number of
corresponding atoms on the right side of the equation.
Example 1.3: Balance the chemical reaction that takes place between iron and
water to form iron (IV) oxide and hydrogen gas by the inspection method.
Step 1: Iron + Water
Iron (IV) oxide + Hydrogen (word equation)
Step 2: Fe + H2O
Fe3O₄ + H2 (Unbalanced equation)
Let US count and tabulate the number of various types of atoms on the reactant
and product sides of the expression
Fe + H2O
Fe3O4 + H2
Atom
Reactant side
Product side
Equation
Number of Fe atoms
1
3
Number of O atoms
1
4
Number of H atoms
2
2
Total no. of atoms
4
9
Unbalanced
6
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Balancing Fe atoms: There is one Fe atom on the left side while there are three
Fe atoms on the right side. Therefore, a suitable coefficient of Fe on the left side
is 3. Thus,
3Fe + H2O
Fe₃O₄ + H₂
(2)
Balancing O atoms. There is one o atom (in H2O) on the left side and there are
four o atoms on the right side. Therefore, a proper coefficient of H2O is 4 as H₂O.
3Fe + 4H2O
Fe3O4 + H2
(3)
Balancing H atoms. There are eight H atoms (in 4H2O) on the left side, but only
two H atoms (in H₂) on the right side. Therefore, an appropriate coefficient of H
is 4 as 4H2. Thus,
3Fe + 4H2O
Fe3O4 + 4H2
(4)
Equation 4 is a balanced chemical equation. Note that number of atoms of each
element is conserved (no. of atoms reactant side = no. of atoms product side).
How?
These are shown below:
Atom
Reactant side
Product side
Equation
Number of Fe atoms
3
3
Number of o atoms
4
4
Number of H atoms
8
8
Total number of atoms
15
15
Balanced
NB: Inspection method works best for simple equations.
B. Balancing chemical equations by the LCM method
By taking the LCM of the total valency of the reactants and products and dividing it
by the total valency of the reactants and products, the coefficients for the balanced
chemical equation are derived. This is known as The LCM method. The following
examples show all of the steps required to balance a chemical equation using the
LCM Method.
Examples:
i. When aluminum reacts with oxygen, aluminum oxide is formed. Write the balanced
chemical equation for the reaction
Step 1: Represent the reaction by a word equation:
Aluminum + Oxygen
Aluminum Oxide
Step 2: Write the correct symbols or formulas for the reactants and products
AI + O₂
AI2O₃
Step 3: Place the total valency of each atom above it.
7
Chemistry Grade 10
3
4
66
Al + O₂
AI2O₃
From the equation we see that the valency of aluminum is 3. The total valency of
oxygen is 2 x 2 = 4. The total valency of aluminum in AI2O₃ is 3 X 2 = 6.
The total valency of oxygen in AI₂O₃ is 2 X 3 = 6, LCM is 12.
Step 4: Find the LCM of each total valency and place it above the arrow, here LCM
is 12.
3
4
12
66
Al + O₂ LCM AI2O₃
Step 5: Divide the LCM by each total valency number to obtain the coefficients for
each of the reactants and products. Place the obtained coefficients in front of the
respective chemical formulas
4AI + 30₂
2AI₂O₃ (Balanced)
Checking: There are 4 aluminum and 6 oxygen atoms on both sides of the equation.
Hence, the chemical equation is correctly balanced
ii. The reaction of sodium sulphate with aluminum nitrate would form aluminum sulphate
and sodium nitrate. Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 1: Sodium sulphate + Aluminum nitrate
Aluminum sulphate + Sodium nitrate
(word equation)
Step 2: Na₂SO₄ + AI(NO₃)₃
A12(SO₄)₃ + NaNO₃
22
3
3
6
6
11
Step 3: Na 2SO₄ + AI(NO₃)₃
A12(SO₄)₃ + NaNO₃
2
2
3
3
6
6
6
11
Step 4: Na₂ SO₄ + AI(NO₃)₃ LCM AI₂(SO₄)₃ + NaNO₃
Step 5: 3Na 2SO₄ + 2AI(NO₃)₃
AI₂(SO₄)₃ + 6NaNO₃ (Balanced)
There are 6 nitrogen, 6 sodium, 3 sulphur, 30 oxygen and 2 aluminum atoms on both
sides of the equation. Thus, the equation is correctly balanced.
iii. The reaction of magnesium nitrate with ammonium phosphate would form ammonium
nitrate and magnesium phosphate. Write the balanced equation.
Step 1: Magnesium nitrate + Ammonium phosphate
Magnesium phosphate +
Ammonium nitrate
Step 2: Mg(NO₃)₂ + (NH₄)₃PO₄
NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂
22
3
3
11
3
3
Step 3: Mg(NO₃)₂ + (NH₄)₃PO₄
NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂
22
3
3
6
11
3
3
Step 4: Mg(NO₃)₂ + (NH₄),PO₄ LCM -> NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂
8
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Step 5: 3 Mg(NO₃)₂ + 2 (NH₄),PO
6NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂ (Balanced)
There are 12 nitrogen, 24 hydrogen, 3 magnesium, 2 phosphorous and 26 oxygen
atoms on both sides of the equation. Thus, the equation is correctly balanced.
B. Balancing Chemical Equations Using Algebraic Method
This method of balancing chemical equations involves assigning algebraic variables
as stoichiometric coefficients to each species in the unbalanced chemical equation.
These variables are used in mathematical equations and are solved to obtain the
values of each stoichiometric coefficient. Consider the formation of ammonia from
hydrogen and nitrogen as an example.
Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation with the correct symbols of the reactants &
products:
N2 + H2
NH3 (unbalanced equation)
Step 2: Assign algebraic variables to each species as coefficients (a, b, c) in the
unbalanced equation:
aN2 + bH2
cNH3
Then, set equations for each element so that it is equal in both the right and left hand
side.
N: 2a = c (subscript of N is 2 in the left side and 1 in the right side)
H: 2b = 3c (subscript of H is 2 in the left side and 3 in the right side)
Step 3: Choose the smallest variable and assign arbitrary number in order to determine
the remaining variables.
In the above case, a is the smallest coefficient. Assuming a = 1, the values of b and c
can be obtained as follows. c = 2 X 1 = 2, 2b = 3c = 3 X 2 = 6; b = 6/2 = 3
Since a, b, and C have no common multiples, they can be substituted into the equation
as follows.
N2 + 3H2
2NH3 ( balanced equation)
Example 1.4: Balance the reaction: Al + O2
AI2O3 using the algebraic method.
Assign variables for each element
aAl + bO2
cAl2O3
The equation for Aluminum: a = 2c (subscript of Al is 2 in the left side and 2 in the
right side). The equation for oxygen: 2b = 3c (subscript of o is 2 in the left side
and 3 in the right side)
9
Chemistry Grade 10
Assuming a = 1, we get:
c = a/2; c= 1/2
2b= x(1/2) = 3/2 ; b = 3/4
Since fractional values of b and c are obtained, the lowest common multiple
denominator between the variables a, b, and c must be found and multiplied with
each variable.
Since the lowest common multiple denominator is 4, each of the variables must be
multiplied by 4.
Therefore, a = 4 X 1 = 4; b = (3/4) X 4 = 3; c = (1/2) X 4 = 2
Substituting the values of a, b, and c in the unbalanced equation, the following
balanced chemical equation is obtained.
4AI + 30₂
2AI2O3
Example 1.5: Balance the equation: PCI₅ + H2O
H3PO4 + HCI
Step 1: PCI₅ + H2O
H3PO4 + HCI
Step 2: aPCl₅ + bH2O
cH₃PO₄ + dHCl
P: a = c (subscript of P is 1 in the left side and 1 in the right side)
CI : 5a = d (subscript of CI is 5 in the left side and 1 in the right side)
H: 2b = 3c + d (subscript of H is 2 in the left side and 3 in H3PO4 in 1 in HCI)
o : b = 4c (subscript of O is 1 in the left side and 4 in the right side)
Assume a =1, therefore c=1, 5a = d
d =5, b =4.
Substituting the values of a, b, c and d in the unbalanced equation:
PCI₅ + 4H2O
H3PO4 + 5HCI (balanced)
Exercise 1.2
1. Balance the following chemical equations, using the inspection method:
a. Na + H2O
NaOH + H2
b. KCIO₃
KCI + O2
C. H2O2
H2O
+
O2
d. AI + H₃PO₄
AIPO4 + H2
e. HNO3 + H2S NO + S + H2O
2. Write the balanced chemical equation to represent the following reactions.
a. Sodium bromide reacts with chlorine to form sodium chloride and bromine
10
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
b. Hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium carbonate to form sodium chloride,
water and carbondioxide
C. Potassium chlorate when heated produces potassium chloride and oxygen
d. Calcium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid to form water, carbon
dioxide and calcium chloride
e. Silver oxide decomposes to silver and oxygen gas.
3. Balance the following equations using the LCM method.
a. Al + HCI
AICI₃ + H₂
b. Fe₂(SO₄)₃ + KOH
K2SO₄ + Fe(OH)₃
C. CaCl₂ + Na₃PO₄
Ca₃(PO₄)₂ + NaCl
d. FeCl₃ + NH₄OH
Fe(OH)₃ + NH₄CI
4. Balance the following equations using the algebraic method.
a. PCI₅ + H2O
H3PO4 + HCI
b. Mg + H2O
Mg(OH)₂ + H2
C. Zn(NO₃)₂
ZnO + NO₂ +
d. H2SO₄ + NaOH Na₂SO₄ + H2O
e. NH3 + O2
NO + H2O
f.
C₆H₁₂O₆+O₂
CO2 + H2O
g. FeCl₃ + MgO
Fe2O3 + MgCl₂
h. BaCl₂ + K3PO₄
Ba₃(PO₄)₂ + 6KCI
i. P₄O₁₀+H₂O₂O
H3PO4
1.3 Types of Chemical Reactions
At the end of this section, students will be able to
list the four types of chemical reactions;
define combination reaction and give examples;
conduct experiments on combination reactions in groups;
define decomposition reaction and give examples;
conduct some experiments on decomposition reactions in groups;
define single - displacement reaction and give examples;
conduct some experiments on simple displacement reactions in groups;
define double - displacement reaction and give examples;
conduct some experiments on double - displacement reactions in group.
11
Chemistry Grade 10
In your group, discuss about the following processes
and share your conclusion with the rest of the class.
1. What are the final products of digestive protein
and starch? Is protein and starch digestion a
building up or breaking down process ?
2. What is alcohol fermentation and its process?
What are the two important chemical compounds
produced during the fermentation of "Teji" or
"Tella"? What is the main ingredient (starting
material) for the production of "Teji" and "Tella"?
3. What are the two major chemical reactants and
the two chemical products of photosynthesis? Is
photosynthesis a breaking down or a building
up process? Compare this process with cellular
?
respiration.
4. What are the combustion products of kerosene?
Is the combustion of kerosene a building up or a
breaking down process?
Activity 1.2
Different elements and compounds react in different ways to produce different kinds
of new substances. Many chemical reactions can be classified as one of the four
basic types of reactions. By analyzing the reactants and products of a particular
reaction, you can classify them into one of these categories. Some reactions may
be categorized into more than one category. A complete understanding of these
reaction types will help predict the products of unknown reactions. The four basic
types of chemical reactions are combinations, decompositions, single displacement,
and double displacement reactions, which are described in the next section.
Such reactions are generally classified as shown in Figure 1.1.
Types of Chemical Reactions
Direct combination
Decomposition
Single displacement
Double displacement
A+B AB
AB A+B
A + BC AB+C
AB + CD
AD + BC
Figure 1.1 Classification of chemical reactions.
12
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
A. Direct Combination Reactions
Combination reactions are those reactions in which two types of pure substances react
directly and form a single substance. In a combination reaction, two elements, two
compounds, or an element and a compound react to form a single compound. In
general, a combination reaction may be represented by the equation.
A + B
AB
where the reactants A and B are elements or compounds, the product AB is a compound.
Such type of reaction is also known as synthesis or composition reaction.
Examples
2Na
+
CI2
2NaCl
Element
+
Element
Compound
CaO
+
CO2
CaCO3
Compound
+
Compound
Compound
Note that in the above reactions, there is a single product.
Experiment 1.1
Investigation of Combination Reaction
Objective: To investigate the reaction between sulphur and iron.
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, watch glass
Chemicals: Sulphur powder, iron filings
Procedure:
1. Mix about 3 g of iron filings and 2 g of powdered sulphur in a watch glass.
2. Transfer the mixture in a glass test tube.
3. Mount the test tube in a sloping position on a stand as shown in Figure 1.2.
4. Heat the test tube until the mixture in the glass glows red hot.
5. Remove the test tube from the flame and observe the result.
13
Chemistry Grade 10
Iron fillings
+
sulphur
Bunsen
burner
Figure 1.2 The reaction between iron and sulphur.
Questions
1. What were the colors of iron filings and sulphur before the reaction?
2. What was the color of the resulting compound after the reaction?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
B. Decomposition Reactions
A decomposition reaction (or analysis) is a reaction that involves the breaking
down of a single compound into two or more elements or simpler compounds. A
decomposition reaction can be carried out using heat (thermal decomposition), light
(photo decomposition), electricity (electrical decomposition) or a catalyst. But most
decomposition reactions are carried out when heat is supplied and this heat energy is
indicated by a 'delta' () symbol above the arrow. The general form of equation for
a decomposition reaction is:
AB
A+B
where the reactant AB must be a compound and the products A and B could be
elements or compounds.
The simplest kind of decomposition reaction is when a binary compound decomposes
into its elements. For example, mercury (II) oxide, a red solid, decomposes when heated
to produce mercury and oxygen gas, similarly a colorless potassium perchlorate
decomposes to potassium chloride and oxygen gas.
2HgO(s)
2Hg(I) + O₂(g)
2KCIO₃(s)
2KCI(s) + 302(g)
14
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Experiment 1.2
Investigation of Decomposition Reaction
Objective: To investigate the decomposition of copper (II) carbonate(CuCO₃).
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, cork, delivery tube.
Chemicals: CuCO3 and lime water.
Procedure:
Put 1g of CuCO3 powder in a glass test-tube. Mount the test tube in a sloping
position on a stand as shown in Figure 1.3. Fit a cork and a delivery tube to the
test tube. Put another test tube containing lime water at the end of the delivery
tube. Heat the CuCO3 with a burner.
Delivery tube
Stand
Lime water
Clamp
Copper(II)
carbonate
Bunsen burner
Figure 1.3 Decomposition of copper (II) carbonate.
Questions
1. What was the color of copper (II) carbonate before heating?
2. What was the color during heating and after cooling?
3. What change did you observe in the lime water?
4. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
C. Single Displacement Reactions
A reaction in which one element displaces another element from its compound is known
as single displacement or replacement reaction. Such a reaction is represented by the
following two general forms.
15
Chemistry Grade 10
A + BC
B + AC
If A is a metal, it will displace B to form AC, provided A is a more active metal than B.
A + BC
BA+C
If A is a non-metal, it will displace C to form BA, provided A is a more active non-
metal than C. In general, a more reactive element displaces a less reactive element
from a compound.
Examples of single-displacement reactions
1. Active metals displace hydrogen from acids
Reactive metals such as potassium, calcium, sodium, and zinc displace hydrogen gas
from dilute acids. For example, zinc is an active metal, and it displaces hydrogen from
hydrochloric acid; but copper metal cannot do so.
Zn + 2HCI
ZnCl₂ + H₂
Cu + HCI
No reaction
2. Reactive metals, such as potassium, calcium, and sodium react vigorously with
water to displace hydrogen:
2Na + 2H2O
2NaOH + H2
Ca + 2H2O
Ca(OH)₂ + H2
3. A more active metal displaces a less active metal
Zinc displaces copper from copper (II) sulphate solutions
Zn + CuSO4
ZnSO₄ + Cu
Iron displaces copper from copper (II) sulphate solutions
Fe + CuSO4
FeSO₄ + Cu
after
sometime
Cu deposits on
Iron nail
the iron nail
CuSO₄ solution
FeSO₄ solution
Figure 1.4 Replacement of copper by iron metal from copper sulphate solution.
16
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Experiment 1.3
Investigation of Single Displacement Reaction
Objective: To investigate the displacement reaction between iron and copper (II)
Sulphate (CuSO₄)
Apparatus: Iron rod and beaker
Chemicals: CuSO4
Procedure:
1. Clean a piece of iron rod or iron knife with emery paper to remove any rust.
2. Take saturated CuSO4 solution in a beaker.
3. Dip the iron rod into the CuSO₄ solution as shown in Figure 1.5 and wait for a
few minutes. What did you observe on the iron rod?
4. Allow the reactants to stand for one day and observe any change on the iron
rod.
Iron rod
Questions
1. What did you observe
on the iron rod after one
day?
2. Write a balanced
Beaker
chemical equation for the
reaction.
3. Write the conclusion for
CuSO₄ Solution
the experiment.
Figure 1.5 Reaction between iron and copper (II)
sulphate.
Exercise 1.3
Complete the following single displacement reactions:
4. CI2 + KI
1. Zn + H2SO4
5. F2 + CaCl₂
2. Zn + Cu(NO₃)₂
3. Cu + AgNO₃
17
Chemistry Grade 10
D. Double Displacement Reactions
A double displacement reaction is a reaction in which two compounds react together
to form two new compounds by exchange of the positive and negative ions of each
reactant. Such a reaction is also known as double replacement reaction or metathesis.
This type of reaction can be written in the following general form of equation:
AB + CD
AD + CB
Experiment 1.4
Investigation of Double Displacement Reaction
Objective: To observe the displacement reaction between Na₂SO₄ and Ba(NO₃)₂:
Apparatus: Beaker, stirrer, filter paper, filter funnel.
Chemicals: Na₂SO₄, Ba(NO₃)₂ and water.
Procedure:
1. Take solution of Ba(NO₃)₂ into a beaker and add drop-wise Na2SO₄ solution
as shown in Figure 1.6. Then stir it continuously.
2. Filter the precipitate using a filter paper and funnel. Collect the filtrate or the
solution in a clean beaker.
Questions
1. Write the names of the compounds that are formed as a precipitate and as
solution at the end of the reaction.
2. What was the colour of the precipitate.
3. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Na2SO₄ solution
Stirrer
Ba(NO₃)₂ solution
Figure 1.6 Double displacement reaction between Na2SO₄ and Ba(NO₃)₂
18
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Example 1.6:
The two soluble compounds AgNO₃ and NaCl react to produce an in soluble
precipitate of AgCl and a soluble NaNO₃ solution.
AgNO3
+
NaCl
AgCl
+
NaNO₃
Soluble
Soluble
Insoluble
Soluble
When aqueous solutions of BaCl₂ and Na₂SO₄ react, a precipitate of BaSO₄ is
formed.
BaCl₂
+
Na2SO₄
BaSO₄
+
2NaCl
Soluble
Soluble
Insoluble
Soluble
When dilute hydrochloric acid is added to sodium carbonate double displacement
reaction takes place. In this reaction carbondioxide gas is produced.
Na2CO3 + 2HCI
2NaCl + H2O + CO2
Exercise 1.4
Give the correct answers for the following questions.
1. What type of reaction does usually take place in each of the following
reactions?
a. An active metal reacting with water
b. A metal reacting with a non-metal
C. An acid reacting with a metal hydroxide
d. Heating of a metal hydrogen carbonate
2. Classify the following reactions as combination, decomposition, single or
double displacement reactions.
a. FeO + C
Fe + CO
b. 2NH3 + H2SO4
(NH₄)₂SO₄
C. CaCO₃ + 2HCI CaCl₂ + CO2 + H2O
d.
2Cu(NO₃)₂
2CuO + 4NO₂ + O2
e. 2Na₃PO₄ + 3Ca(OH)₂ Ca₃(PO₄)₂ + 6NaOH
f.
CuSO₄.5H₂O
CuSO₄ + 5H2O
19
Chemistry Grade 10
1.4 Oxidation and Reduction Reactions
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon
and present your conclusion to the class.
When you dry your meal dishes with a towel, the towel
can be termed as a drying agent and the dish as
wetting agent. Assume that the meal dishes were wet
?
with water, which one would gain water, the towel or
the wetting agent and which one would lose the water,
the wetting agent or the towel, after cleaning? Relate
this idea with oxidizing agent and reducing agent,
oxidation and reduction of substances.
Activity 1.3
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define redox reactions;
define the terms oxidation and reduction in terms of electron transfer;
define oxidation number (oxidation state);
state oxidation number rules.;
determine the oxidation number of an element in a given formula.
In our day to day activity, we are familiar with the chemical processes like rusting of
iron, burning of substances, respiration, digestion of food and so on. All such types
of processes or reactions are known as oxidation and reduction or redox reactions.
Additionally, most metallic and nonmetallic elements are obtained from their ores by
the process of oxidation or reduction. What are oxidation and reduction reactions?
Oxidation-Reduction
An oxidation is defined as the loss of one or more electrons by an atom, and a reduction
is the gain of one or more electrons. Oxidation and reduction occur simultaneously.
Thus, an oxidation reduction reaction, or redox reaction, is one in which electrons are
transferred from one atom to another.
For example, when metallic zinc is added to a solution containing copper(II) sulphate
(CuSO₄), zinc reduces Cu²⁺ by donating two electrons to it. Therefore, Zn is oxidized
and copper is reduced and oxidation - reduction or redox reaction takes place as
shown in the following chemical equation:
Zn + CuSO₄
ZnSO₄ + Cu
Zn + Cu2+
Zn²⁺ + Cu
Oxidation and reduction reactions can also be defined in terms of oxidation number.
20
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Oxidation is an increase in the oxidation number of an element and reduction is a
decrease in the oxidation number. For example,
Cu° + 2Ag⁺ Cu2⁺ + 2Ag°
The oxidation number of copper is increased from 0 to +2 and thus copper is oxidized.
The oxidation number of silver is decreased from +1 to O, and therefore silver is reduced.
1.4.1 Oxidation Number or Oxidation State
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define oxidation number (oxidation state);
state oxidation number rules.;
determine the oxidation number of an element in a given formula.
Oxidation number or oxidation state is the number of electrons that an atom appears
to have gained or lost when it is combined with other atoms. Oxidation number could
be integers including zero and fractional numbers.
Rules for Assigning Oxidation Numbers
Rule 1: The oxidation state of an uncombined element is zero. This applies for poly
atomic molecules, S₈, P₄ and large structures of carbon or silicon each have an
oxidation state of zero.
Example 1.7: The oxidation number of Be = O, Cu = O, Br in Br₂ = O, o in
O3 = O, S in S₈ = O. P in P4 = O, O in O2 = o
Rule 2: The oxidation number of a monatomic ion is equal to the charge on the
ion.
Example 1.8: Na+ = +1, Mg²⁺ = +2, S²⁻ = -2.
Rule 3: The oxidation number of oxygen in a compound is usually -2 except in
the following cases:
Exceptions
The oxidation number of oxygen in:
A. peroxides is -1.
Example: Na₂O₂
B. superoxides is -1/2.
Example: KO₂
C. oxygen diflouride is +2 Example: OF2
Rule 4: The oxidation number of hydrogen in its entire compounds is +1 except
in metal hydrides, (like NaH, CaH₂ and AIH₃), where its oxidation number is -1.
Rule 5: The sum of the oxidation number of all the atoms in a neutral compound
is zero.
21
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.9:
+1 +6-2
H2SO4, (+2) + (+6) + (-8) = 0
Rule 6: In a polyatomic ion, the sum of the oxidation numbers of the constituent
atoms equals the charge on the ion.
Example 1.10:
-2
(SO₄)⁻², (+6)+ (-8) = -2
Rule 7: Elements of group IA have +1 and group IIA have +2 oxidation states in
all of their compounds
Rule 8: In a compound, the more electronegative element is assigned a negative
oxidation number, and the less electronegative element is assigned a positive
oxidation number.
Example 1.11: Assign oxidation number to all elements in
i. HNO3
ii. Cr2O₇²⁻
iii. MnO₄⁻
iv. Ca(H₂PO₄)₂.
i. HNO₃: According to rule 4 oxidation number of H = + 1. Thus the other group
(the nitrate ion) must have a net oxidation number of -1. Oxygen has an
oxidation number of -2, and if we use X to represent the oxidation number
of nitrogen, then the nitrate ion can be written as
[N(x)O₃(²⁻)]⁻ or
ii. Cr₂O₇²⁻: From rule 6 we see that the sum of the oxidation numbers in the
dichromate ion Cr2O₇²⁻ must be -2. We know that the oxidation number of o
is -2, so what remains is to determine the oxidation number of Cr, which we
call y. The dichromate ion can be written as
2y + 7 X-2=-2 y=+6
iii. MnO₄⁻: Let the oxidation number of Mn be X. MnXO₄²⁻. The sum of the
oxidation numbers of Mn and o in MnO⁻₄ is - 1 (Rule 6)
x + (-2 x 4) = - 1, 8 = X = +7
Therefore, the oxidation number of Mn in MnO₄⁻ is +7.
iv. Ca(H₂PO₄)₂: The oxidation number of Ca is +2. Let, the oxidation number of
P be X.
22
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
+2 +1 X -2
Ca(H2PO₄)₂
+ (4 X (+1)) + (2 X + (8 X (-2)) = 0
2+4 + 2x - 16 =0
2x 10 = 0 or X = +5
Hence, the oxidation number of P in Ca(H2PO₄)₂ is +5.
Exercise 1.5
1. Find the oxidation numbers to the underlined species for the following
compounds or ions.
a. K₄[Fe(CN)₆]
d. Na2S406
g. H2SO4
b. K₂Cr₂O₇
e. S2O8⁻²
h. HAuCI
C. H2PtCl₆
f.
i. Fe2(SO₄)₃
2. Determine whether the following processes are oxidation or reduction reactions
a. Cu²⁺+ 2e⁻
Cu
d. S²⁻ S+2e⁻
b.
K
K⁺ + e⁻
e. Fe²⁺ Fe³⁺ + e-
C. O + 2e⁻
O²⁻
f. N + 3e⁻
N³⁻
1.4.2 Oxidizing and Reducing Agents
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define the terms reducing and oxidizing agent;
identify reducing and oxidizing agents from a given redox reaction;
compare and contrast oxidizing and reducing agents.
Whenever one substance loses an electron (is oxidized), another substance must
gain that electron (be reduced). The substance that gives up an electron and causes
reduction is called a reducing agent. The substance that gains an electron and causes
the oxidation is called an oxidizing agent. The following comparison shows the
characteristics of reducing and oxidizing agents.
Reducing agent
Oxidizing agent
1. Loses one or more electrons
1. Gains one or more electrons
2. Causes reduction
2. Causes oxidation
3. Undergoes oxidation
3. Undergoes reduction
4. Becomes more positive
4. Becomes more negative
Tests for an oxidizing agent are accomplished by mixing it with a substance that is
easily oxidized to give a visible color change when the reaction takes place.
23
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.12:
I. Permanganate ion (MnO₄⁻) in acidic solution changes color from purple to
colorless
MnO₄⁻
Mn²⁺
MnO₄⁻ (purple)
Mn²⁺ (colorless)
2MnO₄ +16H+ + 10e-
2Mn²⁺ + 8H2O
Figures 1.7 The reduction of Mn⁷⁺ to Mn²⁺ in acidic media.
II. Dichromate in acidic solution changes color from orange to green
Cr2O₇2-
Cr³⁺
Cr2O₇²⁻ (orange)
Cr³⁺(Green)
Cr2O₇²⁻ + 14H+ + 6e-
2Cr³⁺ + 7H2O
Figures 1.8 The reduction of Cr6+ to Cr³⁺ in acidic media.
Other common oxidizing agents are chlorine, potassium chromate, sodium chlorate
and manganese (IV) oxide. Similarly, certain reducing agents undergo a visible colour
change with a substance which is easily reduced.
I. A moist starch solution changes potassium iodide paper to blue-black to show that
iodine is formed, 21-
12. That is potassium iodide is a reducing agent.
II. Hydrogen sulphide bubbled through a solution of an oxidizing agent forms a
yellow precipitate, S²⁻
S. Thus, H2S is a reducing agent.
Other common reducing agents are carbon, carbon monoxide, sodium thiosulphate,
sodium sulphite and iron (II) salts. The oxidizing or reducing ability of substances
depend on many factors. Some of these are:
Electronegativity: Elements with high electronegativity such as F2, O₂, N2 and Cl₂
are good oxidizing agents. Elements with low electronegativity for example, metallic
24
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
elements like Na, K, Mg and Al are good reducing agents.
Oxidation states: In a compound or ion, if one of its elements is in its higher oxidation
state, then it is an oxidizing agent. Similarly, if an element of a compound or ion is in
its lower oxidation state, then it is a reducing agent.
Example 1.13: Oxidizing agents
Reducing agents Fe⁺²S, C+2O, Na2S⁺⁴O₃
1.4.3 Analyzing Redox Reactions
At the end of this section, students will be able to explain why every reduction reaction
is accompained by oxidation reaction.
Oxidation and reduction or redox reactions occur simultaneously in a given reaction.
Form a group and discuss the following and present
your conclusion to the class.
1. How can you identify an oxidizing agent and
?
reducing agent in a reaction?
2. Why a reducing agent undergoes oxidation and
an oxidizing agent undergoes reduction?
3. Why must every redox reaction involve both an
Activity 1.4
oxidizing agent and a reducing agent?
Example 1.14: Identify the reducing and oxidizing agents in the following
balanced redox reactions:
2Fe + 302
Fe2O3
Assign oxidation states of the reactants and products, then identify the species
oxidized and reduced.
2Fe + 30₂ 2Fe2O3 +3 -2
Fe is oxidized from 0 to +3
o is reduced from o to -2
Therefore, Fe is reducing agent and O2 is oxidizing agent.
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl₂ + H₂
Mg°
+
2H+1CI-1
Mg⁺²Cl₂⁻⁻ + H₂⁰
Mg is oxidized from 0 to +2, therefore Mg is reducing agent.
H is reduced from +1 to 0, therefore HCI is the oxidizing agent.
25
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 1.6
1. Where do the most easily reduced and oxidized elements found in the
periodic table of the elements?
2. For the following substances, tell whether the oxidation number increases or
decreases in a redox reaction:
a. An oxidizing agent
b. A reducing agent
C. A substance undergoing oxidation
d. A substance undergoing reduction
3. In the following reactions, label the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
a. ZnO+C
Zn + CO
b. 8Fe + S₈
8FeS
C. Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe + 3CO₂
d. PbS + 4H2O2
PbSO₄ + 4H2O
1.4.4 Balancing Redox Reactions: Oxidation-Number-Change Method
At the end of this section, students will be able to balance redox reactions using
oxidation change method.
One way to balance redox reactions is by keeping track electron transfer, by using
the oxidation numbers of each of the atoms. It is based on the difference in oxidation
number of oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
For the oxidation-number-change method, start with the unbalanced equation. The
example below is for the reaction of iron (III) oxide with carbon monoxide.
Fe₂O₃+CO
Fe + CO2
Step 1: Assign oxidation numbers to each of the atoms in the equation and write the
numbers above the atom.
+3 -2
+2 -2
0
+4 -2
Fe2O3 + CO
Fe + CO2
Step 2: Identify the atoms that are oxidized and those that are reduced. In the above
equation, the C atom is being oxidized from +2 to +4. The Fe atom is being reduced
from +3 to O.
Step 3: Use a line to connect the atoms that are undergoing a change in oxidation
number. On the line, write the oxidation-number change.
26
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
- 3
+3 -2
+2 -2
0
+4 -2
Fe2O3 + CO
Fe + CO2
+2
Step 4: Use coefficients to make the total increase in oxidation number equal to the
total decrease in oxidation number. In this case, the least common multiple of 2 and 3
is 6. So the oxidation-number increase should be multiplied by 3, while the oxidation-
number decrease should be multiplied by 2. The coefficient is also applied to the
formulas in the equation. So 3 is placed in front of the CO and in front of the CO₂.
2 is placed in front of the Fe on the right side of the equation. The Fe2O₃ does not
require a coefficient because the subscript of 2 after the Fe indicates that there are
already two iron atoms.
- - 3*2=6
+3 -2
+2 -2
0
+4-2
Fe2O3
+
CO
Fe + CO2
+2*3=6
Step 5: Check whether each element is balanced. Occasionally, a coefficient may
need to be placed in front of a molecular formula that was not involved in the redox
process. In the current example, the equation is now balanced.
Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe
+
3CO₂
Example 1.15: Balance the chemical equation:
HNO3 + H3AsO3
NO + H3AsO4 + H2O
1.
Identify the oxidation number of each atom.
Reactant side: H= +1; N= +5; o = -2; As= +3
Product side: N= +2; o = -2; H= +1; As= +5
2.
Determine the change in oxidation number for each atom that changes.
N: +5
+2;
Change = -3
As: +3
+5;
Change = +2
3. Make the total increase in oxidation number equal to the total decrease in
oxidation number. We need 2 atoms of N for every 3 atoms of As. This gives
US total changes of -6 and +6.
4.
Place these numbers (2 & 3) as coefficients in front of the formulas containing
those atoms
2HNO3 + 3H3AsO3
2NO + 3H3AsO4 + H2O (balanced)
27
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 1.7
Balance the following using oxidation number change method
a. Al + H2SO4
AI₂(SO₄)₃ + H2
b. KCIO₃
KCI + O2
C. MnO2 + Al
Mn + Al2O3
d. Cu + H2SO4
CuSO₄ + SO₂ + H2O
Non-redox Reactions
At the end of this section, students will be able to identify redox and non redox
reactions.
What are non redox reactions? non redox reactions are chemical reactions where the
oxidation states of chemical elements remain unchanged in reactants and products.
Therefore, reactions in which neither oxidation nor reduction takes place or no species
either gains or loses electrons are non-redox reactions. Neutralization and double
displacement reactions are examples of non-redox reactions.
Example 1.16:
Na2SO₄ + CaCl₂
CaSO4 + 2NaCl
CaCO3
CaO+CO2
KOH + HNO3
KNO3 + H2O
1.5 Molecular and Formula Masses, the Mole Concept and
Chemical Formulas
Discuss the following in your group and present your
conclusion to the class.
1. Is it possible to count 'teff' seeds for practical
purposes? If not, why? How do you quantify 'teff'
?
for practical purposes such as in markets?
2. Molecules, atoms or ions are extremely small entities.
How can we express their quantities for practical
purposes such as in the laboratory reactions and in
Activity 1.5
industrial applications?
28
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
At the end of this section, students will be able to
explain and determine molecular mass, formula mass, molar mass, empirical and
molecular formulas;
describe the mole concept and solve problems related to moles of substances.
1.5.1 Molecular mass (MM) and Formula Mass (FM)
At the end of this topic, students will be able to explain and determine molecular
mass, formula mass.
The molecular mass or formula mass of a compound is used to calculate the percentage
of its constituents. For example, the molecular mass of H2O is used to determine the
percentage of hydrogen, and the formula mass of NaCl is used to determine the
percentage of sodium. What is molecular mass or formula mass?
Molecular Mass (MM) is the sum of masses of all the atoms present in a molecule.
Example 1.17:
MM of H2O = 2 X 1 amu (2 hydrogen atoms) + 16 amu (1 oxygen atom) = 18
amu,
MM of CO2 =12 amu carbon atom) +2 X 16 amu (2 oxygen atoms) = 44 amu
lonic compounds are not comprised of discrete molecules, but rather, ions. The
smallest unit of an ionic compound that retains the identity of an ionic compound
is called a formula unit. The mass of a formula unit is called its formula mass.
Fomula Mass ( FM) is the sum of the atomic masses of all atoms present in the
formula unit of the compound, whether it is molecular or ionic. But FM is used
mostly for ionic compounds.
Example 1.18:
FM of NaCl = 23 amu (1Na) + 35.5 amu (CI) = 58.5 amu.
FM of Ca(OH₂)₂ = 40 amu (1Ca) + 2 X [16 amu( (10) + 2 amu (2H)] = 76 amu
1.5.2 The Mole Concept
At the end of this topic, students will be able to
define mole and explain the concept using examples;
define molar mass;
calculate the molar masses of substances.
29
Chemistry Grade 10
It is the concept adopted as a convenient way to deal with the tremendous amount of
molecules or ions. A mole is defined as the amount of a substance that contains the
same number of entities as there are atoms in exactly 12 g of carbon-12. 12 g of
carbon-12 contains 6.022x10²³ atoms. This number is known as Avogadro's number
(NA), in honor of Amedeo Avogadro (1776-1856, who first proposed the concept).
The term mole, like a dozen or a gross, refers to a particular number of things. A
dozen of eggs equals 12 eggs, a gross of pencils equals 144 pencils, and a mole of
any substance equals 6.02x10²³ units of the substance.
Example 1.19: 1 mole of H2O equals 6.02 X 10²³ molecules of H2O
1 mole of NaCl equals 6.02 X 10²³ formula units of NaCl
Molar mass is the molecular mass or formula mass expressed in grams. It is the
mass of 1 mole of a substance.
Molar mass of substance A = mass of one mole of A = 6.02 x10²³ units of
substance A
Example 1.20: molar mass of H2O = 18 g = mass of 1 mole of H2O = 6.02 X
10²³ molecules of H2O
Molar mass of NaCl = 58.5 g = mass of one mole of NaCl =6.02 X 10²³
formula units of NaCl
1.5.3 Chemical Formulas - Empirical and Molecular Formulas
At the end of this topic, students will be able to
define empirical and molecular formulas;
determine empirical and molecular formulas;
calculate percentage composition of an element in a substance.
Chemical formulas are used to express the composition of compounds in terms of
chemical symbols. By composition we mean not only the elements present but also the
ratios in which the atoms are combined. Here, you deal with two types of formulas,
empirical formulas and molecular formulas.
Empirical formula (or simplest formula) for a compound is the formula of a substance
written with the smallest ratio (whole number ratio) subscripts. The molecular formula
is the actual formula that tells you the exact number of atoms of different elements
present in a molecule.
Example 1.21:
Empirical formula
Molecular formula
Benzene
CH
C₆H₆
Glucose
CH2O
C₆H₁₂O₆
30
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Note that the empirical formula, merely tells you the ratio of numbers of atoms in the
compound.
Percent Composition by Mass (%)
Percent composition by mass tells you what percent of each element is present in a
compound. Thus, it helps in chemical analysis of the given compound. The percentage
composition of a given compound is defined as the ratio of the amount of individual
elements present in the compound multiplied by 100. Mathematically,
Percent composition of an element =
n X molar mass of the element X 100%
molar mass of compound
where n is the number of moles of the element in 1 mole of the compound. For example,
in 1 mole of hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂) there are 2 moles of H atoms and 2 moles of
o atoms. The molar masses of H₂O₂, H, and o are 34.02 g, 1.008 g, and 16.00 g,
respectively. Therefore, the percent composition of H2O2 is calculated as follows:
% H = 34.02 2x1.00gH H2O2 = 5.926%
% O = 2 x 16 94.06%
Determination of Empirical and Molecular Formulas
Steps to determine empirical formula are:
Step 1: Derive the number of moles of each element from its mass. Masses of elements
may be given in terms of percent composition of elements or grams.
Step 2: Divide each element's molar amount by the smallest molar amount to yield
subscripts for a tentative empirical formula.
Step 3: Multiply all coefficients by an integer, if necessary, to ensure that the smallest
whole number ratio of subscripts is obtained
Example 1.22: What is the empirical formula of a compound that contains 43.6%
P and 56.4% o ?
Step 1: Derivation of moles of each element,
Given mass of the element
Number of moles each element =
Molar mass of the element
Number of moles of P = 43.6 g/mol = 1.41 mol
Number of moles of o = 56.4 16.0 g/mol = 3.53 mol
31
Chemistry Grade 10
Step 2: Smallest molar amount is 1.41
P: 1.41/1.41=1.00, O: 3.53/1.41 = 2.50
Step 3. Multiply both by 2 to convert into whole number, P: 2 X 1 =2, O: 2 X
2.5 = 5
Empirical formula is P2O5
Example 1.23: A compound contains 79.9% carbon and 20.1 % of hydrogen by
mass. What is the empirical formula of the compound?
Step 1: C= (79.9 g)/(12 g/mol) = 6.7 mol, H = 20.1g/(1g/mol) = 20.1 mol
Step 2: C= 6.7/6.7 = 1, H = 20.1/6.7 = 3
Step 3: Empirical formula = CH₃
Molecular formula = Empirical formula xn
molar mass of molecular formula
n=
molar mass of empirical formula
Example 1.24: What is the molecular formula of the oxide of phosphorus that has
the empirical formula P2O5 if it's molecular mass is 284?
Molar mass of P₂O₅ = 142,
n = 284/142 = 2
Therefore, molecular formula = (P₂O₅)₂ = P₄O₁₀
Example 1.25: The compound ethylene glycol is often used as antifreeze. It
contains 38.7% carbon, 9.75% hydrogen, and the rest oxygen. The molecular
weight of ethylene glycol is 62.07 g. What is the molecular formula of ethylene
glycol?
1. Calculate the empirical formula. Assume 100 g of the compound, which will
contain 38.70 g carbon, 9.75 g hydrogen and the rest oxygen.
Mass of o = 100 g - - (38.7 g of C+ 9.75 g H) = 51.55 g
2. Calculate the moles of each element present:
No of moles of C = 12.01 38.70 g C g C = 3.22 mol C
No of moles of H = 9.75 gH = 9.67 mol H
1.008 g H
No of moles of o = 51.55 g O = 3.22 mol
16.01 g o
32
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Next, calculate the ratio of molecular weight to empirical formula weight. The
molecular weight is given. The empirical formula is CH₃O, so the empirical formula
weight is 12.01 + 3(1.008) + 16.00 = 31.03.
= empirical formula mass mass = 62.07 31.03 = 2
Molecular
n
Therefore, the molecular formula is twice the empirical formula: C2H6O2.
Exercise 1.8
1. Define and discuss each of the following terms: mole, Avogadro's number,
molar mass, molecular mass, formula mass, percentage composition
2. Distinguish between
a. Formula mass and molecular mass of a compound
b. Empirical and molecular formula
3. How many atoms and ions are there in one formula unit of
a. K2CO₃
b. Ba₃(PO₄)₂
4. How many moles of each element are present in
a. 1.00 mole of Cu₃(PO₄)₂
b. 2.5 mole of Na2CO3
C. 2 moles of AI₂(SO₄)₃
5. Calculate the empirical formula for:
a. 39.3% Na, 60.7% CI
b. 56.5% K, 8.7% C, 34.8% O
6. A. A compound of carbon and hydrogen contains 92.3% C and has a molar
mass of 78.1g/mol. What is its molecular formula?
B. A compound of carbon, hydrogen and chlorine has a molar mass of 99
g/mol. Analysis of a sample shows that it contains 24.3% carbon and 4.1%
hydrogen. What is its molecular formula?
7. Calculate the molar mass of a compound if 0.372 mole of it has a mass of
152 g.
8. Calculate the molecular mass or formula mass (in amu) of each of the following
substances:
a. CH₄
C. SO₃
e. Na₂SO₄
b. NO₂
d. C6H6
f. Ca₃(PO₄)₂
9. Calculate the percentage composition by mass of the following compounds:
a. C2H₅OH
C. H2SO4
e. K2Cr₂O₇
b. Na₃PO4
d. CaCO₃
33
Chemistry Grade 10
1.6
Stoichiometry
Refer to grade 9 chemistry and revise the three
fundamental laws of chemical reactions. Discuss in class
using the following and give your own examples for
each law.
a. Carbon forms two types of oxides namely carbon
monoxide and carbon dioxide.
?
b. The ratio of the mass of hydrogen to the mass of
oxygen in water is always 1:8.
C. The total masses of calcium, carbon and oxygen
are the same before and after the decomposition
Activity 1.6
of calcium carbonate.
At the end of this section, students will be able to
deduce mole ratios from balanced chemical equations;
solve mass-mass problems based on the given chemical equation;
define molar volume;
state Avogadro's principle;
solve mass-mass problems based on the given chemical equation;
solve mass-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
solve volume-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
describe limiting and excess reactants.
Stoichiometry is the study of the quantitative composition of substances and the
relationship that exists between the reactants and the products involved in chemical
reactions. In other words, stoichiometry is the study of the amount or ratio of moles,
mass, or volumes (for gases) of reactants and products. Stoichiometric calculations are
based on the following two major principles.
A.
The composition of any substance in the chemical equation should be expressed
by a definite formula.
B.
The law of conservation of mass must be obeyed (the mass of reactants equals
the mass of products)
?
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon.
When wood burns, the ash weighs much less than the
original wood. Where did the "lost mass" go? How can
you estimate the mass of the wood that is no longer
Activity 1.7
present? Present your conclusion to the class.
Note that stoichiometric calculations are done for balanced chemical equations.
34
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
1.6.1 Molar Ratios in Balanced Chemical Equation
At the end of this section, students will be able to deduce mole ratios from balanced
chemical equations.
Stoichiometry problems of this type are called either mass-mass or mole-mole problems.
A balanced chemical equation provides information about the nature, masses, number
of moles, number of molecules/atoms of reactants and products.
For example, consider the reaction of hydrogen with nitrogen to produce ammonia.
The equation shows that 3 molecules of hydrogen and 1 molecule of N2 react to
produce 2 molecules of ammonia. The equation can also represent the reaction of 3
moles (3x6.02x10²³ molecules) of H2 with 1 mole (6.02 X 10²³ molecules) of N2 to
yield 2 moles (2x6.02 X 10²³ molecules ) of NH₃. The same equation can also tell US the
combination of 6 g of H2 with 28 g of N2 to yield 34 g of NH3. This can be further
interpreted as follows:
N2
+
3H2
2NH3
1 molecule N2 +
3 molecules H2
2 molecules NH₃ (Molecular interpretation)
1mol N2
+
3 mol H2
2 mol NH₃ (Molar interpretation)
28.0 g N2
+
3 X 2.02 g H₂
2 X 17.0 g NH₃ ( mass interpretation)
Calculations based on chemical equations (stoichiometric problems) are classified into
mass-mass, volume-volume and mass-volume problems.
1.6.2 Mass - Mass Relationships
At the end of this section, students will be able to solve mass-mass problems based on
the given chemical equation or using the conversion factor.
There are two methods for solving mass-mass problems. These are mass-ratio and
mole-ratio methods.
A. The Mass - ratio Method
In this method, the mass of one substance is determined from the given mass of the
other substance using the following steps.
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Place the given mass above the corresponding formula, and X above the
formula of the substance whose mass is to be determined
Step 3: Write the total molar mass of the substances below the formula of each
substance. (Total molar mass is the molar mass of the substance multiplied by its
coefficient).
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown mass, X.
35
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.26: How many grams of aluminum metal must be heated to produce
20.4 g of aluminium oxide?
Solution:
Step 1: 4AI + 302
2AI2O3
X
20.4 g
Step 2: 4AI + 302
2AI2O3
X
20.4 g
Step 3: 4AI + 302
2AI2O3
108
204
Step 4: x/(108 g) = (20.4 g)/(204 g)
Step 5:
X
= (20.4 g)/(204 g) X 108 g = 10.8 g
Therefore, 10.8 g of aluminum metal is needed to produce 20.4 g of aluminum
oxide.
Note that stoichiometric problems can also be solved using the mole ratio or molar mass
as conversion factors. The numbers in a conversion factor come from the coefficients of
the balanced chemical equation.
In general, for mole - mole problems,
mole A X mole ratio = mole B
Mass-Mass problems,
1mole A
mole
B
molar mass B
gram A X
X
X
= gram B
molar mass A
mole A
mole B
In the above example, coefficients of Al and AI2O₃ are 4 and 2 respectively
Therefore, conversion factor = mole ratio = 4 mol AI/2 mol O₂. Given molar masses,
1 mole AI2O₃ = 102 g, 1 mole Al = 27 g
The conversion steps are summarized as follows:
grams of AI2O₃
moles of AI2O3
moles of Al
grams of Al
Conversion factor: molar mass of AI2O₃ mole ratio
molar mass of Al
20.4 g X 1 mol AI₂O₃/102 g AI2O₃ X 4 mol Al /2 mol AI2O₃ X 27 g Al/1mol
Al = 10.8 g
Example 1.27: What mass of magnesium sulfate will be produced if 4.8 g of
magnesium reacts with excess sulfuric acid?
Step 1: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
36
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
4.8g
X
Step 2: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
4.8g
X
Step 3: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
24g
120g
Step 4:
X = (4.8 g)/(24 g) X 120 g = 24 g
Therefore, 13.6 g MgSO₄ will be produced. Check the result using conversion
factor. Hint: mole ratio = 1mole Mg/1mole MgSO4
B. The Mole - ratio Method
In this method, calculations are made in terms of moles; therefore the given mass is
converted into mole. The obtained mole can be converted back to mass if required.
Follow the steps given below to solve problems of mass-mass relationships using mole
ratio method:
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Convert the given mass to moles and write the obtained moles and the required
quantity, x, above the formulas of the respective substances.
Step 3: Place the coefficients as the number of moles under the formula of each
substance involved.
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown value, x; and convert the moles obtained into mass.
Example 1.28: How many grams of calcium oxide are needed to react completely
with 22.0 g of carbon dioxide?
Solution:
Step 1: CaO + CO2
CaCO3
Step 2: moles of CO2 = given mass/molar mass = 22 g/44 g/mol = 0.5 mol
X 0.5mol
Step 3: CaO + CO2
CaCO3
1mol
1mol
Step 4: x/1 = 0.5mol/1mol
X = 0.5 mol
Step 5: Convert the moles into grams of CaO
Mass of CaO produced = No. of moles CaO X molar mass CaO
= 0.5mol X 56 g/mol = 28 g
Solve the above problem using conversion factor,
gram CO2
Mole CO2
mole CaO
gram CaO
37
Chemistry Grade 10
22 g CO2 X
1mol CO2 X 1mol CaO X 56 g CaO 28 g of CaO
44 g CO2 1mol CO2 1mol CaO
Example 1.29: How many grams of carbon monoxide must react with excess iron
oxide to produce 28 grams of iron?
Step 1: Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe + 3CO2
given mass
Step 2: No. of moles Fe
=
molar mass
= 28 g/ 56 g/mol = 0.5 mol
X
0.5 mol
Step 3: Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe + 3CO2
3 mol 2 mol
Step 4: x/(3 mol) = 0.5 mol/(2 mol)
X = 0.5 X 3 mol/2 = 0.75 mol of CO
Step 5: Convert the moles into grams of CO
Mass of CO required = no. of moles CO X molar mass CO
= 0.75 mol X 28 g/mol =21 g (check the result using the conversion factor)
Note that although mass-mass and mole-mole stoichiometric problems are more
common, there are also mass-mole and mole-mass problems.
In mole-mass problems, the amount of one substance is given in moles and the mass
of another substance is determined, usually in grams and in mass-mole problems, the
mass of one substance is given, usually in grams and the amount of another substance
is determined in moles. Refer to relevant sources and solve Exercise 1.9 (a,b). You may
use the general sequence of conversions
for a mole-mass calculation follow the following sequence:
mol 1st substance
mol 2nd substance
mass 2nd substance
Example: What mass of Fe₂O₃ must be reacted to generate 3 moles of AI2O3?
Fe₂O₃ + 2AI
2Fe + AI2O₃
Given: Moles of AI2O₃ = 3, Molar mass of AI2O₃ = 102 g Required: Mass of Fe₂O₃,
molar mass of Fe2O₃ = 160 g
Solution: Follow the sequence, Gram AI2O₃
mole AI2O3
mole Fe2O₃
Gram Fe₂O₃
3 moles of AI2O₃ X 1 1 mole mol AI₂O₃⁻ Fe2O₃ X 1 160 mol g Fe2O₃ = 480 g of Fe2O₃
for mass- mole calculation follow the following sequence:
38
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
mass 1st substance
mol 2nd substance
mol 2nd substance
Example: How many moles of C2H₅OH are needed to generate 106.7 g of H₂O?
C2H₅OH + 30₂
2CO₂ + 3H2O
Given: mass of H2O = 106.7 g, molar mass of H2O = 18 g Required: No. of mole
of C2H₅OH
Solution: follow the steps: Gram H2O
moleH₂O
mole C2H₅OH
106.7 g X 1mole 18g H2O X mole 3mol C2H₅OH H2O = 1.97 moles of C2H₅OH
Exercise 1.9
1. Which of the following statements is correct for the equation shown here?
4NH₃(g) + 50₂(g)
4NO(g) + 6H₂O(g)
a. 6 g of H2O are produced for every 4 g of NH3 reacted.
b. 1 mole of NO is produced per mole of NH3 reacted.
C. 2 moles of NO are produced for every 3 moles of O2 reacted
2. How many moles of H2O are required to produce 4.5 moles of HNO3 according
to the following reaction?
3NO₂ + H2O
2HNO₃ + NO
3. How many moles of CaO are needed to react with excess water to produce
370 g of calcium hydroxide?
4. In the decomposition of KCIO₃, how many moles of KCI are formed in the
reaction that produces 0.05 moles of O2?
5. How many grams of CaCO₃ are needed to react with 15.2 g of HCI according
to the following equation?
CaCO₃ + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + CO₂ + H₂O
6. What mass of nitrogen dioxide is produced by the decomposition of 182 g
of magnesium nitrate?
7. Solve the following using either mass-mole or mole-mass relations
a. What mass of hydrogen sulphide gas is burned in a reaction that produces
4 mol SO₂ and water vapor: 2H2S+ 302
2SO₂ + 2H2O
b. How many moles of CO2 will be produced when 50 g of CaCO₃ are
reacted according to the chemical equation:
CaCO₃ + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + CO2 + H2O
39
Chemistry Grade 10
1.6.3 Volume - Volume Relationships
At the end of this section, students will be able to solve volume -volume problems
based on the given chemical equation.
At Standard Temperature (0°C) and Pressure (1atm) or STP, one mole of any gas
occupies 22.4 liters. This, 22.4 liters is known as molar volume at STP.
The volume of a gas and its number of molecules are related and explained by
Avogadro's Law. Avogadro's Law states that equal volumes of different gases, under
the same conditions of temperature and pressure, contain equal number of molecules.
According to this law, the volume of a gas is proportional to the number of molecules
(moles) of the gas at STP as shown below:
V ~ n; where V is the volume and n is the number of moles of gas
In Volume - volume problems, the volume of one substance is given and the volume of
the other substance is calculated.
Example 1.30: What volume of oxygen will react with methane to produce 44.8
liters of carbon dioxide at STP?
Step 1: CH₄ + 202
2H2O + 2
Step 2: Place the given volume and the required volume, X above the corresponding
formulas.
X
44.8 L
CH₄
+
202
2H2O
+
CO2
44.8 L
22.4 L
Step 3: Write the total molar volume (22.4 L multiplied by any coefficient) below
the formulas.
Step 4: x/44.8 L=(44.8 L)/(22.4 L) X = 44.8 /22.4 X 44.8 L= 89.6 L
Step 5: Solve for the unknown volume, X
X = 89.6 L of oxygen is needed.
40
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Exercise 1.10
From
1. What volume of nitrogen reacts with 33.6 litres of oxygen to produce
nitrogen dioxide?
2. How many litres of sulphur trioxide are formed when 4800 cm³ of sulphur
dioxide is burned in air?
3. How many litres of ammonia are required to react with 145 litres of oxygen
according to the following reaction?
4NH3 + 502 4NO + 6H2O
4. Calculate the volume of oxygen produced in the decomposition of 5 moles of
KCIO₃ at STP?
5. How many moles of water vapour are formed when 10 litres of butane gas,
C₄H₁₀ is burned in oxygen at STP?
1.6.4 Mass - - Volume Relationships
At the end of this section, students will be able to solve mass -volume problems based
on the given chemical equation.
In mass-volume problems, either the mass of one substance is given and the volume of
the other is required or the volume of one substance is given and the mass of the other
one is required. The steps to solve such type of problems are the same as the previous
steps except putting the masses on one side and the volumes on the other side of the
equality sign.
Example 1.31: How many grams of magnesium should react with sulphuric acid
to produce 5.6 L of hydrogen at STP?
Solution:
Step 1: Mg + H2SO4
H2
X
5.6 L
Step 2: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
X
5.6 L
Step 3: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
24 g
22.4 L
Step 4: x/24 g = 5.6 L/22.4 L
X = 6 g
Step 5: X = 6 g of magnesium is needed
41
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 1.11
1. How many litres of oxygen are required to react with 156 g of benzene
according to the chemical equation:
2C6H6 + 150₂
12CO₂ + 6H2O
2. What mass of iron metal would be completely oxidized by 89.6 L of oxygen
to produce 2 3 at STP?
3. Calculate the mass of calcium carbide that is needed to produce 100 cm³ of
acetylene according to the equation:
CaC2 + 2H2O
C2H2 + Ca(OH)₂
4. How many milliliters of sulphur dioxide are formed when 12.5 g of iron
sulphide ore (pyrite) reacts with oxygen (at STP) according to the equation
4FeS₂ + 110₂
2Fe2O3 + 8SO₂
1.6.5 Limiting and Excess Reactants
At the end of this section, students will be able to describe limiting and excess reactants.
calculate the limiting and excess reactants of a reaction.
Consider a dance contest at a club. If there are 14
men and only 9 women, then only 9 female/male pairs
can compete.
1. How many men will be left without partners?
2. Who (men or women) are in excess?
3. Who (men or women) limits the number of female/
?
male pair that can dance in the contest?
4. How can you relate this analogue with the chemical
reactions involving two or more reactants?
Discuss in your group and present in class your
Activity 1.8
conclusion.
In a chemical reaction involving two reactants, the reaction will stop when all of one
reactant has been completely consumed no matter how much of the second reactant
remains. The reactant completely consumed first in a reaction is called the limiting
reactant, because it limits or determines the amount of product that can be formed.
When the limiting reactant is completely consumed, no more product can be formed
and thus the other reactant remains excess. Excess reactants are the reactants present
42
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
in quantities greater than necessary to react with the quantity of the limiting reactant.
Suppose you want to make some cheese sandwiches. Each is made from two slices of
bread and a slice of cheese.
2 slices bread + 1 slice cheese
1 cheese sandwich
If you have 7 slices of bread and 2 slices cheese, you can make 2 cheese sandwiches.
3 slices of bread is excess. The number of sandwiches is limited by the number of slices
of cheese. Hence, slices of cheese are the limiting ingredient and slices of bread are
excess ingredient.
Note that: Yield of the product is the one calculated using the limiting reactant and it
is the smallest.
Example 1.32: Magnesium metal reacts with hydrochloric acid by the following
reaction:
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl2 + H2
If 0.30 mol Mg is added to hydrochloric acid containing 0.52 mol HCI, how many
moles of H2 are produced?
Solution:
Here there are 0.3 mol of Mg and 0.52 mol of HCI. Therefore, first determine the
limiting reactant. Calculate the yield of H2 (product) using both reactants, the reactant
that gives lower yield is the limiting reactant and the amount obtained by the limiting
reactant is the yield of the product.
A. Using the quantity of Mg
B. Using the quantity of HCI
0.3mol/1mo = x/1mol
0.52 mol/2 mol = x/1mol
0.3 mol
X
0.52 mol
X
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl₂ + H2
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl₂ + H2
1 mol
1 mol
2 mol
1 mol
0.3 mol/1 mol = x/1 mol
0.52 mol/2 mol = x/1 mol
X = 0.3 mol of H2
X = 0.26 mol of H2
H2 produced using HCI is less than H2 produced using Mg.
Hence, HCI is the limiting reactant and Mg is the excess reactant. The number of moles
of H2 produced is equal to the quantity of H2 obtained using HCI (limiting reactant)
which is 0.26 mol.
43
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.33: In a process for producing acetic acid, oxygen gas is bubbled
into acetaldehyde, CH₃CHO, containing manganese (II) acetate (catalyst) under
pressure at 60 °C.
2CH3CHO + O2
2HC2H₃O₂
In a laboratory test of this reaction, 20.0 g CH₃CHO and 10.0 g O₂ were put into a
reaction vessel. A. How many grams of acetic acid can be produced? B. How many
grams of the excess reactant remain after the reaction is complete?
Solution
1. Convert grams in to moles
given mass
No. of moles of CH₃CHO =
molar mass
= 20g
= 0.454 mol
44 g/mol
No. of moles of O₂ = given mass
molar mass
= 10 g
= 0.312 mol
32 g/mol
2. Calculate the amount of HC2H₃O₂ produced by 0.454 mol. CH₃CHO and 0.312 mol
O₂ in order to decide the limiting reactant.
A. Using the quantity of CH₃CHO
B. Using the quantity of O₂
0.454 mol
X
0.312 mol X
2CH3CHO +O2
2HC₂H₃O₂
2CH3CHO + O2
2HC₂H₃O₂
2 mol
2 mole
1 mol 2 mol
0.454 mol/2 mol = x/2 mol
0.312 mol/1 mol = x/2 mol
X = 0.454 mol of HC2H₃O₂
X = 0.624 mol of HC2H₃O₂
Therefore, the limiting reactant is acetaldehyde, CH₂CHO. It is the reactant that gives
lower yield in the above reaction. Oxygen is the excess reactant in the above reaction
since it gives higher yield.
Number of moles of HC2H₃O₂ produced = 0.454 mol
A. Amount of HC2H₃O₂ produced in grams = 0.454 mol X 60 g/mol = 27.2 g
B.
Calculate the amount of oxygen consumed using the product obtained by the
limiting reactant
X
0.454 mol
2CH3CHO + O2
2HC₂H₃O₂
1 mol
2 mol
44
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Amount of O2 consumed, X = 0.454 mol X 1 mol/2 mol = 0.227 mol
We started with 10 g of O2 or 0.312 mol, so the excess O2 = 0.312 - 0.227 =
0.085mol or 2.7 g.
Exercise 1.12
1. If 6.5 g of zinc reacts with 5.0 g of HCI, according to the following reaction.
Zn + 2HCI
ZnCl₂ + H2
a. Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b. How many grams of the reactant remain unreacted?
C. How many grams of hydrogen would be produced?
2. What mass of Na₂SO₄ is produced if 49 g of H2SO4 reacts with 80 g of
NaOH?
3. If 20 g of CaCO₃ and 25 g of HCI are mixed, what mass of CO2 is produced?
CaCO₃ + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + CO2 + H2O
4. If 3 moles of calcium react with 3 moles of oxygen, then
a. Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b. How many moles of calcium oxide are formed?
5. For the reaction: 2AI + 3H2SO₄ AI2(SO₄)₃ + 3H₂, how many grams of
hydrogen are produced if 0.8 mole of aluminum reacts with 1.0 mole of
sulphuric acid?
1.6.6 Theoretical, Actual and Percentage Yields
At the end of this section, students will be able to
describe theoretical, Actual and percentage yields;
calculate theoretical, Actual and percentage yields.
By Considering the preparation of 'Shiro' powder
from chickpeas at home, discuss in group the following
questions and present your conclusion to the class.
a. Have you noticed the amount of chickpeas before
and after the preparation of Shiro powder? Is it
possible for the amount of chickpeas to be equal
after and before making the Shiro powder? If not,
?
what is the reason?
b. How could the quantity of the Shiro powder
preparation be maximized?
C. How can you compare this analogy with the yield
of products in a chemical reaction?
Activity 1.9
45
Chemistry Grade 10
Many chemical reactions do not proceed to give 100 % yield for a number of reasons.
Some reactions generate unwanted products due to side reactions. Others are, by
nature incomplete. Some products are difficult to collect without loss which reduces
the yield. As a result, the actual yield (experimentally determined yield) of a product
is usually less than the theoretical yield (calculated yield). The theoretical yield is
the calculated amount of product that would be obtained if the reaction proceeds
completely. The measured amount of product obtained in any chemical reaction is
known as the actual yield.
The percentage yield is the ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield multiplied
by 100.
Measured amount
Actual yield
Percentage yield=
X 100%
Theoretical yield
Calculated
Example 1.34: What is the percent yield if 24.8 g of CaCO₃ is heated to give
13.1 g of CaO?
Solution
The actual yield of CaO (given in the problem!) is 13.1 g
Determine the theoretical yield using mass-mass relationship
24.8 g
X
CaCO3
CaO + CO2
100 g
56 g
x/(56 g) = (24.8 g)/(100 g)
X = 13.9 g is the theoretical yield of CaO
Actual yield of CaO
Percentage yield of CaO =
X 100
Theoretical yield of CaO
Percentage yield of CaO = (13.1 g )/(13.9 g) x100 = 94.2%
46
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Exercise 1.13
1. When 21.6 g of aluminum reacts with oxygen, 20.8 g of aluminum oxide is
produced. What is the percentage yield of aluminum oxide?
2. When 14.5 g of SO₂ reacts with 21 g of O₂, what will be the theoretical
yield and percentage yield of the reaction if the actual yield is 12 g?
3. In the reaction: 2C₈H₁₈ + 250₂
16CO2 + 18H₂, when 52.7 g of octane
(C₈H₁₈) burns in oxygen, the percentage yield of carbon dioxide is 82.5%.
What is the actual yield in grams?
Checklists for Reference
Balancing chemical equations
Oxidation
Chemical reaction
Oxidizing agents
Chemical equation
Percentage yield
Combination reaction
Products
Decomposition reaction
Percentage composition
Double displacement reaction
Redox reaction
Excess reactant
Reducing agents
Empirical formula
Reduction
Formula mass
Reactants
Limiting reactants
Single displacement reaction
Mass-mass problems
Stoichiometry
Mass-volume problems
Theoretical and actual yield
Molecular formula
Volume-volume problems
Mole concept
Unit Summary
Chemical equations are representations of chemical reactions using chemical
symbols and formulas.
In any reaction, the total mass of reactants equals the total mass of products
according to the law of conservation of mass. Thus, we should always balance
chemical equations.
Chemical reactions can be classified as combination, decomposition, single
displacement or double displacement reactions.
When a substance loses electron (s) or increases its oxidation number in a
reaction, the process is oxidation and when a substance gains electron (s) or
decreases its oxidation number, the process is reduction.
Oxidizing agents are substances reduced, and reducing agents are the
substances oxidized in reduction - - oxidation (redox) reaction.
Reactions in which neither oxidation nor reduction takes place are non-redox
reactions. Neutralization and double displacement reactions are examples of
47
Chemistry Grade 10
non-redox reactions.
Molecular mass or formula mass expressed in grams is called molar mass. Molar
mass is the mass of one mole of a substance.
A mole is defined as the amount of a substance that contains the same number
of entities as there are atoms in exactly 12 g of carbon-12. 12 g of carbon-12
contains 6.022x10²³ atoms. This number is known as Avogadro's number (NA).
Empirical formula (or simplest formula) for a compound is the formula of a
substance written with the smallest ratio (whole number ratio) subscripts. The
molecular formula is the actual formula that tells you the exact number of atoms
of different elements present in a molecule.
In chemical reactions, the quantitative relationship between reactants and
products is called stoichiometry. There are mainly mass-mass, mass volume and
volume-volume stoichiometric relations
The reactant completely consumed first in a reaction is called the limiting
reactant. The reactants present in quantities greater than necessary to react
with the quantity of the limiting reactants are excess reactants
In chemical reactions, the actual (experimentally determined) yield of a product
is usually less than the theoretical (calculated) yield. The percentage yield is the
ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield multiplied by 100.
Review Exercises
Part I: True-false type questions.
1.
In any chemical reaction, each type of atoms is conserved.
2.
In a balanced chemical equation, both sides of the equation have the same
number of moles.
3.
The oxidizing agent is oxidized by the reducing agent.
4.
Most metallic elements are strong reducing agents, whereas most non-metallic
elements are strong oxidizing agents.
5.
The higher the percentage yields of a chemical reaction, the more efficient the
reaction.
Part II: Write the missing words for each of the following.
6.
The oxidation number of manganese in KMnO₄ is
.
7.
The maximum yield of product is determined by
reactant.
8.
Reactions which do not involve electron transfer are known as
.
9.
The sum of masses of all the atoms present in a molecule is
.
10. The sum of the atomic masses of all atoms present in the formula unit of an ionic
compound is
.
11.
is the formula of a substance written with the smallest integer
(whole number) subscripts.
12.
is the actual formula that tells you the exact number of atoms of
different elements present in a molecule.
48
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Part III: Multiple choice questions.
13. Which of the following contains the largest number of H2O molecules ?
a. 1 mole of H2O
C. 6.02 X 10²³ molecules of H2O
b. 18 g of H2O
d. 1 kg of H2O
14. The formula mass of Ca₃(PO₄)₂ is
a. 310
d. 120
b. 87
e. none
C. 200
15. One mole of two different substances A and B have equal
a. number of particles
d. molecular mass
b. molar mass
e. percentage composition of the
C. formula mass
elements
Part IV: Problem - solving questions.
Solve the following problems appropriately.
16. Calculate the molecular masses (in amu) of the following compounds:
a. sulphur dioxide (SO₂), a gas that is responsible for acid rain, and
b.
caffeine (C₈H₁₀N₄O₂), a stimulant present in tea, coffee, and cola
beverages.
17. How many moles of CO2 are present in 176 g of CO₂ ?
18. How many grams of oxygen can be prepared by the decomposition of 12
grams of mercury (II) oxide?
19. 25 g of NH₃ is mixed with 4 moles of O₂ in the given reaction:
4NH₃(g) + 50₂(g)
4NO(g) + 6H2O(I)
a. Which is the limiting reactant?
b. What mass of NO is formed?
C. What mass of H2O is formed?
20. Consider the following reaction: 2N2O₅
4NO₂(g)+ O₂(g)
When 40 g of N₂O₅ decomposes, 4.5 g of O2 is formed. What is the percent
yield?
21. Two compounds have the same composition: 85.62% C and 14.38% H.
a. Obtain the empirical formula corresponding to this composition.
b. One of the compounds has a molecular mass of 28.03 amu; the other, of
56.06 amu. Obtain the molecular formulas of both compounds.
22. A borane has the empirical formula BH₃ and a molecular mass of 28 amu. What
is its molecular formula?
23. The percentage composition of acetic acid is found to be 39.9% C, 6.7% H, and
53.4% o and its molecular mass was determined by experiment to be 60 amu.
Calculate the empirical and molecular formula of acetic acid.
49
Chemistry Grade 10
24. Balance the following equations using any method :
a. H3BO3 H₄B₆O₁₁ + H2O
b. P₂I₄ + P₄ + H2O PH 1 + H₃PO₄
C. HCIO₄ + P₄O₁₀ H3PO4 + CI2O₇
d. H₂S + HNO3 S + NO + H2O
e. H2SO4 + HBr SO₂ + Br₂ + H2O
f. KMnO₄ + HCI
MnCl₂ +CI₂ + KCI +H2O
g. K + KNO₃ N2 + K₂O
50
Expanded solute
Solute
Solvent
Expanded solve.
Step 2
Step I
Step 3
Step 3
Solution
Solution
Colloid
UNIT
SOLUTIONS
Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
explain the types of solutions;
describe the solution formation process, the rate of dissolution, the heat of
solution and solubility;
describe the dependence of solubility on temperature & pressure of
solution;
solve problems involving concentration of solutions;
express the concentration of solutions in various units;
describe, using the concept of equilibrium, the behavior of ionic solutes in
solutions that are unsaturated, saturated and supersaturated;
prepare solutions of required concentration by dissolving a solute or
diluting a concentrated solution;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills along this unit: observing, classifying,
comparing & contrasting, communicating, measuring, asking questions,
drawing conclusion, applying concept and problem solving.
Chemistry Grade 10
Start-up Activity
1. Consider a patient whose health condition is
deteriorated and require a quick recovery.
a. If you were a physician treating the patient,
would you recommend an IV fluid or a capsule?
b. Discuss the differences among isotonic,
hypotonic, and hypertonic solutions. Which
solution would you administer to a patient who
is suffering from dehydration due to excessive
diarrhea? Discuss in a group and present your
conclusions to the class.
2. Recall from the previous grades that matter is
classified into pure substances (elements and
compounds) and mixtures. To refresh your memory
of substances and mixtures from the general
sciences, form a group of four students each, discuss
and complete the missing information labeled as A,
B, C, D, E, and F in the concept map shown below.
Matter
Physically
A
B
Combined
Chemically
F
E
D
C
Combined
Solutions
Colloids
Suspensions
O2
CO2
Coke
Water &
Cl2
Paint
Water
Tea
oil
Zn
Fog
NaCl
Cu
Brass
Sand &
Milk
Sugar
Air
water
Pb
Ice cream
amalgam
Honey
Spaghetti
sauce
Note: Mixtures have the following general properties
In a mixture each component keeps its original properties.
The separation of components can be easily done.
The proportion of the components is variable.
Mixtures can be converted into component substances by physical process and vice
versa. Whereas a substance is a single kind of matter that has definite physical
and chemical properties regardless of its source or the way it is made and cannot
be separated into other kinds of matter by any physical process. Thus, substances
(compounds and elements) are inter-converted through chemical process only.
52
Solutions
2.1
Heterogeneous and Homogeneous Mixtures
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define the terms mixture, homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures;
distinguish between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures.
Form a group, perform the following activity and
present your conclusions to the class.
1. Classify each of the mixtures- sand + water, coffee,
tea; seawater, air, brass; steel, natural gas, pizza,
vinegar, vegetable salad, and fruit punch as
a. Homogeneous if it has a uniform composition or
b. Heterogeneous if it is an insoluble mixture of
substances and has non-uniform composition.
C. Where do you categorize blood, milk, butter
Activity 2.1
and cloud: to homo or hetero?
Mixtures are combinations of two or more substances in which the individual substances
keep their own properties. Components of mixtures (unlike those of compounds) can
have variable proportions, can be separated physically, and retain their properties.
Mixtures are part of your daily life. The air you breathe the food you eat, most of the
medications you use, the skin and hair products such as body lotion and shampoo, etc.
are all mixtures. There are two types of mixtures: homogeneous and heterogeneous
mixtures.
A homogeneous mixture is a mixture in which the composition is uniform throughout
the mixture. i.e., it has no visible boundaries the components are evenly distributed
throughout the entire mixture. Often it is easy to confuse a homogeneous mixture
with a pure substance because they are both uniform. The difference is that the
composition of the substance is always the same/constant regardless of the source or
the way it is made. NaCl, for instance, is always formed in a ratio of 23 is to 35.5 by
mass. But a homogeneous mixture of NaCl and water may be formed by combining
them in various proportions; 5 g in 100 g or 10 g in 100 g water; would all give a
homogeneous mixture of NaCl and water called a solution. When a spoonful of sugar
dissolves in water, the composition of the mixture, after sufficient stirring, is the same
throughout the solution. This solution is a homogeneous mixture.
A heterogeneous mixture is a mixture that consists of physically distinct parts, each
with different properties. This type of mixtures has at least two visible phases. Mixture
of oil and water, wood ash and water, sand and water, etc. are good examples.
53
Chemistry Grade 10
2.1.1 Suspensions, Solutions, Colloids
At the end of this section, students will be able to
describe a suspension;
define the terms solute, solvent, solution;
explain the different types of solutions;
give examples for each types of solutions;
present a report on how jewelry gold is made to class after a visit to nearby
goldsmith;
describe a colloid.
A.
Suspensions
Mixtures can further be classified into suspensions, colloids, and solutions. A suspension
is a heterogeneous mixture in which the solid particles are spread throughout the
liquid without dissolving in it. A mixture of chalk and water, sand and water, mixture
of slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) and water, muddy water are some examples.
B.
Solutions
Solutions are all around US. The air we breathe and much of what we drink for
example, soda, coffee, and tea, and the fluids in our body are all solutions. A solution
is a homogeneous mixture of a solute dissolved in a solvent. Because of dissolution of
solute in solvent, the particles in solution are of the size of individual atoms, molecules
or ions. The solvent part of the solution is usually a liquid but can be a gas or a solid
(see types of solutions in subsequent section). Generally, the major component of the
solution is called solvent, and the minor component is called solute. If both components
in a solution are 50%, the term solute can be assigned to either component. When
a gaseous or solid material dissolves in a liquid, the gas or solid material is called
the solute. When two liquids dissolve in each other, the major component is called the
solvent and the minor component is called the solute.
Note that all solutions are homogeneous mixtures but not all homogeneous mixtures
are solutions.
Properties of Solutions
A solution has a single uniform phase and has no visible boundaries because the
components are individual atoms, ions, or molecules. These components do not settle
upon standing or separate by filtration.
The particles of a solution are very small that they can pass through the pores
of even fine filter paper. So, solute cannot be separated from the solvent by
filtration.
The solutions are very stable; the components do not separate, neither coagulate
upon standing.
54
Solutions
Note: Although the components of a solution may not be separated by settling
(sedimentation) or filtration the solute can be separated from the solvent by other
physical processes. For example, a solution of sodium chloride and water can be
separated by distillation or evaporation.
Types of Solutions
Although we usually think of solutions as liquid, they can exist in all three physical
states: solid, liquid, and gas.
i. Gaseous solutions: Gaseous solutions are usually described as gas-gas solutions
where both solute and solvent are gases. The atmosphere is a gaseous solution that
consists of nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, water (in the form of vapor),
methane, and some other minor components. The major component (Nitrogen) is
regarded as a solvent and the other components are regarded as solute. Other
example is natural gas (See unit 6 for details).
ii. Liquid solutions: Solids, liquids and gases dissolve in a liquid solvent to form
liquid solutions. Some examples include carbonated beverage (gas and liquid),
alcoholic beverage (liquid in liquid), and sea water (solid in liquid). Note that in
liquid solutions the solute can be a solid, a liquid, or a gas but the solvent is always
a liquid.
iii. Solid solutions: Many alloys, ceramics, and polymer blends are solid solutions.
Solid solutions have no restriction on the state of the solute but the solvent has to
be solid. Alloys are solid-solid solutions. Dental filling solution is a good example
of liquid (mercury)-solid (silver) solution. Other examples of solid solutions include
wax, and H2 in Pd (gas in solid; used for hydrogen storage).
Project 2.1
Do you know how jewellery gold is made? Form a self-manged group, pay a visit to
the nearby goldsmith, and report your experiences to the class.
Exercise 2.1
1.
Complete the following table using examples that are not previously
mentioned in this textbook.
55
Chemistry Grade 10
Solute
Solvent
State of the
Example
solution
Gas
Gas
Gas
Gas
Liquid
Liquid
Liquid
Liquid
Liquid
Solid
Liquid
Liquid
Solid
solid
solid
Gas
solid
solid
liquid
solid
solid
Mercury in zinc amalgam
2.
Classify each of the following as homogeneous or heterogeneous mixtures
and discuss their composition.
a) glass b) sand c) Cement d) water gas e) producer gas.
C.
Colloids
A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture in which insoluble particles of one or more
substances are suspended uniformly throughout another substance.
Properties of Colloids
A colloid (or colloidal solution) appears to be homogeneous but actually, it is
heterogeneous upon closer inspection.
The size of particles in a colloid is bigger than those in a true solution but smaller
than those in a suspension. It is between 1 nm and 100 nm in diameter.
The particles of a colloid can pass through a filter paper. So, a colloid cannot be
separated by filtration.
There are two phases in colloidal solution. They are known as the dispersed phase
and the dispersion medium. The component present in smaller proportions is the
dispersed phase while the one present in greater proportion is the dispersion
medium.
Colloids are quite stable. The particles do not separate on keeping.
A colloid (or a colloidal solution) scatters a beam of light passing through it
(because its particles are fairly large). As a result, these rays as well as colloidal
particles become visible. The phenomenon in which the particle in a colliod scatter
the beams of light that are directed at them and make the path of the light beam
visible is called Tyndall effect (Figure 2.1). This effect is not observed in true
solutions. You may expect suspensions to display Tyndall effect. But the Tyndall
effect in suspensions disappear as the particles settle down.
56
Solutions
Solution
Colloid*
Figure 2.1 The light beam is not visible as it passes through true solution (left) but it is
clearly visible when it passes through a colloid (right).
Types of Colloids
Depending upon the state of matter present in the dispersed (internal) and dispersion
(external or continuous) medium there are 8 different types of colloidal solutions
(Table 2.1).
Table 2.1 Types of colloids.
Dispersed
Dispersing
Type
Example
Phase
Medium
Liquid
Gas
Aerosol
Fog, clouds, mist
Solid
Gas
Aerosol
Smoke, automobile exhaust
Gas
Liquid
Foam
Shaving cream
Liquid
Liquid
Emulsion
Milk, face cream
Solid
Liquid
Sol
Milk of magnesia, mud
Gas
Solid
Foam
Foam, rubber, sponge, pumice
Liquid
Solid
Gel
Jelly, cheese, butter
Solid
Solid
Solid sol
Colored Gemstone, milky glass
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon
?
and present your conclusions to the class.
1. The sky appears blue at day time but red at sunrise
and sunset. Why?
2. How is rainbow formed?
3. Is soap a substance or a mixture?
Activity 2.2
Coagulation
Coagulation is the process by which the dispersed phase of a colloid is made to
aggregate and thereby separate from the continuous phase. The curdling of milk
when it sours is an example of coagulation.
57
Chemistry Grade 10
Project 2.2
Read on "cloud seeding" technology and understand the mechanism. Then, prepare
for a conversation to argue for or against on the intervention of this technology on the
natural water cycle to produce artificial rain. You may seek information from Internet.
Your teacher will organize the conversation session.
Association of colloids
When molecules or ions that have both a hydrophobic (nonpolar, water hating) and
a hydrophilic (polar, water loving) end are dispersed in water, they associate, or
aggregate, to form colloidal-sized particles called micelles. The hydrophobic end
point inward toward one another and the hydrophilic ends are on the outside of the
micelle facing the water molecules. A colloid in which the dispersed phase consists of
micelles is called an association colloid. Ordinary soap in water provides an example
of an association colloid. Soap consists of compounds such as sodium stearate,
C H 35 COONa. The stearate ion has a long hydrocarbon end that is hydrophobic
(because it is nonpolar) and a carboxyl group (COO-) at the other end that is
hydrophilic (because it is ionic).
o
Na⁺
Stearate
In water solution, the stearate ions associate into micelles in which the hydrocarbon
end point inward toward one another and away from the water, and ionic carboxyl
groups are on the outside of the micelle facing the water (Figure 2.2). The cleansing
action of soap occurs because oil and grease can be absorbed into the hydrophobic
center of the soap micelles and washed away.
Soap molecules
Soap molecules
Dirt particles
Na⁺
(oil or Grease)
Na⁺
Na+
Na⁺
Na,
Na⁺
Na⁺
Na⁺
Na+
Na+
Water
Na
Na⁺
Na
Na+
Na+
Na⁺
(a) Soap micelle
(a) Soap micelle entraps
the dirt particle
Cleansing action of soap
Figure 2.2 The cleansing action of soap. The soap molecule is represented by a polar
head and zigzag hydrocarbon tail. An oily spot can be removed by soap because
58
Solutions
the nonpolar tail dissolves in the oil, and the entire system becomes soluble in water
because the exterior portion is now ionic..
Project 2.3
Make your own hair gel using locally available materials. You may be assisted with
internet. Write all the procedures you followed including the name of the materials,
the source, the amount and the processing procedures and steps. You may consider
a combination of gelatin or flaxeed with some kind of essential oil. For the essential
oil, ethanol ("areki") extracts from lavender, rosemary, lomengrass, thyme, or tea tree
can be used.
Exercise 2.2
1. Explain the cleansing action of soap and detergents.
2. Discuss the difference between
a. suspension and colloid
d. compound and homogeneous
b. solution and colloid
mixtures
C. pure substance and mixtures
3. When a corona virus infected patient coughs or sneezes, fine droplets of
respiratory fluid containing the viral particles get dispersed in the atmosphere
as a colloidal particle called
a. emulsion
C. fog
b. aerosol
d. smoke (choose correct answer)
4. Classify each of the following as suspension, solution, or colloid using a vein diagram.
a. Paint
f. sea water
k. juice
b. Yogurt
g. blood
I. vinegar
C. toothpaste
h. ruby
d. honey
i. urine
e. soda water
i. soap suds
5.
Colloidal sulphur particles are negatively charged with thiosulphate ions,
S2O3², and other ions on the surface of the sulphur. Indicate which of the
following would be most effective in coagulating colloidal sulphur, NaCl,
MgCl₂, or AICI₃.
2.2 The Solution Process
At the end of this section students will be able to explain how the "like dissolves like"
rule depends on inter-particle forces of interactions.
A solution is formed when the solute particles are completely dissolved in the solvent.
59
Chemistry Grade 10
We have noted previously that gases mix freely. But the formation of liquid and solid
solutions requires overcoming the solute-solute and solvent-solvent inter-particle forces
of attraction before the mixing step. Because the solute as well as the solvent particles
are held to each other by intermolecular forces in liquid and solid state. The solution
process thus involves three basic steps;
i.
breaking up the solute-solute inter-particle forces
ii.
breaking up the solvent-solvent inter-particles forces
iii.
formation of solute-solvent interaction.
Thus, the extent of dissolution of a solute in a solvent is governed by intermolecular
forces. The energy change associated with the dissolution process and entropy (the
increase in disorder) that result when molecules of the solute and solvent mix to form
a solution are the forces driving the solution process.
Note that: the formation of a solution from a solute and a solvent is a physical process,
not a chemical change.
2.2.1 Liquid Solutions and Inter-particle Forces of Attractions
When one substance (the solute) dissolves in another (the solvent), particles of the
solute disperse throughout the solvent. The solute particles occupy positions that are
normally taken by solvent molecules.
The ease with which a solute particle replaces a solvent molecule depends on the
relative strengths of inter-particle forces in the three types of interactions (Figure 2.3):
solute-solute interaction
solvent-solvent interaction
solute- solvent interaction
Expanded solute
Solute
Solvent
Expanded Solvent
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 3
Solution
Figure 2.3 Amolecular view of the solution process, portraye as taking place in three steps.
Solutes dissolve in a solvent when the inter-particle forces of interaction between
solute molecules and solvent molecules are replaced by solute-solvent interactions.
The useful rule-of-thumb "like dissolves like" says that substances with similar types of
intermolecular forces dissolve in each other. That means, when the inter-particle forces
within the solute are similar to those within the solvent, the forces replace each other
and a solution forms. Thus, by knowing the forces, we can often predict whether a
60
Solutions
solute will dissolve in a solvent.
Thus, ionic compounds like NaCl (that are extremely polar) and polar compounds like
ethanol (C₂H₅OH) dissolve in polar solvents (e.g. H₂O) and nonpolar compounds and
elements (e.g. hexane, CCI₄, 12, oil) dissolve in nonpolar solvents like hexane (C₆H₁₄),
carbon tetrachloride (CCI₄), and benzene.
How can we Predict the Likeness of a Substance?
One useful classification of materials is polarity. As you read about covalent and ionic
compounds in Grade 9, you learned that ionic compounds have the highest polarity
forming full cations and anions within each formula unit as electrons are transferred
from one atom to another. You also learned that a covalent bond is polar when the
bonded atoms have different electronegativities and, thus, share the bonding electrons
unequally. In diatomic molecules, such as HF, there is only one bond that is polar and
the molecule is also polar. In larger molecules, molecular polarity is determined by the
net dipole moment (imbalance of charge over the molecule); which in turn depends on
both shape and bond polarity. Dipole moment (µ) is a measure of molecular polarity,
given in the unit debye (D) derived from SI units of charge (coulomb, C) and length
(m): 1 D = 3.34 X 10⁻³⁰ C.m.
Substances with zero or low electronegativity difference in between the bonding
atoms and having zero net dipole moment such as H2, O₂, N₂, CH₄, CCI₄ are nonpolar
whereas H₂O, NH3, CH₃OH, NO, CO, HCI, H₂S, PH₃, etc. having high electronegativity
difference in between the bonding atoms and having net dipole moment are polar
compounds. See illustrations below where the dipole moments cancels out in carbon
dioxide (CO₂) but add-up to give a net dipole in water molecule (H₂O). Note that
the presence of polar bonds does not always result in a polar molecule; we must also
consider shape and the atoms surrounding the central atom.
net dipole
(a) CO2
C
(b) H2O
Adding these vectors together cancels
them out. Therefore, CO2 is non-polar.
H
H
The horizontal components of the two dipoles
cancels out each other. But the vertical
components add-up to give a net dipole
moment in H2O molecules.
Inter-particle/Intermolecular Forces
You studied in grade 9 that atoms in a molecule (e.g. CI₂, H2O, NH3, etc) are held
together by covalent bond/s. The covalent bonds are called intramolecular forces-
force within a molecule. You are also familiar with the three states of matter-solid,
liquid and gas. The gaseous state is characterized by absence of interparticle forces
and hence the molecules of a gas are free to move independent of the other molecules.
61
Chemistry Grade 10
However, in liquids and solids, molecules are held together by intermolecular forces
between molecules. Intermolecular forces are also called noncovalent interactions.
They are attractive or repulsive forces between neighboring molecules.
These forces include:
dipole-dipole interaction
dipole-induced dipole interaction
dispersion forces or London forces
ion-dipole interaction
ion-induced dipole
hydrogen bonding
The relative strengths of these forces in order of weakest to strongest is:
Dispersion forces < dipole-induced dipole < dipole-dipole < H - bonding < ion dipole bond
Note: Dipole-dipole, dipole-induced dipole, and dispersion forces make up what
chemists commonly refer to as van der Waals forces, after the Dutch physicist Johannes
van der Waals. lons and dipoles are attracted to one another by electrostatic forces
called ion-dipole forces, that are not van der Waals forces. Hydrogen bonding is a
particularly strong type of dipole-dipole interaction. These forces play a central role
in the formation of solutions. So let's have a brief look at each of them:
Dipole-Dipole Forces
Dipole-dipole forces occur between polar molecules as a result of electrostatic
interactions among dipoles (Figure 2.4(a)). e.g. Solubility of HBr in H₂O.
Dipole-induced Dipole Force
Arise when a polar molecule distorts the electron cloud of a nonpolar molecule (Figure
2.4(b)). The solubility in water of atmospheric O₂, N2, and noble gases, while limited,
is due in part to these forces. Paint thinners and grease solvents also use them.
(a)
(b)
δ-
δ-
δ+
δ-
δ+
δ-
δ+
far apart
δ-
δ+
δ-
δ+
δ+
nonpolar
Polar molecule
molecule
δ-
δ+
δ-
δ+
δ-
δ+
closer
to
δ
δ+
δ-
dipole
induced dipole
Figure 2.4 Dipole-dipole (a) and dipole-induced dipole (b) forces of attraction
between polar and nonpolar molecules.
62
Solutions
Dispersion Forces (London forces)
Dispersion forces occur between all neighboring molecules and arise because the
electron distribution within molecules is constantly changing. This type of force is
also called instantaneous dipole-induced dipole force. It is common to all types of
molecules-polar as well as nonpolar. But it is more important to account for properties
of nonpolar molecules.
Ion-Dipole Forces
lon-dipole forces are the
δ+
δ-
-
principal force involved when an
ionic compound dissolves in water
Polar molecule
Anion
(Figure 2.5). e.g. NaCl dissolves
in H2O via ion-dipole interaction.
+
δ-
δ+
Cation
Polar molecule
Figure 2.5 Two types of ion-dipole interaction
lon-induced dipole forces, one
lon
Nonpolar molecule
type of charge-induced dipole
A
+
force, rely on polarizability.
They arise when an ion's charge
δ-
δ⁺
distorts the electron cloud of
B
+
a nearby nonpolar molecule
(Figure 2.6). This type of force
initiates the binding of the Fe²⁺
Figure 2.6 lon-induced dipole interactions. (A)
ion in hemoglobin to an O2
when the ion and the nonpolar molecules are
molecule entering a red blood
far apart, (B) when the ion and the nonpolar
cell.
molecule get closer-the nonpolar molecule gets
polarized.
The Hydrogen Bond
Definition: The hydrogen bond is an attractive interaction between a hydrogen bonded
to an electronegative O, N, or F atom in one molecule and an unshared electron pair
on O, N, or F atoms of another molecule, Figure 2.7.
Hydrogen bond
in acetic acid
Hydrogen bond
in water
δ-
Hydrogen bond
δ+
in ammonia
δ
O.
H
δ+
H
CH₃
δ+
H
CH₃
N:
H
N
H
H
H
O
H
:O:
H
""H
H
H
Hydrogen bond
in acetic acid
Figure 2.7 Hydrogen bonding in water, acetic acid, and ammonia. Solid lines represent
covalent bonds, and dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds.
63
Chemistry Grade 10
2.2.2 Solutions of lonic Solids in Water
Many ionic compounds are soluble (at least 1 g dissolves in 100 mL water) in water;
however, not all ionic compounds are soluble. Chemists refer to substances as soluble,
slightly soluble, or insoluble in a qualitative sense. For instance, KCI is readily soluble
in water whereas AgCl is insoluble. Ca(OH)₂ is slightly soluble. lonic compounds that
are soluble in water exist in their ionic state as hydrated cations and anions within the
solution (See Figure 2.8).
A.
B.
C.
δ-
O
6-
8
H
H
δ+
O
CI
dipole-ion interaction
CI
CI
CI
H
H
Na
Na
Na
Na
CI
CI
CI
H
H
8+
CI
CI
CI
O
Na
Na
Na
Na
H
H
CI
o
+5
CI
CI
CI
H
H
Na
0
Na
Na
Na
Na
Na
H
CI
CI
CI
Na
Na
Na
Na
δ-
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
H
H
CI
Na
Na
Na
Na
Na
CI
CI
H
δ-
CI
CI
O
Na
Na
Na
Na
CI
H
H
CI
CI
CI
CI
Na
Na
Na
Na
CI
Na
Na
CI
CI
CI
Na
Na
Na
Na
H
6-
H
$H
H
Na
+
NaCl and water mixture
NaCl crystal
Na⁺ and CI ions sorrounded by water molecules
Figure 2.8 Hydration of Na⁺ and CIT ions as NaCl dissolves in water.
2.2.3 The Solubility Rules for lonic Solids
At the end of this section students will be able to predict relative solubilities.
Solubility is defined as the maximum amount of a substance that can be dissolved in
a given volume (usually 100 mL) of solvent at a given temperature. The solubility rules
for common ionic compounds are listed below.
i.
All common salts of the Group 1A elements (such as Na⁺, K⁺, Li⁺) and ammonium,
NH₄⁺, are soluble
ii. All common salts containing acetate (CH₃COO⁺), or nitrate (NO₃⁺), and most
perchlorates (CIO ₄) are soluble
iii. All common chlorides (CI⁻), bromides (Br⁻), and iodides (I) are soluble, except those
of Ag⁺, Pb²⁺, Cu²⁺, and Hg₂²⁺. All common fluorides (F⁻) are soluble, except those
of Pb²⁺ and Group 2A.
iv. Most hydroxide salts are only slightly soluble. Hydroxides of GI elements are
soluble. Hydroxides of GII elements (Ca, Sr, and Ba) are slightly soluble. Hydroxide
salts of transition metals and AI³⁺ are insoluble. Thus, Fe(OH)₃, AI(OH)₃, are not
soluble.
v. All compounds containing sulfate (SO₄²⁻) are soluble, except those of barium (Ba),
64
Solutions
strontium (Sr), lead (Pb), calcium (Ca), silver (Ag), and mercury (Hg)
vi. Except for those compounds following rule 1, compounds containing carbonate
(CO₃²⁻), sulfides (S²⁻), oxides (O²⁻), and phosphates (PO₄³⁻) are insoluble.
Form a group, discuss
the following activity and
present your conclusions to
the class. Fluoride (F⁻) has a
significant alleviating effect
against dental caries if the
concentration is approximately
1 mg/l. However, continuing
consumption of higher
Dental fluorosis
concentrations (>1.5 mg/I)
can cause dental fluorosis and
in extreme cases even skeletal
fluorosis.
One of the methods used
for the removal of excess
fluoride from drinking water is
precipitation by employing lime
?
[quicklime (CaO) or slacked
lime (Ca(OH)₂)] followed by
Skeletal fluorosis
sedimentation and/or filtration.
Discuss how lime removes
fluorides from water.
Activity 2.3
The dissolution of molecular solids also follows the same rule. Molecular
solids are made up of atoms or molecules held together by London or
dispersion forces, dipole-dipole forces, or hydrogen bonds. Examples of
molecular solids include ice, solid carbon dioxide, sucrose, sulfur, solid
hydrocarbons (e.g. octadecane, C₁₈H₃₈), etc. Polar molecular solids such
as ice, glucose, and sucrose dissolve in polar solvents like water. Nonpolar
molecular solids such as sulfur, solid hydrocarbons, etc dissolve in nonpolar
solvents like benzene, hexane, etc.
2.2.4 Solution of Liquids in Liquids
In addition to the dissolution of ionic compounds in water, solutions can also be made
by mixing two compatible liquids. The liquid in the lower concentration is termed as
solute, and the one in higher concentration is the solvent. For example, grain alcohol
(CH₃CH₂OH) is a polar covalent molecule that can mix with water. When two similar
liquids (in terms of polarity) are placed together and are able to mix into a solution,
65
Chemistry Grade 10
they are said to be miscible. Liquids that do not share similar characteristics and
cannot mix together, on the other hand, are termed immiscible. For example, oil and
water are immiscible because oil is nonpolar whereas water is polar.
Exercise 2.3
1. Which of the following exists predominantly in the water (H₂O) molecule?
a. van der Waal's force
C. hydrogen bond
b. ion-dipole force
d. none
2. Which of the following has the highest induced dipole interactions in its
molecules?
a. He
C. Ne
b. Ar
d. Kr
3. Oxygen (O) and sulphur (S) are in the same group in the periodic table.
They form compounds with hydrogen, H2O and H2S. However, H2O is a liquid
whereas H2S is a gas at a room temperature. Explain.
4. Classify each of the following as soluble or insoluble in water:
a. BaCO₃
g. Ca₃(PO₄)₂
b. AICI₃
h. PbCl₂
C. MgO
i. AgNO₃
d. AI(OH)₃
i. (NH₄)NO₃
e. KI
k. NH₄CI
f. AI₂(SO₄)₃
5. Classify each of the following pairs as miscible or immiscible:
a. Water and grain alcohol
d. Water and honey
b. "Tej" and water
e. Water and petrol
C. Water and oil
f. Gasoline and "naphtha"
6. What type (s) of intermolecular (interparticle) forces exist when the following
pairs interact:
a. HBr and H2S b. Cl2 and CBr₄
C. I2 and NO₃; d. NH3 and H₈(Benzene)
2.2.5 The Rate of Dissolution
At the end of this section students will be able to define rate of dissolution
Dissolution is defined as the process through which a solute dissolves in a solvent (e.g.
water) to produce a solution. How fast does a solute dissolve in a given solvent? What
are the major factors that affect the rate of dissolution? The rate of dissolution is the
speed with which a solute dissolves in a solvent to form a solution.. This largely depends
upon two factors-the inter-particle forces discussed so far and, to a lesser extent on
conditions such as the surface area of the solid solute, and the temperature and the
66
Solutions
pressure (for gaseous solutes) of the system. When the solvent-solute interactions are
stronger than those between solute-solute and solvent-solvent particles, the dissolution
process becomes faster. A good example is dissolution of ethanol (alcohol) in water.
The increasing surface area of the solute will increase the rate of dissolution because it
increases the number of solute particles in contact with the solvent. Stirring or agitation
of the mixture can also increase rate of dissolution.
2.2.6 Energy Changes in Solution Process
At the end of this section students will be able to
define heat of solution, solvation energy and hydration energy;
apply the concept of heat of solution to the solution of ammonium nitrate crystal;
apply the concept of heat of solution to the solution of sodium hydroxide crystal;
explain how heat of solution is influenced by the inter particle interaction forces.
For instance, if you mix ammonium chloride in water in a flask, the flask gets cold.
But when sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is mixed in water, the flask gets hot. Why? The
reason is attributed to the energy changes that accompany the dissolution process.
As discussed earlier, the solution process involves three steps: breaking solute-solute
interaction, breaking solvent-solvent interaction, and forming solute-solvent interactions
or the mixing step. When the energy released during the third step in solution process,
i.e. the mixing step is larger than the energy required to break the solute-solute and
solvent-solvent forces, energy is released-the process is exothermic. This energy heats
up the surrounding and that is why the flask gets hot. On the contrary, if the energy
released in the mixing step is less than the energy required to break the solute-solute
and solvent-solvent forces, the dissolution process absorbs energy from the surrounding
and the surrounding (the flask) gets cold-the dissolution process is endothermic. The
energy involved in the mixing step is called solvation energy. Solvation refers to the
process of attraction and association of molecules of a solute and a solvent. Solvation
energy is the energy released when solute molecules are solvated by solvent molecules.
Solvation in water is called hydration. Thus, hydration energy is the energy released
when solute molecules or ions are solvated by water molecules.
The heat of solution or enthalpy of solution is defined as the amount of heat released or
absorbed during the dissolution process and can be calculated using the equation
q = m x Cg x AT
Eq 2.1
Where q is the amount of energy released or absorbed in Joules (J), m is mass of
the solution, T is the temperature change (T₁-Tₜ), Cg is the specific heat of solution
(J/g.°C) (can be assumed to be the same as that of water, 4.184 J/g.°C for dilute
solutions). The unit of heat of solution is Joule or kJ. Heat (Enthalpy) of solution can
either be positive (endothermic) or negative (exothermic) depending on the observed
temperature change.
67
Chemistry Grade 10
The molar heat of solution (AHₛₒIₙ) of a substance is the heat absorbed or released
when one mole of the substance is dissolved in water at constant pressure:
ДН
q
=
Eq 2.2
solution
the number of moles of solute
The enthalpy changes are expressed in kJ/mol for a reaction taking place at standard
conditions (a temperature of 298.15 K and a pressure 1 atm).
Example 2.1: When 5.19 g of NaCO₃ was dissolved in 75.0 g of water, the
temperature of the water rose by 3.8°C. Calculate the heat of solution and the
molar heat of solution. Take c of the solution as 3.820 J/g.°C and molar mass of
NaCO₃ as 105.99 g/mol.
Given
Required
Solution
Mass solution = mass solute + mass solvent
q and HₛₒI
q = mcAT = 80.19 g X
= 5.19 g + 75.0 g = 80.19 g
3.820 J/g.°C X (-3.80°C)
An increase of temperature means
= -1164.0 Joules
Tf > Ti. Thus,
H sol = q/n
T = Ti - Tf = -3.80°C
=-1164.0 J/0.0489 moles
Number of moles of solute = given
= -23,803.70 J/mole
mass divided by molar mass
= 5.19 g/105.99 g/mol
Exothermic
= 0.0489 mole
To understand the enthalpy changes involved during the dissolution, let's consider the
hypothetical three-step process happening between two substances: solute and solvent.
The three processes are solute-solute, solvent-solvent, and solute-solvent interactions
each accompanied by an enthalpy change:
Step 1: Solute particles separate from each other. This step involves overcoming
intermolecular attractions, so it is endothermic.
Solute (aggregated) + Heat
Solute (separated)
H solute >0
Step 2: Solvent particles separate from each other. This step also involves overcoming
attractions, so it is endothermic, too.
Solvent (aggregated) + Heat
Solvent (separated)
solvent >0
Step 3: Solute and solvent particles mix and form a solution. The different particles
attract each other and come together, so this step is exothermic:
Solute (separated) + Solvent (separated)
Solution + Heat
mix <0
We combine the three individual enthalpy changes to find the enthalpy of solution
68
Solutions
(AHsoln), the total enthalpy change that occurs when solute and solvent form a solution:
=
H
+
+
soln
solute
solvent
Hmix
Endothermic and Exothermic Dissolution Processes
Depending on the relative magnitude of H solute + solvent & mix' the H soln can be
zero (ideal solution), negative (exothermic) or positive (endothermic).
Ideal Solutions (ДН soln = H solute + solvent + mix = 0)
When the strengths of the intermolecular forces of attraction in solute-solute and
solvent-solvent are similar to solute-solvent the solution is formed with no accompanying
energy change. Such a solution is called an ideal solution. A mixture of ideal gases
(or gases such as helium and argon, which closely approach ideal behavior) is an
example of an ideal solution, since the entities comprising these gases experience no
significant intermolecular attractions. Ideal solutions may also form when structurally
similar liquids are mixed. For example, mixtures of the alcohols - methanol (CH₃OH)
and ethanol (C₂H₅OH) form ideal solutions, as do mixtures of the hydrocarbons
pentane, C₅H₁₂, and hexane, C₆H₁₄·
Enthalpy of Hydration (lonic Solids in Water)
Therefore, H soln = solute + H solvent + H mix lat hydr
Where ДН lat' Lattice energy, is the energy required to break up the ions apart from
crystal lattice. ДН solv solvation energy, is the energy released or absorbed when solute
particles are completely surrounded by solvent molecules. When water is used as the
solvent, we use the term hydration energy, Hyd' rather than the more general term
solvation energy. Hydration is usually exothermic, so heat is released when water
molecules completely surround solute particles.
How does Lattice Energy affect the Solubility of lonic Solids?
Breaking up the lattice is an endothermic process. Hydration of ions favors the
dissolution of an ionic solid in water. Thus, Lattice energy works against the solution
process (Figure 2.9), so an ionic solid with relatively large lattice energy is usually
insoluble.
Hydration energy
+
Lattice energy
Figure 2.9 The effects of lattice energy and hydration energy on the solution process
of ionic solids.
69
Chemistry Grade 10
Lattice energies depend on the charge on the ions and also the distance between
the centers of the neighboring positive and negative ions. As the magnitude of the
charge on the ions increases the lattice energy also increases. For this reason, you can
expect substances with single charged ions to be more comparatively soluble, and
those with multiple charged ions to be less soluble in water. Lattice energy is inversely
proportional to the inter-particle distance between the centers of the two ions. Thus,
CsCI has less lattice energy than NaCl.
Examples of Endothermic and Exothermic Processes
When sodium hydroxide is dissolved in water, the solution becomes hot (the solution
process is exothermic). On the other hand, when ammonium nitrate is dissolved in water,
the solution becomes very cold (the solution process is endothermic). This cooling effect
from the dissolving of ammonium nitrate in water is exploited in instant cold packs
used in hospitals. An instant cold pack consists of a bag of NH₄NO₃ crystals inside a
bag of water (Figure 2.10). When the inner bag is broken, NH₄NO₃ dissolves in the
water. Heat is absorbed, so the bag feels cold. Hot packs, by contrast, containing
either CaCl₂ or MgSO₄, produce heat when the salts dissolve in water (Figure 2.10).
INSTANT HOT COMPRESS
Disposable Squeeze Bag
INSTANT
SINGLE USE ONLY
COLD PACK
INSTRUCTIONS:
DIRECTION FOR USE:
1. Shake
2. Locate inner
3. Shake
4. Wrap in
contents to pouch.
briefly
soft cloth
1. Locate
2. Shake content
3.wrap with a light towel
bottom of
squeeze firmly
to mix
and apply
inner liquid
breifly
or cloth, then apply to
bag
to rupture inner
contents
pack.squeeze
injured area.
fluid pouch
firmly to rupture
WARNING: AVOID DIRECT SKIN CONTACT
Figure 2.10 The instant cold compress and hot compresses
Note: Enthalpy of solution is only one part of the driving force in the formation of
solutions; the other part is the entropy of solution. You will learn about entropy at
higher levels.
Enthalpy (heat) of solution can be determined in the laboratory by measuring the
temperature change of the solvent when solute is added. A calorimeter is a device
used to measure the amount of heat involved in a chemical or physical process.
70
Solutions
Discuss the following questions and present finding to
the class
1. Discuss how people traditionally alleviate
inflammation (tenderness), and pains caused by
?
muscle or joint damage in relation to the medical
uses of cold packs and hot packs.
2. The process of dissolution is always accompanied
by energy change. (True/False).
Activity 2.4
Exercise 2.4
1. Which one of the following pairs of ions has greater enthalpy of hydration?
i. Na⁺ or Cs⁺?
ii. Mg²⁺ or Cs⁺?
iii. F- or Cl⁻? Explain.
2. A student added 4.00 g of NaOH(s) to 100 g of water in a polystyrene foam
cup. The temperature of the water rose by 10.0°C. Assuming the polystyrene
foam cup is well insulated and the specific heat capacity of water is 4.18
J/°C.g, determine the molar enthalpy of solution of sodium hydroxide in kJ
mol⁻¹. Answer: ДН soln = -43.5 kJ mol-¹, verify this!
3. The molar heat of solution, H soln of NaOH is -445.1 kJ/mol. In a certain
experiment, 5.00 g of NaOH is completely dissolved in 1.000 L of water at
20.0°C in a foam cup calorimeter. Assuming no heat loss, calculate the final
temperature of the water. Answer: Tf = 33.2°C, verify this!
71
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 2.1
Investigation of Heat of Solution
Objective: To investigate the heat of solution of calcium chloride and ammonium
nitrate.
Apparatus: Erlenmeyer flask, thermometer, cork.
Chemicals: Calcium chloride, ammonium nitrate and water.
Procedure:
1. Weigh out accurately about 4 g of calcium chloride in a weighing boat (or
weighing paper) and record the mass on your results sheet.
2. Using graduated cylinder, accurately measure 40 mL of distilled water;
record your measurement to one decimal place on your results sheet.
3. Pour the water into an Erlenmeyer flask and stopper it with a cork as shown
in Figure 2.11.
Thermometer
Cork
Insulated vessel
Reaction mixture
Figure 2.11 Apparatus to measure the heat of solution.
4. Insert a thermometer through a hole in the cork and record initial temperature,
again recording your results to one decimal place in the table below.
5. Remove the cork along with the thermometer and quickly transfer the weight
calcium chloride and replace the cork; not the thermometer.
6. Insert the stirrer and stir to dissolve the salt.
7. Insert the thermometer and record the final temperature of the solution
(highest or lowest temperature attained) in the table
72
Solutions
Chemical
Initial temperature
Maximum
Heat of solution
of the solvent
temperature of the
solution
CaCl₂
NH4NO3
8. Repeat the procedure using ammonium nitrate.
9. Calculate the total amount of heat in Joules (J) absorbed or liberated.
10. Calculate the amount of heat in Joules (J) absorbed or liberated per mole of
salt and determine whether the process is endothermic or exothermic.
Insulate the vessel, if you can, or assume the heat exchange with surrounding
negligible. Assume that the specific heat of the solution is the same as the
specific heat of water (4.184 J/g.°C) and molar mass of calcium chloride
110.98 g/mol.
Project 2.4
Your teacher will arrange a visit to nearby hospital or other health center. Your role is
to contact the professionals on the usage of instant cold packs and instant hot packs.
Ask them to get one each, discuss the usage, working principle, and the composition.
Write the dissolution equation in each case. Report your answers to the class
2.3 Solubility as an Equilibrium Process
At the end of this section students will be able to
define solubility;
describe the distinctions among unsaturated, saturated and supersaturated
solutions;
prepare unsaturated and saturated solutions of sodium sulphate;
prepare supersaturated solution of sodium thiosulphate;
explain the equilibrium nature of saturated solution.
We have already defined solubility as the maximum amount of a substance that can
be dissolved in a given volume (usually 100 mL) of solvent at a given temperature.
When an ionic solid dissolves, ions leave the solid and enter the solvent. Suppose that
you have a beaker of water to which you add some salt (Figure 2.12) and stir the
mixture until the NaCl dissolves. You keep adding more and more salt and continue
stirring. Eventually, you reach a point where no more of the salt will dissolve no matter
how long or how vigorously you stir it. Why? At the molecular level, we know that action
of the water causes the individual ions to break apart from the salt crystal and enter
the solution, where they remain hydrated by the water molecules. What also happens
73
Chemistry Grade 10
is that some of the dissolved ions collide back again with the undissolved solute and
crystallize. Recrystallization is the process of dissolved solute returning to the solid
state. At some point the rate at which the solid salt is dissolving becomes equal to the
rate at which the dissolved solute is recrystallizing. When that point is reached, the
total amount of dissolved salt remains unchanged-equilibrium is established. Solution
equilibrium is the physical state described by the opposing processes of dissolution
and recrystallization occurring at the same rate.
Dissolution
Solid (solute)
Dissolved ions
Crystallization
a
b
c
d
Figure 2.12 Illustrates the formation of saturated solution. (a) excess solid added to a
solvent (b) The solute starts to dissolve (c) The solute continues to dissolve (d) No more
solute is dissolving indicating that the process has reached a dynamic equilibrium
where the rate of dissolution is equal to the rate of crystallization.
2.3.1 Unsaturated, Saturated, and Supersaturated Solutions
A saturated solution is a solution that is at equilibrium and contains the maximum
amount of dissolved solute at a given temperature in the presence of undissolved
solute. Therefore, if you filter off the solution and add more solute, it doesn't dissolve.
A simple analogy is "when you have eaten your feel, you are saturated!"
Unsaturated solution is the solution that has not reached its maximum solubility. This
means that more solute could still be added to the solution and dissolving would still
occur.
Supersaturated solutions are solutions that have dissolved solute beyond the normal
saturation point. Usually a condition such as increased temperature or pressure is
required to create a supersaturated solution. For example, sodium acetate has a very
high solubility at 273 K. When cooled, such a solution stays dissolved in what is called
a meta-stable state. However, when a seeding crystal is added to the solution, the
extra solute will rapidly solidify, leaving a saturated solution (Figure 2.13). During the
crystallization process, heat is evolved, and the solution becomes warm. Common hand
warmers use this chemical process to generate heat.
74
Solutions
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.13 (a) a hot supersaturated solution (formed at elevated temperature) (b) the
scenario when the supersaturated solution is cooled (c) cold supersaturated solution
after seeding.
Experiment 2.2
Preparation of Unsaturated, Saturated and Supersaturate Solutions
Objectives: To prepare unsaturated, saturated and supersaturate solutions
Materials required: 100 g of Na₂S₂O₃, sodium thiosulfate, beaker, balance, filter
paper, spatula, stirring rod
Procedure:
1. Pour 100 mL water in a beaker.
2. Add some crystal (about 5 g) of Na₂S₂O₃ into the water using spatula and stir
until it dissolves.
a) What do you call this type of solution?
3. Continue adding more and more Na₂S₂O₃ while stirring to dissolve.
b) What do you observe after addition of large (about 70 g) amount of
solute?
c) Why does the excess solute remains undissolved?
4. Filter the undissolved solute. Collect the filtrate or the solution.
d) What is the name of such a solution?
5. Add spatula-full more solute to the filtrate while heating the mixture and stir.
e) Does the additional solute dissolve in absence of heating? What about
while heating?
f) What is the name of such a solution?
Prepare your report and discuss your findings with rest of the class.
75
Chemistry Grade 10
Discuss the following questions in group and present
your conclusions to the class.
1. Discuss the differences among saturated,
unsaturated, and supersaturated solutions in
relation to your life experiences.
2. Consider three beakers A, B, and C containing
100 mL each of unsaturated, saturated, and
supersaturated solutions of a salt. What would
?
happen if a few crystals of the salt is added to
each? Which solution would be able to dissolve,
which not? In which case would you expect even
more than added amount of solid to precipitate?
Activity 2.5
2.3.2 Factors Affecting Solubility of Substances
At the end of this section students will be able to
describe the factors that affect solubility of substances;
investigate the effect of temperature on solubility of sodium sulphate;
conduct an experiment to determine solubility of table salt and sugar.
Solubility of a substance in a given solvent depends on
inter-particle forces,
temperature, and
pressure (for gases only).
A. Effect of Temperature on Solubility of Solids
You know that more sugar dissolves in hot tea than in cold tea. Generally, the solubility
of most of solid solutes increases with temperature. For instance, the solubility of
sodium sulfate, Na₂SO₄, rises more than tenfold when the temperature rises from 0°C
to 32.4°C, where it reaches a maximum of 49.7 g Na₂SO₄ per 100 g water. The
solubility of NaCl is 36 g/100 mL of water at 25°C and 39 g/100 mL of water at
100°C.
76
Solutions
Experiment 2.3
Determination of the Solubility of NaCl
Objective: To determine the solubility of NaCl
Apparatus: Beaker, evaporating dish, measuring cylinder, glass rod, filter paper,
analytical balance, and Bunsen burner.
Chemicals: Sodium chloride and water.
Procedure:
1. Take an evaporating dish and weigh it.
2. Take 100 mL of water in a beaker and add about 20 g of sodium chloride
to it. Stir the solution vigorously with a glass rod, add more sodium chloride
while stirring and continue this process until undissolved sodium chloride is left
in the beaker.
3. Take 50 mL of the supernatant saturated solution (assume that 50 mL of
solution is equal to 50 mL of the solvent) and transfer it to an evaporating
dish.
4. Heat the solution in the evaporating dish as shown in the Figure, till all the
water has evaporated and dry sodium chloride is left in the evaporating dish.
5. Cool the evaporating dish containing dry sodium chloride to room temperature
and weigh it again.
Observations and analysis:
1. Volume of the NaCl solution
2. Weight of the empty evaporating
dish
3. Weight of the evaporating dish +
NaCl collected after evaporating
the solvent
4. Calculate the solubility of NaCl in
water and express the results in
grams of NaCI/100 g of water
(assume that 100 mL of water =
100 g of water).
5. Repeat the experiment with sugar.
B. Effect of Temperature on Solubility of Gases
The solubility of gases in liquids decreases with increasing temperature. The molecules
in the gaseous state are so far apart because attractive intermolecular interactions in
77
Chemistry Grade 10
the gas phase are essentially zero for most substances. When a gas dissolves, it does
so because its molecules interact with solvent molecules. Heat is released when these
new attractive forces form. Thus, if external heat is added to the system, it breaks
the attractive forces between the gas and the solvent molecules and decreases the
solubility of the gas.
Perform the following activities in group and present
your conclusions to the class.
(Effect of climate change and pollution on environment)
a. Discuss the effect of climate change (rise in
temperature of the environment) on aquatic life.
b. As nations shift from agriculture-led to industry-
led economy, environmental pollution becomes a
serious concern. Water bodies, for instance, can be
polluted by chemicals released to the environment
by industries along with wastes. Discuss how pollution
of water bodies by chemicals can affect aquatic
?
life such as fish and its productivity. From this lesson,
what precautions would you make when disposing
wastes of personal hygiene materials such as
sanitary pads (Modess) or hair gel containers and
Activity 2.6
other plastic materials?
C. Effect of Pressure on Solubility of Gases: Henry's Law
At the end of this section students will be able to
state Henry's law
use Henry's law to calculate concentration of gaseous solute in a solution.
1. Do you know why (a)
Carbonated beverages such
as coke, Pepsi, fizzes (sparkles,
Figure to the right) when the
cap is removed (b) Multicellular
organisms need hemoglobin
in red blood cells to bind and
?
carry O2 to support the energy
needs. Why this mechanism of
replenishing O2 in biological
fluid is necessary? What would
Activity 2.7
happen if hemoglobin is absent?
78
Solutions
Pressure has virtually no effect on the solubility of solids or liquids in liquid solvents
because they are incompressible. In contrast, the solubility of gases increases as the
partial pressure of the gas above a solution increases (Henry's Law). As you can see
in Figure 2.14, more and more gaseous particles enter the solution when the pressure
is increased from P1 to P₂ and then P3.
P1
P2
P3
Gas above
liquid
Dissolved
gas
a) Dynamic equilibrium
b) Pgas increased c)A new dynamic equilibrium at P3
Figure 2.14 A model depicting why the solubility of a gas increases as the partial
pressure increases at constant temperature.
Henry's Law: Relating Pressure to the Solubility of a Gas in a Liquid
The quantitative relationship between pressure and the solubility of a gas is described
quantitatively by Henry's law, which is named for its discoverer, the English chemist,
William Henry (1775 - 1836):
CαP or C = kP
where C is the concentration of dissolved gas at equilibrium, P is the partial pressure
of the gas, and k is the Henry's law constant, which must be determined experimentally
for each combination of gas, solvent, and temperature. Although the gas concentration
may be expressed in any convenient units, we will use molarity here. The units of the
Henry's law constant are therefore mol/(L.atm) = M/atm.
The partial pressure of a gas can be expressed as concentration by writing Henry's
Law as
P = k
Eg 2.3
Since partial pressure and concentration are directly proportional, if the partial pressure
of a gas changes while the temperature remains constant, the new concentration of
the gas within the liquid can be easily calculated using the following equation:
P1 = C2 P2
Eg 2.4
Where C₁ and P₁ are the concentration and partial pressure, respectively, of the gas
at the initial condition, and C2 and P₂ are the concentration and partial pressure,
respectively, of the gas at the final condition.
79
Chemistry Grade 10
Note: Gases that form strong intermolecular forces such as H-bonding or react
chemically with water, such as HCI and the other hydrogen halides, H2S, and NH3, do
not obey Henry's law; all of these gases are much more soluble than predicted by
Henry's law.
Example 2.2
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide gas inside a bottle of cola is 4 atm at
25°C. What is the solubility of CO2? The Henry's law constant for CO2 in water is
3.3 X 10⁻² mol/L.atm at 25°C.
Given
Required
Solution
Pco2 = 4 atm
Solubility
The relation between solubility of a
of carbon
gas and its partial pressure is given
kH = 3.3x10⁻² mol/L.atm
dioxide
by Henry's law:
Temperature = 293
C = kH X P
K = constant
Substituting the values of kH and P in
the above equation gives:
C = 3.3 X 10-2(mol/(L.atm) X 4 atm
= 0.132 mol/L
= 0.1mol/L; when rounded to
one significant figure.
Example 2.3
The solubility of nitrogen gas at 25°C and 1 atm is 6.8x10⁻⁴ mol/L. What is the
concentration of nitrogen dissolved in water under atmospheric conditions? The
partial pressure of nitrogen gas in the atmosphere is 0.78 atm.
Given
Required
Solution
P1 = 1 atm
C2
C₁/P₁=C₂/P₂
C₁= 6.8 X 10⁻⁴ mol/L
P2 X C₁/P₁ = C2
P2 = 0.78 atm
Note: atmospheric condition means the
0.78 atm X 6.8x10⁻⁴ mol
pressure is 1 atm. Since air is 78% N2,
C2=
L
78% of 1 atm is exerted by N2.
(1 atm)
78% X 1 atm = 0.78 atm
C2=5.3 x10⁻⁴ mol/L
Therefore, the partial pressure of N2
under atmospheric condition is 0.78
atm
Note that the decrease in solubility is the result of lowering the pressure from 1
atm to 0.78 atm.
80
Solutions
Exercise 2.5
1. Why are carbonated beverages such as Coca Cola are packed under
pressure?
2. The concentration of CO2 in a solution is 0.032 M at 3.0 atm. What is the
concentration of CO2 at 5.0 atm of pressure?
3. Which of the following gases has the greatest Henry's law constant in water
at 25°C?
a. CH₄
b. Ne
C. NH3
d. H2
2.4 Ways of Expressing Concentration of Solutions
At the end of this section students will be able to
define concentration of a solution;
define mass percentage, ppm and ppb of a solute in a solution;
calculate the mass percentage, ppm and ppb of a solute in a solution from a given
information.
Solution Concentration
In chemistry, concentration is defined as the relative quantity of a solute against a total
quantity of solution or solvent. There are different ways of expressing concentration
of solutions, e.g. percent by mass or volume, mole fraction, molarity, molality, and
normality.
2.4.1 Percent by Mass/Volume
The percent by mass (also called the percent by weight or the weight percent) is
defined as
mass of solute
Percent by mass of solute =
X 100%
mass of solute + mass of solvent
= mass of solute
X 100%
mass of solution
Eq 2.5
The percent by mass is a unitless number because it is a ratio of two similar quantities.
81
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 2.4: A solution is made by dissolving 13.5 g of glucose, C₆H₁₂O₆, in
0.100 kg of water. What is the mass percentage of solute in this solution?
Given
Required
Solution
Mass of solute (glucose)
%(w/w)
%(w/w)
solute
= 13.5 g
Mass of solvent
=
Mass of solute X 100%
= 0.100 kg =100 g
Mass of solution
But Mass solution = mass solute + mass solvent
Substituting the values of masses of
glucose (solute) and solution in the
above equation gives:
%(w/w) solute = (13.5 g/113.5 g) x100%
=11.9%
Parts by Volume: The most common parts-by-volume term is volume percent, % (v/v),
the volume of solute in 100 volumes of solution:
Volume percent = Volume of solute x100%
Volume of solution
Example 2.5
A rubbing alcohol usually contains 70 mL of isopropanol in 100 mL of solution.
What is the %(v/v) of this solution
%(v/v) isopropanol = (70/100) X 100% = 70%
Example 2.6
An iostonic solution contains 0.9 g of NaCl in 100 mL of aqueous solution. What
is the % (w/v) of NaCl of this solution?
Given
Required
Solution
Mass (w) of NaCl = 0.9 g
% (w/v)
% (w/v)
solute
solute
Volume solution = 100 mL
Mass of solute
=
X 100%
Volume of solution
= (0.9 g)/(100 mL) X 100%
= 0.9%
Note that mass of 100 mL of solution is equal to 100 g if density of solution is
assumed to be equal to density of water; the case for dilute solutions.
82
Solutions
When making a percent solution, it is important to indicate what units (w/w, or, v/v,
or, w/v) are being used, so that others can also make the solution properly. Also,
recall that mass of solution is the sum of both the solvent and the solute when you are
performing percent calculations.
For more dilute solutions, parts per million (10⁶ ppm) and parts per billion (109 ppb)
are used. These terms are widely employed to express the amounts of trace pollutants
in the environment.
The mass-based definitions of ppm and ppb are given here:
ppm = Mass of solute X 106
Mass of solution
Eq 2.6
ppb =
Mass of solute
X 109
Mass of solution
Eq 2.7
Note that, 1 ppm = 1 g solute per 1,000,000 g solution = 1/(1,000.000)
Example 2.7
A 2.5 g sample of ground water was found to contain 5.4 µg of Pb²⁺. What is the
concentration of Pb²⁺, in parts per million?
Given
Required
Solution
Mass of solute (Pb²⁺) =
Concentration
ppm = Mass of solute X 106
5.4 µg = 5.4x10⁻⁶ g
in ppm
Mass of solution
= [(5.4 X 10⁻⁶ g)/(2.5 g)] X 106
Mass solution = 2.5 g
= 2.16 ppm
Note that the sum of 2.5 g and 5.4 µg is approximately equal to 2.5 g. When
reporting contaminants like lead in drinking water, ppm and ppb concentrations are
often reported in mixed unit values of mass/volume. This can be very useful as it
is easier for US to think about water in terms of its volume, rather than by its mass.
In addition, the density of water is 1.0 g/mL or 1.0 mg/0.001 mL which makes the
conversion between the two units easier. For example, if we find that there is lead
contamination in water of 4 ppm, this would mean that there are:
4
4 ppm =
mg
lead
1,000,000 mg solution
This is a very dilute solution, so the sum of masses of solute and solvent can be
approximately equal to the mass of the solvent
Now, let's convert 1,000,000 mg of water into volume:
V = density mass
= [(1,000,000 mg)/(1 mg/0.001 mL)] = 1,000 mL = 1L
83
Chemistry Grade 10
Substituting in the above equation yields,
4 ppm = 1L 4 mg solution lead
Therefore, for dilute solutions
1 ppm = 1 mg/L
Exercise 2.6
1. A sample of 0.892 g of potassium chloride, KCI, is dissolved in 54.6 g of
water. What is the percent, by mass, of KCI in the solution?
2. a) If 150 g of orange juice contains 120 mg of ascorbic acid (Vitamin C),
what is the concentration of ascorbic acid, expressed in ppm?
b) Express the concentration of ascorbic acid given in (a) in ppb.
3. What is the (w/v)% of a solution if 24.0 g of sucrose is dissolved in a total
solution of 243 mL?
4. How many grams of NaCl are required to make 625 mL of a 13.5% solution?
5. Find the concentration of calcium ion (in ppm) in a 3.50 g pill that contains
40.5 mg of Ca²⁺.
6. The label on a 300 mL beer bottle indicates 5.0 % alcohol by volume. How
many milliliters of alcohol does the bottle of beer contain?
2.4.2 Mole Fraction
At the end of this section students will be able to
define mole fraction;
calculate mole fraction of a solute and a solvent in a solution.
A mole fraction of a component substance A (XA) in a solution is defined as the moles
of component substance divided by the total moles of solution (that is, moles of solute
plus solvent).
Mole fraction (XA) = moles of substance A
total moles of solution
Eq 2.8
Mole fraction (Xβ) = moles of substance B
total moles of solution
Eq 2.9
Note: Usually a solution composed of solute and solvent. So X solute + X solvent = 1,
Therefore, if mole fraction of the solute is 0.25, then mole fraction of solvent = 0.25
= 0.75. In other words, if solute is 25% by mole, then solvent is 75%.
84
Solutions
Put another way, the mole fraction gives the proportion of solute (or solvent) particles
in solution. The mole percent is the mole fraction expressed as a percentage:
Mole % =
amount (mol) of solute
x100%
amount (mol) of solute + amount (mol) of solvent
Eq 2.10
Example 2.8
What is the mole fraction of I₂ in a solution containing 30 g of I₂ in 400 g of CCI ₄
Given
Required
Solution
Mass solute (I₂) 30 g
mole
Mass solvent (CCI₄)
fraction
Number of moles of = Molar Mass I2 mass of I2
= 400 g
of I2
= (30 g)/(254 g/mol) = 0.12 mol I2
Mass of CCI₄
Number of moles of CCI₄= Molar mass of CCI₄
= (400g)/(154g/mol)
= 2.6 mol CCI₄
= (0.12 mol)/(0.12 mol + 2.6 mol)
= 0.044
XCCI₄ 4 = 0.044 = 0.96
Exercise 2.7
1. A sample of rubbing alcohol contains 142 g of isopropyl alcohol (C₃H₂OH)
and 58.0 g of water. What are the mole fractions of alcohol and water? M.wt
C₃H₇OH = 60.0 g/mol, H2O = 18 g/mol.
2. In a solution composed of A, B, and C, if we have 1 mole of A, 1 mole of B
and 2 moles of C. Find the mole fraction of each of them.
2.4.3 Molarity
At the end of this section students will be able to
define molarity;
prepare molar solutions of different substances;
calculate molarity of a solution from a given information.
85
Chemistry Grade 10
The most common unit of concentration is molarity, which is also the most useful for
calculations involving the stoichiometry of reactions in solution.
Definition: The molarity (M) of a solution is the number of moles of solute present in
exactly 1 L of solution.
Molarity = number of moles of solute
volume of solution in litre
Eq 2.11
1 M = (1 mole of solute)/(1 L of solution)
Given mass of solute or mass of solute dissolved
Number of moles of a solute =
Molar mass of the solute
Eq 2.11
The units of molarity are therefore moles per liter of solution (mol/L), abbreviated as
M.
Molarity has two drawbacks that affect its use in precise work:
Effect of temperature. A liquid expands when heated, so a unit volume of hot
solution contains less solute than that of cold solution; thus, the molarity is different.
Effect of mixing. Because of solute-solvent interactions that are difficult to predict,
volumes may not be additive: adding 500 mL of one solution to 500 mL of another
may not give 1000 mL of final solution.
Example 2.9
1. What is the molar concentration of a solution containing 16.0 g of CH3OH in
200 mL of solution?
Given
Required
Solution
Mass of solute
Molarity
Molarity =
Number of moles of CH3OH
(CH₃OH) = 16 g
Volume of solution in liter
Volume of solution
Mass of CH₃OH
=
= 200 mL = 0.20 L
Molar mass of CH3OH X Volume of solution in L
Molar mass of
= (16 g )/(32 g/mol X 0.2 L)
CH3OH
= 2.50 mol/L = 2.50 M
= 32 g/mol
2. Calculate the number of moles of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) needed to make
2.50 L of 0.100 M NaOH.
Given
Required
Solution
Molarity =0.1 M
Number
Molarity =
Number of moles of CH3OH n
II
I
Volume solution
of moles
Volume of solution in liter
V
= 2.50 L
of solute
Rearranging the above equation gives:
(NaOH)
n = M X V = 0.1Mx2.5 L = 0.1 mole/L x2.5 L
= 0.25 mole
86
Solutions
Exercise 2.8
1. 5.85 g of sodium chloride (NaCl) is dissolved in in water to make 250 mL
of solution. Assuming the density of the solution as 1 g/mL, calculate
a. the molarity of the solution.
b. the mass percentage of the solute.
2. How would 250 ml of 0.15 M KNO₃ solution be prepared?
3. A solution of hydrochloric acid contains 36 percent HCI, by mass. Calculate
the mole fraction of HCI in the solution.
2.4.4 Molality
At the end of this section students will be able to
define molality;
prepare molal solutions of different substances;
calculate molality of a solution from a given information.
Molality (m) does not contain volume in its ratio; it is the number of moles of solute
dissolved in a given mass of solvent (Kg):
amount (mol) of solute
Molality (m) =
(mass (kg) of solvent
Eq 2.13
Note that molality includes the quantity of solvent, not solution. Molality has two
advantages over molarity for precise work:
Effect of temperature. Molal solutions are based on masses of components, not
volume. And since mass does not change with temperature, neither does molality.
Effect of mixing. Unlike volumes, masses are additive: adding 500 g of one solution
to 500 g of another does give 1000 g of final solution.
For these reasons, molality is the preferred term when temperature, and hence density,
may change, as in a study of physical properties. Note that, in the case of water, 1 L
has a mass of 1 kg, so molality and molarity are nearly the same for dilute aqueous
solutions.
87
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 2.10
Calculate the molality of a solution prepared by dissolving 32.0 g of CaCl₂ in
271g of water.
Given
Required
Solution
Mass of CaCl₂ =
Molality(m)
Number of moles of solute
=?
Molality (m) =
32.0 g
Mass of solvent in kg
Mass of H2O =
mass of CaCl₂
271 g = 0.271
II
Molar mass CaCl₂ X Mass (kg)of of H2O
kg
= (32.0 g)/(111 g/mol X 0.271 kg)
= 1.06 m CaCl₂
Exercise 2.9
1. How many grams of glucose (C₆H₁₂O₆) must be dissolved in 563 g of ethanol
(C2H₅OH) to prepare a 2.40 X 10⁻² m solution? Ans: mass of glucose = 2.43
g (Verify this)
2.4.5 Normality
At the end of this section students will be able to
define the terms equivalent weight, number of equivalents and normality;
calculate normality of a solution from a given information.
The normality of a solution is the gram equivalent weight of a solute per liter of
solution. One gram equivalent of a solute per liter of solution is expressed as 1
normal. It is indicated using the symbol N, eq/L, or meq/L (= 0.001 N) for units of
concentration.
N =
number of gram equivalents of solute
volume of solution in litre
Eq 2.14
mass of solute
Where number of gram equivalents of solute =
equivalent weight
Eq 2.15
but equivalent weight= mass
molar of solute
Z
Eq 2.16
Substituting eq 2.16 in eq 2.15 gives:
88
Solutions
mass of solute
number of gram equivalents of solute =
XZ
molar mass
eq 2.17
Substituting eq 2.17 in eq 2.14 gives:
N
= mass of solute
X Z
molar mass X volume of solution in litre
Eq 2.18
Where 'z' is the number of transferable H⁺ or OH- ions in acid-base reaction, positive
or negative charges carried by the cations or anions in precipitation reaction, or
electrons in redox reactions.
Thus, z= 1 for HCI, 2 H2SO4 (because 1 H2SO4 releases 2 H+ ions in aqueous solution),
3 for H3PO4, 1 for 1 NaOH, 2 for Ca(OH)₂, 2 for Na2CO₃, and 6 for A12(SO₄)₃
(because A12(SO₄)₃ dissociates to give 2AI³⁺ = 6 positive charges).
Example 2.11
Calculate the number of gram equivalent or simply equivalents in each of the
following
(a) 18.25 g HCI (b) 20 g NaOH (c) 98 g H2SO4
Given
Required
Solution
(a) Mass solute (HCI)
eq
The reaction: HCI
H+ + Cl⁻
= 18.25 g
HCI produces one H⁺; thus Z =1.
Molar mass (HCI)
number of gram equivalents of solute
= 36.5 g/mol
=(8.25/36.5) X = 0.5 eq
(b) Mass solute (NaOH)
eq
The reaction: NaOH
Na⁺ + OH-
= 20 g
NaOH produces one OH; Z =1.
Molar mass (NaOH)
number of gram equivalents of solute
= 40 g/mol
=(20/40) X 1 = 0.5 eq
(c) Mass solute (H₂SO₄)
eq
The reaction: H2SO4
2H+ + SO 4²⁻
= 98 g
H2SO4 releases two H+ ions in this case;
Molar mass = 98 g/mol
Z =2.
number of gram equivalents of solute
=(98/98) X 2 = 2 eq
89
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 2.12
(i) Calculate the number of equivalents present in 0.50 mol H3PO4 if the acid is
a. completely neutralized to give PO 4 3-
b. converted to H2PO 4
C. converted to HPO 4²⁻
(ii) Calculate the Normality of each of the solutions described in Q(i) a to C if the
solution volume was 100 mL each.
(iii) What is the mass of Na2CO3 required to prepare 100 mL of 0.1 N Na2CO₃
(Given: Molar mass Na2CO₃= = 106 g/mol).
Given
Required
Solution
(a)
number of
The appropriate equation is
Mole H3PO4 =
equivalents
0.5
H3PO4
3H+ + PO4³⁻
H3PO4 releases 3 H+ ions in this case; Z = 3
equivalents = (mass of solute)/(molar mass) X Z
equivalents = n X Z= 0.5 X 3 =1.5 eq
Where, n = (mass solute)/(molar mass solute)
=moles of solute
(b)
eq
The appropriate equation is
Mole H3PO4 =
0.5
H3PO4 H⁺ + H₂PO₄¹⁻
H3PO4 releases 1 H+ ion in this case; Z =1 =
equivalents = (mass of solute)/(molar mass) X Z
equivalents = n X z=0.5 X 1=0.5 eq
(c)
eq
The appropriate equation is
Mole H3PO4 =
H3PO4
2H+ + H2PO ₄²
0.5
H3PO4 releases 2 H+ ion in this case; Z =2
equivalents=(mass of solute)/(molar mass) XZ
equivalents=n X z=0.5 X 2=1 eq
Normality is the only concentration unit that is reaction dependent. For example, in
a multistep dissociation of diprotic (e.g. H₂SO₄) and polyprotic acids (e.g. H₃PO₄),
the value of 'z' depends on the actual number of H⁺ released; not just the one in the
formula.
90
Solutions
ii) Calculate the Normality of each of the solutions described in Q(i) a to c if the
solution volume was 100 mL each.
Given
Required
Solution
(a)
Normality
a) N=Eq/L= (1.5 Eq)/(0.1 L)=15 Eq/L=15 N
Mole H3PO4 = 0.5
b) N=Eq/L= (0.5 Eq)/(0.1 L)=5 Eq/L=5 N
V = 100 mL = 0.1 L
c) N=Eq/L= (1 Eq)/(0.1 L)=15 Eq/L=10 N
(iii) What is the mass of Na2CO3 required to prepare 100 mL of 0.1 N Na2CO₃
(Given: Molar mass Na2CO₃= 106 g/mol)
Given
Required
Solution
N = 0.1 eq/L
Mass?
Na2CO3 release 2Na⁺; z= 2
V = 100 mL = 0.1 L
Thus
Molar mass Na2CO3
N = mass of solute
X Z
= 106 g/mol
molar mass X volume of solution in litre
Mass = [0.1 eq/Lx106 g/mol X 0.1 L]/2
= 0.53 g
The easiest way to find normality is from molarity. All you need to know is the
value of 'z'.
N = M.z; where N is normality and M is molarity
Example 2.13
Calculate the normality of 0.5 M H2SO4 solution (assume complete dissociation).
Given
Required
Solution
M = 0.5
N
N = Mz
= 0.5 X 2 = 1 N
Exercise 2.10
1. How many equivalents of solute is contained in1 L of 2 N solution?
2. Calculate the mass of AI₂(SO₄)₃ in 250 mL of solution if the concentration is
0.48 N.
3. Calculate the molarity and normality of a solution that contains 16.2 g of the
salt Fe₂(SO₄)₃ in 200 mL of solution.
4. Calculate the normality of
a. 0.1381 M NaOH
b. 0.0521 M H3PO4 assuming complete dissociation.
91
Chemistry Grade 10
2.4.6 Conversion of Concentration Units
At the end of this section students will be able to inter convert various concentration
expressions.
The interconversion of concentration units is very simple. Because they are intrinsic
units. That means, any amount of liquid taken from a 5% (v/v) ethanol solution, for
instance, always contains ethanol to solution in ratio of 5 is to 100 regardless of the
volume taken. Therefore, 5% (v/v) read as 5 mL of ethanol per 100 mL of solution. 5
ppm glucose means 5 g of glucose per 10⁶ g of solution. Similarly, 5 ppb of glucose
means 5 g of glucose per 109 g of solution. If percent is given in (v/v), convert the mL
of solute into moles by converting volume to mass by multiplying with density followed
by calculating moles using the formula (mole = mass/molar mass). And convert mL of
solution into liter.
Example 2.14
Converting Mole Fractions to Molality
The mole fractions of glucose, C₆H₁₂O₆, and water are 0.150 and 0.850,
respectively. What is the molality of glucose in the solution?
Given
Required
Solution
X
= 0.15
Molality
solute(glucose)
Molality = m = number of moles of solute
X
= 0.85
=m
mass of solvent in kg
solvent(water)
Let's consider 0.15 moles of glucose and 0.85
moles of water which is consistent with the
given mole fractions. Thus, to calculate the mass
of solvent in kg we convert the mole solvent into
mass solvent as follows:
Mass. H2O = mole X molar mass
= 0.85 mole X 18 g/mole
=15.3 g = 0.0153 kg
Substituting the values in the above equation
gives:
Molality = m = 0.15 0.0153 mole kg =9.8 m
92
Solutions
Example 2.15
1. An aqueous solution is 0.273 m KCI. What is the molar concentration of
potassium chloride, KCI? The density of the solution is 1.011 X 10³ g/L.
Given
Required
Solution
Molality =
Molarity
Molarity = M = number of moles of solute
0.273 m
= M
Volume of solution in litre
Density solution =
but molality : = 0.273 m means 0.273 mole of
1.011 X 10³ g/L
KCI per 1 kg (=1000 g) of solution.
solute = KCI
Now, we know number of moles of solute.
To determine volume of solution in liter we
Molar mass KCI =
proceed as follows:
74.6 g/mole
V solution = mass solution solution
= (mass solute + mass solvent )/d solution
= (0.273 mole X 74.6 g/mole) + (1000g)/
(1.011 X 10³ g/L)
=1.01 L
Substituting the values in the above equation
gives:
Molarity = M = 0.273 mole =0.270 M
1.01 L
Example 2.16: Converting (w/w) percent to Molarity
Calculate the molarity of 36.5%(w/w) HCI solution (density of solution = 1.20 g/
mL; molar mass HCI = 36.5 g/moL)
Given
Required
Solution
%(w/w) = 36.5
Convert
Molarity = M = number of moles of solute
Density solution =
% into
Volume of solution in litre
1.20 g/mL
Molarity
but %(w/w) = 36.5% means 36.5 g of HCI
Molar mass (HCI) =
in 100 g of solution. Thus, number of moles of
36.5 g/mole
HCI is calculated as follows:
Number of moles of HCI = mass/molar mass
= 36.5 g/36.5 g.mol⁻¹=1 mol
volume of solution = msol/dsoln
= 100 g/1.2
= 83.3 mL = 0.0833 L
Substituting the values in the above equation
gives:
Molarity = M = 1 mole =12.0 M
0.0833 L
93
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 2.11
Hydrogen peroxide is a powerful oxidizing agent: it is used in concentrated
solution in rocket fuel. But in dilute solution in hair bleach. An aqueous solution of
H2O2 is 30.0% by mass and has a density of 1.11 g/mL; molar mass of H2O2 is
34.02 g/mol. Calculate the
i. molality
iii. molarity
ii. mole fraction of H2O2
2.5 Preparation of Solutions
At the end of this section students will be able to prepare molar, molal, or normal
solutions of different substances.
Note that in the example above, we still don't have enough information to actually
make the solution in the laboratory. There is no piece of equipment that can measure
out the moles of a substance. For this, we need to convert the number of moles of the
sample into the number of grams represented by that number. We can then easily use
a balance to weigh the amount of substance needed for the solution. In this section,
we will consider preparation of stock solutions using a standard solid compounds and
preparation of dilute solutions using stock solutions.
2.5.1 Preparation of Stock Solutions from Pure Compound
A) preparation of liquid solution using a solid solute
The solution preparation generally involves 6 steps; part of which are shown in (Figure
2.15):
Step 1: Calculate the required amount (mass). When you are asked to prepare a
solution that consisted of a dissolved solid, you usually need to calculate the mass
required to be dissolved in a suggested volume. But mass can be calculated by using
number of moles (n) as;
Mass required = n X molar mass
Step 2: Weigh the required mass using balance.
Step 3: Transfer the measured amount into a beaker of enough capacity. Add some
solvent and mix (shake) to dissolve. The amount of solvent added at this stage should
not exceed half the final volume of the solution to be prepared. Heating over a hot
plate may be required if the solid is not readily soluble.
Step 4: Transfer the dissolved mixture into volumetric flask of desired capacity and
shake to mix.
Step 5: Dilute to the mark by filling the remaining portion of the flask with the solvent.
The solvent is usually water as we often prepare aqueous solutions.
Step 6: Cap it and label your flask containing the prepared solution with the key
information (concentration, name of solute, date of preparation, and owner (your
94
Solutions
name). This step is very important even if you need the solution immediately.
Transferring
Diluting to
Dissolution
the mark
Measurement
cap and label
500 mL
500 mL
500 mL
Hot plate
Figure 2.15 Illustration of steps involved in making a 500 mL liquid solution of given
concentration by dissolving a solid solute in a liquid solvent.
B) Preparation of a liquid solution using a liquid solute
A solution may also be prepared by dissolving a liquid in another liquid. In this case
you need to calculate the volume of the solute that is required. If number of moles is
known, then volume (v) can be calculated using;
V= m/d = (n X molar mass)/d; where d density of the solute.
Similar steps are followed. But in this case we use measuring cylinder instead of
balance to measure the volume of liquid and the measured volume of liquid is directly
transferred to a volumetric flask of desired capacity using a funnel followed by step
5 and step 6.
Example 2.17
Prepare 100 mL of 1 M NaOH using pure NaOH solid.
Given
Required
Solution
Molarity = 1 M
Mass
Molarity = M
=
number of moles of solute = n
= 1 mol/L
NaOH
Volume of solution in litre
V
Volume of
This is a liquid solution to be prepared by
solution = 100
dissolving appropriate mass of the solute
mL = 0.1 L
(NaOH) in distilled water to form 0.1 L of
molar mass of
solution.
NaOH = 40 g/
Thus, we need to calculate mass of NaOH
mol
required to be dissolved in water to form 0.1
L of the solution.
But mass = number of moles X molar mass
Number of moles is obtained by rearranging
the molarity equation as:
Number of moles = MV
mass = (1 mol/L)x0.1Lx40 g/mole = 4 g
Therefore, the solution is prepared by dissolving 4 g of NaOH in 100 mL volumetric flask,
and diluting to the mark by filling the remaining portion of the flask with distilled water.
95
Chemistry Grade 10
2.5.2 Diluting a Solution
At the end of this section students will be able to
explain dilution process;
calculate the volume or concentration changes during dilution of solution;
prepare a dilute solution from concentrated solution.
Concentrated solutions are often stored in the laboratory stockroom for use as needed.
Frequently we dilute these "stock" solutions before working with them.
Dilution is the procedure for preparing a less concentrated solution from a more
concentrated one by simply adding more solvent. Often, a small portion (Vi) of stock
solution is withdrawn from the more concentrated solution and diluted to final volume
Vf by simply adding more solvent. Imagine we have an aqueous salt solution with 18
particles in a certain volume V1 of solution and that it has a certain concentration M1.
That means we have 18 particles (18/(6.02x10²³ moles)) dissolved in the volume V¹
of the solution. Let's dilute this solution by adding more water to double the volume of
the solution to V₂ = 2V₁ as illustrated in Figure 2.16. What stays the same and what is
changed when more water is added? Did the number of particles (number of moles)
change? What about the concentration?
2h
h
Solution I
Solution II
Before dilution; volume = V₁,
After dilution; volume = V₂,
Concentration = M₁
Concentration = M₂
Figure 2.16. The dilution of a more concentrated solution (solution I) to a less
concentrated one (solution II) by doubling the volume of solution by adding more
solvent does not change the total number of solute particles.
The molarity of solution I is
M₁= Moles₁/V₁
96
Solutions
And the molarity of solution II is
M₂=Moles₂/V₂
Rearranging the equations to find moles we obtain
Moles₁=M₁ V₁ V₁
And
Moles₂=M₂ V₂
As you can see in Figure 2.16, adding more solvent changed the volume of the solution.
Doing so we also changed its concentration because the number of particles (number
of moles) per unit volume (per unit litre or per unit mL) is changed. However, the
number of particles (number of moles) of solute did not change. So,
Moles = Moles₂
M₁V₁=M₂V₂
This formula is known as dilution formula. It is used to prepare dilute solutions. For
instance, to prepare a dilute solution having a volume V₂ and concentration M₂ using
a more concentrated solution having concentration M₁, we withdraw the volume V₁
from the more concentrated (stock) solution having the concentration M1 and add
more water to raise the volume from V₁ to V₂. We often need to calculate V₁ using
the formula:
Caution! When preparing dilutions of concentrated acids such as sulfuric acid, the
directions usually call for adding the acid slowly to water with frequent stirring. If
water were added to acid, the water would quickly heat and splatter, causing harm
to the person making the solution.
Example 2.18
Describe how you would prepare 2.50 X 10² mL of a 2.25 M H2SO4 solution,
starting with a 7.41 M stock solution of H2SO ₄.
Given
Required
Solution
M1 = 7.41 M
V₁
M₁V₁ = M₂V₂
V₁ = ? =
M₂=2.25 M
V1 = M2V2
V₂ = 250 mL
V₁=(2.25 M X 250 mL)/(7.41 M)
=75.9 mL
Thus, we must withdraw 75.9 mL from the 7.41 M H2SO4 solution, transfer it to a 250
mL volumetric flask half-filled with distlled water, and dilute it with sufficient amount
of water to the mark.
97
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 2.12
1. How would you prepare 2.00 X 10² mL of a 0.866 M KOH solution, starting
with a 5.07 M stock solution?
2. What is the difference between dilute and unsaturated? Or concentrated
and saturated?
3. Prepare a 100 mL of 0.1 M sucrose from 1M sucrose solution by dilution.
Exercise 2.13
Outline the preparation of 100 mL of (a) hypotonic (0.1 M) and (b) hypertonic
(0.25 M) aqueous NaCl solution and (c) 0.1 M H2SO4 using a stock solution of
98% (w/w) H2SO ₄. Density = 1.84 g/ml. (Hint: First calculate the molarity of
the 98%(w/w) H2SO4 solution as shown in example 2.16. Then use the dilution
formula). Show all the necessary steps and let your teacher check it!
2.6 Solution Stoichiometry
At the end of this section students will be able to
use stoichiometrically equivalent molar ratios to calculate amounts of reactants
and products in a reaction of pure and dissolved substance.
In Unit 3 you studied about stoichiometric calculations in terms of the mole method,
which treats the coefficients in a balanced equation as the number of moles of reactants
and products. Solving stoichiometry problems for reactions in solution requires the
additional step of converting the volume of reactant or product in solution to amount
(mole) using the relationship MV = number of moles of solute.
Generally, we follow these steps:
1. Balance the equation. Note that the coefficients in chemical equation indicate
number of moles.
2. Find the amount (mol) of one substance from the volume and molarity.
3. Relate it to the stoichiometrically equivalent amount of another substance.
4. Convert to the desired units.
98
Solutions
Mole-Mole Calculation
Example 2.19
What is the concentration of sodium hydroxide required to react completely with equal
volume of 0.104 M sulfuric acid?
Given
Required
Solution
VNaOH⁻VH₂SO₄
MNaOH = 2 =
Equation: H2SO4 + 2NaOH
Na₂SO₄ + 2H2O
Stoichiometry
1 mole
2 mole
MH2SO₄⁻ = 0.104 M
Equation
H2SO4
+ 2NaOH
Na2SO₄
+ 2H2O
Given
nH₂SO₄=0.104
nNaOH=MNaOH
mol/L x VH2SO₄
X VNaOH
Stoichiometry=nww/nuso,=1
=
=
Since volume is the same, it cancels out and the equation
becomes: 2/1 = MNaOH/0.104 M
= 0.208 M
Exercise 2.14
What is the concentration of sodium hydroxide that is required to react
completely with equal volume of 0.104 M hydrochloric acid?
Mole - Mass
Example 2.20
What mass of solid magnesium hydroxide can be produced if 45 mL of a 0.63 M
Mg(NO₃)₂ solution reacts completely with excess NaOH?
Given
Required
Solution
V
=
45
mL
Stoichiometry
1 mole
58.321 g
MMg(NO3)2
= 0.63
M
Equation
Mg(OH)_(s) +2NaNO,(aq)
Note that M and
Given
0.63 M, 45 mL
Mass =?
V are given means
number of moles
=1 mole/58.321 g
(n) is known: n=MV
=0.63 mol/L X 0.045
mass
= 0.63 mol/L X 0.045L X 58.321 g/1 mole
=1.65g
99
Chemistry Grade 10
Mass - Volume
Example 2.21
What volume of 0.0995 M AI(NO₃)₃ will react with 3.66 g of Ag according to the
following chemical equation?
Given
Required
Solution
MASSING 0.0995 M
WAg=3.66g
VAI(NO₃)₃⁻?
Stoichiometry
3x107.97 g
1 mole
Equation
3Ag(s)
+ Al(NO₃),(aq)
3 AgNO₃(aq)
+ Al(s)
Experimental
3.66 g
n AI(NO3)3
=
3x107.97g/1mole=3.66g/(0.0995MxV) where
MV = mole
VAI(NO3)3 = 3.66 g x1 mole/3x107.97 g x0.0995 mol/L=0.114L
Exercise 2.15
What volume of 0.512 M NaOH will react with 17.9 g of H₂C₂O₄(s) according
to the following chemical equation?
H₂C₂O₄(s) + 2NaOH(aq)
Na₂C₂O₄(aq) + 2H₂O(I)
Mole - Volume Calculation
Example 2.22
What volume of a 0.35 M AgNO₃ is required to react completely with 55mL of
a 0.24 M NaCl solution?
Given
Required
Solution
VNacl=55 mL
VAgNO₃⁻?
Stoichiometry
1 mole
1 mole
MNaci=0.24 M
Equation
NaCl(aq) + AgNO₃(aq)
NaNO₃(aq) + AgCI(s)
Note that M and
Experimental
0.24 M, 55 mL
0.35 M, V=?
V are given means
Stoichiometry: =
number of moles
= (0.24 mol/L x0.055L)/(0.35 mol/L VAgNO3)
(n) is known:
=1
n=MV
V AgNO3 = (0.24 mol/L x0.055L)/(0.35 mol/L) = 0.0377
L=37.7 mL
100
Solutions
Mole - Number of Particles
Example 2.23
1. How many HCI particles are there in 0.1 mole of the HCI solution?
Strategy: 1 mole HCI contains Avogadro's number of HCI particles, then 0.1 mole
contains how many?
Answer: 0.6022 X 10²³ particles = 6.022 X 10²² HCI particles
Exercise 2.16
What volume of 0.5 M glucose (C₆H₁₂O₆) contains 3.01 X 10²² molecules of
glucose?
2.7 Describing Reactions in Solution
At the end of this section students will be able to
explain the relationship between reacting ions, spectator ions, precipitation and
solubility;
write net ionic equations.
Molecular Equation
A molecular equation is a chemical equation in which the reactants and the products
are written as if they were molecular substances, even though they may actually
exist in solution as ions. The state (solid, liquid, gas) of each substance is indicated in
parentheses after formula. (aq) is used to indicate the that molecule is dissolved in
water.
Consider the reaction between silver nitrate, AgNO₃, and sodium chloride, NaCl, in
aqueous solution to give solid silver chloride, AgCl, and aqueous sodium nitrate. The
equation for this reaction may be written as:
AgNO₃(aq) + NaCl(aq)
AgCI(s) + NaNO₃(aq)
This is just a molecular equation. Note from the solubility rules (Table 2.1) that all
common nitrates and chlorides of Group 1A are soluble. That is why (aq) is used after
these formulae. The solubility rule also taught US that AgCl is insoluble in water. That
is why (s) to indicate that it is precipitated out from the solution to the bottom of the
reaction flask/test tube as a solid.
101
Chemistry Grade 10
lonic Equation
Although a molecular equation is useful in describing the actual reactants and products,
it does not give any information about what is happening at the level of ions. Since
this kind of information is very useful, you often need to write the molecular equation
as an ionic equation. Consider the reaction of silver nitrate and sodium chloride. Both
are soluble ionic substances and are strong electrolytes. When they dissolve in water,
they go into solution as ions giving on the reactant side of the reaction:
Ag⁺(aq) + NO₃⁻(aq) + Na⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq)
On the product side of the equation, AgCI(s) is an ionic compound that doesn't dissolve
in water, but the ions are held together in particular sites in the crystalline solid. We
leave the formula as AgCI(s) to convey this information in the equation. On the other
hand, NaNO₃ is a soluble ionic compound and is a strong electrolyte. Also it dissolves
in aqueous solution to give freely moving ions. Therefore, we can write it as
Na⁺(aq) + NO₃⁻(aq)
The complete equation is
Ag⁺(aq) + NO₃⁻(aq) + Na⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq)
AgCI(s) + Na⁺(aq) + NO₃⁻(aq),
The ions appearing on both sides of the equation (Na⁺ and NO₃⁻) are called spectator
ions, as they do not take part in the reaction and they can be canceled on both sides
to express the essential reaction that occurs.
Ag⁺(aq) + NO + Na+(aq) + Cl⁻(aq)
AgCI(s) + Na + NO 3 (aq)
The resulting equation is:
Ag+ (aq) + Cl⁻(aq)
AgCI(s)
This net ionic equation, is without spectator ions and the reaction that actually occurs at
an ionic level is between silver ions and chloride ions which forms solid silver chloride.
Steps for writing a net ionic equation
1. Write the balanced molecular equation
2. Write the balanced complete ionic equation
3. Cancel out the spectator ions. What remains is the net ionic equation.
102
Solutions
Exercise 2.17
1. Discuss the difference between molecular equations and ionic equations?
What are spectator ions?
2. Consider the reaction between sodium carbonate and calcium chloride in
aqueous solution:
a. How are sodium carbonate and calcium chloride found in water solution,
dissociated to give ions or as solid? (Refer to solubility rule). Write
dissociation reaction for each of them.
b. Write the ionic equation for the reaction between sodium carbonate and
calcium chloride. Are the products formed soluble in water?
C. Write the soluble product in ionic form. Are there the same ions in the
reactant and product side? If yes, cancel them out!
d. Write the net ionic equation.
3. For the following molecular equation, write ionic equation, net ionic equation,
and identify the spectator ions:
2AgNO3 (aq) + Na2CrO₄ (aq)
Ag2CrO₄ (s) + 2NaNO₃ (aq)
Key Terms of the Unit
Concentrated
Mass percentage
Parts per billion
Colloids
Miscible
Saturated
Dilute
Molality
Solvation
Electrolyte solution
Molarity
Supersaturated
Henry's law
Mole fraction
Suspension
Heterogeneous solution
Nonelectrolyte
Unsaturated
Homogeneous solution
Normality
Unit Summary
To ensure that you understand the material in this chapter, you should review the
meanings of the bold terms in the following summary and ask yourself how they
relate to the topics in the chapter.
A heterogeneous mixture is a mixture that consists of physically distinct parts,
each with different properties.
A homogeneous mixture is a mixture in which the composition is the same
throughout. i.e., it has no visible boundaries because the components are mixed as
individual atoms, ions and molecules.
A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture that consists of a dispersion of fine solid
particles in a liquid or gas, removable by filtration.
A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture in which insoluble particles of one or more
substances are suspended uniformly throughout another substance.
Scattering of a beam of light by colloidal particles is called Tyndall effect.
103
Chemistry Grade 10
A colloid can be a gel, an emulsion, a sol, foam, or aerosol.
Coagulation is the process by which the dispersed phase of a colloid is made to
aggregate and thereby separate from the continuous phase.
A colloid in which the dispersed phase consists of micelles is called an association
colloid.
A solution is a homogeneous mixture. The major component is the solvent, while
the minor component is the solute. The terms miscible and immiscible, instead of
soluble and insoluble, are used for liquid solutes and solvents. The statement like
dissolves like is a useful guide to predicting whether a solute will dissolve in a
given solvent.
For liquid solutions formed from a solvent A and solute B, an ideal solution results
when the A-B attractions are the same as the A-A and B-B attractions and for such
a solution, H soln = O.
When the A-B attractions are greater than the A-A and B-B attractions, ДН soln <0
and the solution process is exothermic.
When the A-B attractions are weaker than the A-A and B-B attractions, H soln > 0
and the solution process is endothermic.
Dissolving occurs by solvation, the process in which particles of a solvent surround
the individual particles of a solute, separating them to make a solution. For water
solutions, the word hydration is used. If the solute is molecular, it dissolves into
individual molecules. If the solute is ionic it dissolves into ions. The individual ions
separate from each other, forming a solution that conducts electricity. Such solutions
are called electrolytes. If the dissociation of ions is complete, the solution is a strong
electrolyte. If the dissociation is only partial, the solution is a weak electrolyte. If a
solution is made up of molecules only, it does not conduct electricity and is called
nonelectrolyte.
The amount of solute in a solution is represented by the concentration of the
solution. The maximum amount of solute that can be dissolved in a given amount of
solvent is called the solubility of the solute. Such solutions are saturated. Solutions
that have less than the maximum amount that it can dissolve are unsaturated.
Most solutions are unsaturated, and there are various ways of stating their
concentrations.
A dilute solution is one in which there is a relatively small amount of solute dissolved
in the solution.
A concentrated solution contains a relatively large amount of solute.
These two terms do not tell US whether or not the solution is saturated or unsaturated.
They are used for comparing concentrations of two solutions in a more general
qualitative sense.
Solubility depends on two factors, predominantly intermolecular forces of
attraction and to some extent conditions (surface area, temperature, pressure).
Increasing the temperature usually increases the solubility of solids in water
and liquids in water while it decreases the solubility of gases in water. Increasing
104
Solutions
pressure increases solubility of gases in liquid. Henry's law says that the solubility
of a gas is directly proportional to its partial pressure above the solution.
Review Exercise
Part I: Multiple Choice Questions
1. Soda water is an example of:
a. liquid-liquid solution
C. solid-liquid solution
b. liquid-gas solution
d. gas-gas solution
2. Which of the following type of matter can exhibit Tyndall effect?
a. aerosol
b. soda water
C. brass
3. A solution that is formed when NaCl dissolves in water has the properties of
a. Sodium Chloride
C. both NaCl and water
b. Water
d. neither NaCl nor water
4. A simple way of determining whether a mixture is colliodial or not is through the use of
a. particle size b. Tyndall effect C. non-uniform appearance d. a & b
5. A suspension is
......
a. a homogenous mixture of a solute and a solvent
b. a heterogeneous mixture of one phase dispersed in another phase
C. a heterogeneous mixture that exhibits Tyndall effect
d. a mixture that contain smaller particle size than a solution
6. Which properties of colloids is applied in the cloud seeding mechanism to produce
artificial rain?
a. Association
C. Coagulation
b. Dispersion
d. Scattering
7. The cleansing action of soaps and detergents are related to which property of a
colloid?
a. Association
C. Coagulation
b. Dispersion
d. Scattering
8. The continuous and dispersed phase in fog is
and
, respectively.
a. gas, solid
C. gas, liquid
b. liquid, gas
d. liquid, liquid
9. How many grams of NaOH is required to prepare 100 mL of 1 M NaOH solution?
a. 4
b. 40
C. 0.4
d. 400
10. A solution that contain 4.9 g H2SO4 in 1 liter of solution has the same
and
. Assume the solution has the same density as water.
a. molarity and molality
C. normality and molality
b. molarity and normality
d. none of the above
11. When the molarity of a sulfuric acid solution is doubled, its normality is
a. halved b. doubled C. quadrupled d. remain the same
12. Mole fraction and percentage differ by a factor of
a. 1 b. 10 C. 100 d. 0.1
105
Chemistry Grade 10
13. Which of the following substances are not readily miscible within each other?
a. C₆H₆ and CCI₄
C. C2H₅ OH and H2O
b. H2O and CCI₄
d. CH₃ OH and H2O
14. Rate of dissolution is largely dependent upon:
a. the inter-particle forces
b. the surface area of solid solute
C. the temperature of the system
d. the pressure of the system
15. Which of the following statements is not correct?
a. pressure has little effect on the solubility of liquids and solids
b. the solubility of most solids increases with increasing temperature
C. the solubility of gases in water increases with increasing temperature.
d. none of the above
16. The quantitative relationship between gas solubility and pressure is given by:
a. Raoult's law
C. Henry's law
b. Hess's law
d. Dalton's law
17. A solution that has a capacity to dissolve more solute is called
solution
a. dilute
C. supersaturated
b. unsaturated
d. concentrated
18. A concentrated solution is
a. same as supersaturated solution
b. contain less solute than solvent
C. contains relatively large amount of solute
d. a saturated solution
19. Which of the following solutions is the most dilute?
a. 0.1 M NaCl
C. 0.001 M NaCl
b. 0.01 M NaCl
d. 10.0 mM NaCl
20. Which of the following is a saturated NaCl solution at 20°C? Solubility of NaCl is
36 g/100 mL.
a. 0.615 M
C. 36.0 M
b. 6.15 M
d. 0.0615 M
21. The ratio of the number of moles of solute divided by the total number of moles
gives:
a. the mole fraction of the solute
C. the molality of the solution
b. the molarity of the solution
d. the normality of the solution
22. Phosphoric acid reacts with calcium hydroxide to form calcium hydrogen phosphate
(CaHPO₄) and water. The equivalent weight of phosphoric acid in this reaction will
be:
a. 98 g/eq
C. 32.6 g/eq
b. 49 g/eq
d. 14 g/eq
106
Solutions
23. Which of the following is the balanced net ionic equation for the reaction between
H2SO₄ (a) and NaOH (aq)?
a. HSO₄⁻(aq)
H⁺(aq) + SO₄² (aq)
b. H⁺(aq) + OH-(aq)
H₂O(I)
C. ²⁻(aq) + 2Na⁺(aq)
NaSO ²⁻(aq)
d. H₂SO₄(aq) + 2OH⁻(aq)
2H₂O(I) + ²⁻(aq)
24. When a given volume of concentrated solution is diluted 100 fold, which one of
the following is true?
a. the dilute solution has more number of moles of solute per unit volume than that
of concentrated solution
b. the number of moles of solute per unit volume of the dilute solution is equal to
that of the concentrated solution
C. the number of moles of solute in a given volume of a solution is the same before
and after dilution
d. all of the above
Part II: Short Answer Questions
25. Give one example of each: a gaseous solution, a liquid solution, a solid solution.
26. What are the two factors needed to explain the differences in solubilities of ionic
solids in water?
27. Explain in terms of intermolecular attractions why octane is immiscible in water.
28. Give the type of colloid (aerosol, foam, emulsion, sol, or gel) that each of the
following represents.
a. rain cloud
b. milk of magnesia
C. soapsuds
d. silt in water
29. Concrete is a mixture of
,
,
, and
.
30. Explain on the basis that "like dissolves like" why glycerol, CH₂ OHCHOHCH2 OH, is
miscible in water but benzene, C₆H₆, has very limited solubility in water.
31. Explain why ionic substances show a wide range of solubilities in water.
32. Indicate the type of solute-solvent interaction that is most important in each of the
following solutions:
a. KBr in water
C. ammonia in water
b. hexane, C₆ H₁₄, in gasoline
33. Describe the characteritics of endothermic and exothermic dissolution processes.
34. Consider the following solutions. In each case, predict whether the solubility of the
solute should be high or low. Justify your answer.
a. KCI in H2O
d. H2O in CH₃ OH
b. HF in H2O
e. CCI₄ in H2O
C. KCI in CCI₄
35. What is the usual solubility behavior of an ionic compound in water when the
temperature is raised? Give an example of an exception to this behavior.
36. Give one example of each: a salt whose heat of solution is exothermic and a salt
whose heat of solution is endothermic.
107
Chemistry Grade 10
37. What do you expect to happen to a concentration of dissolved gas in a solution
as the solution is heated?
38. Explain why a carbonated beverage must be stored in a closed container.
39. Pressure has an effect on the solubility of oxygen in water but a negligible effect
on the solubility of sugar in water. Why?
40. Which of the following ions would be expected to have the greater energy of
hydration, Mg²⁺ or Al³⁺?
41. Which of the following ions would be expected to have the greater energy of
hydration, F⁻ or CIT?
Part III: Work Out Problems
42. The solubility of carbon dioxide in water is 0.161 g CO2 in 100 mL of water at
20oC and 1.00 atm. A soft drink is carbonated with carbon dioxide gas at 5.50
atm pressure. What is the solubility of carbon dioxide in water at this pressure?
43. Calculate the molarity of each of the following solutions:
a. 10.5 g NaCl in 350.0 mL of solution
b. 40.7 g LiCIO₄ 3H2O in 125 mL of solution
44. What mass of solution containing 5.00% potassium iodide, KI, by mass contains
258 mg KI?
45. Caffeine, C₈H₁₀N₄O₂, is a stimulant found in tea and coffee. A sample of the
substance was dissolved in 45.0 g of chloroform, CHCI₃, to give a 0.0946 m
solution. How many grams of caffeine were in the sample? Molar mass caffeine
= 194.19 g/mol
46. A 100.0-g sample of a brand of rubbing alcohol contains 65.0 g of isopropyl
alcohol, C₃H₇OH, and 35.0 g of water. What is the mole fraction of isopropyl
alcohol in the solution? What is the mole fraction of water?
47. A bleaching solution contains sodium hypochlorite, NaCIO, dissolved in water. The
solution is 0.650 m NaCIO. What is the mole fraction of sodium hypochlorite?
48. The concentrated sulfuric acid we use in the laboratory is 98.0% H2SO4, by mass.
Calculate the molality and molarity of the acid solution. The density of the solution
is 1.83 g/mL.
49. Calculate the approximate volume of water that must be added to 250 mL of
1.25 N solution to make it 0.500 N.
50. An antiseptic solution contains hydrogen peroxide, H₂O₂, in water. The solution is
0.610 m H₂O₂. What is the mole fraction of hydrogen peroxide?
51. Citric acid, H3C6H₅O₇, occurs in plants. Lemons contain 5% to 8% citric acid by
mass. The acid is added to beverages and candy. An aqueous solution is 0.688 m
citric acid. The density is 1.049 g/mL. What is the molar concentration?
52. A solution of vinegar is 0.763 M acetic acid, HC2H₃O₂. The density of the vinegar
is 1.004 g/mL. What is the molal concentration of acetic acid?
108
Stomach
Drain
Battery
Lemon
Tomato
Milk
Blood
Tablets
Soap
Cleaner
3
Decreasing
PH
Increasing
0
I
2
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Acidic
Neutral
Alkaline
UNIT
Stomach Acid Vinegar Coffee Water Baking Soda Ammonia Bleach
Solution
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
classify inorganic compounds on the basis of their composition and/ or their
chemistry;
discuss types of oxides and their chemical properties;
explain the Arrhenius concept of acids and bases;
mention the classification of acids and salts;
describe the general properties, preparation and uses of common acids,
bases and salts;
distinguish the differences between strong and weak acids/ bases; and
concentrated and dilute acids/ bases;
recognize the corrosive nature of acids and bases, and exercise the
necessary precautions in handling and using them;
develop skills for identifying acidic, basic and neutral compounds;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, classifying, comparing
and contrasting, inferring, predicting, communicating, measuring, asking
questions, interpreting data, drawing conclusion, applying concepts,
relating cause and effect and problem solving.
Chemistry Grade 10
Start-up Activity
Discuss the following in groups and present your
conclusion to the class.
1. Which flavour (salty, sour, bitter or none) each
of the following substances does have? Coffee,
unripe orange, cheese, outer peel of lemon, kosso,
water, common salt, vinegar.
2. Consider the following: carbohydrates, proteins,
urea, oils, diamond, salt, water, baking soda.
Classify them into organic and inorganic and
analyze the source of each substance.
3. Can you identify organic and inorganic compounds
using their melting points?
3.1 Introduction
By the end of this section, students will be able to
define inorganic compounds;
classify inorganic compounds as oxides, acids, bases and salts.
The term inorganic compound refers to all compounds that do not contain carbon
except simpler compounds of carbon like oxides (eg CO₂), carbonates (eg CaCO₃)
and carbides (eg SiC). Inorganic compounds are compounds consisting of mineral
constituents of the earth or generally found in nonliving things. Compounds found in
living things are generally organic compounds (see unit 6 for the details). The majority
of metal compounds are inorganic.
Inorganic compounds are mostly found in nature as silicates, oxides, carbonates,
sulphides, sulphates, chlorides, nitrates, etc.
Inorganic compounds are generally classified into four groups namely oxides, acids,
bases and salts.
We are familiar with the utility and importance of oxides, acids, bases and salts in
our daily life. For example, we know that the carbon dioxide (CO₂) gas in CO₂-fire
extinguisher is an oxide, the sour taste of vinegar is due to acetic acid (CH₃COOH),
sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is a base used in the preparation of soaps, and sodium
chloride (NaCl) is common salt which is useful as a food ingredient. This unit deals with
the chemical nature and formation of more oxides, acids, bases and salts.
110
Important Inorganic Compounds
Exercise 3.1
1. List some inorganic compounds with which you are familiar. Write on the board.
2. Lime stone (CaCO₃) and common salt (NaCl) are inorganic substances. Why?
3. Which branch of chemistry is concerned with the study of all elements?
4. What is the source of inorganic compounds ?
3.2 Oxides
Form a group and discuss the following and present
your findings to the class;
?
1. Why oxygen is the most abundant element on the
earth's crust?
2. How oxygen exists in nature?
3. Which elements react with oxygen?
4. What do you call the product when oxygen reacts
Activity 3.1
with an element?
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define and classify oxides as acidic, basic, neutral, amphoteric and peroxides
define and give examples of acidic oxides, basic oxides, amphoteric oxides
and neutral oxides
explain the chemical properties of acidic oxides, basic oxides, amphoteric
oxides and neutral oxides
differentiate basic oxides from acidic oxides using experimental results
compare and contrast acidic and basic oxides
explain the salt-forming nature of acidic oxide, basic oxide and amphoteric
oxide
define neutral oxides and peroxides and give examples for each of them
discuss the chemical properties of peroxides
differentiate peroxides from other oxides by conducting an experiment
Oxygen reacts directly with almost all elements except the noble gases and inactive
metals like gold, platinum, and palladium. Such compounds of oxygen are called
oxides. Oxides are binary compounds containing oxygen and any other element
(metal, non-metal or metalloid). Note that binary compounds are those consisting of
only two elements.
Oxygen + Element (Metal, Non-metal or Metalloid)
Oxide
111
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 3.1: magnesium oxide, MgO, aluminium oxide, AI2O3, carbon dioxide,
CO2, and sulphur dioxide, SO₂ and carbon monoxide, CO are examples of oxides.
Exercise 3.2
Classify the following compounds as oxides or not oxides.
A. Na₂O
F. SO₃
B. N2O₅
G. H3PO4
C. Na2CO3
H. AI2O3
D. P4O10
I. H2O
E. KNO₃
J. H2SO4
Oxides, based on their properties are classified as shown in Figure 3.1.
Acidic Oxides
Basic Oxides
Oxides
Neutral Oxides
Amphoteric Oxides
Peroxides
Figure 3.1 Classification of oxides.
A. Acidic Oxides
Discuss in your group and present your conclusions to
the class.
1. What is acid rain and what are the major causes
of acid rain?
2. What would be the pH (decreases, increases or
remains unchanged) of solution when carbon
dioxide (CO₂), dinitrogen pentoxide (N₂O₅),
?
tetraphosphorous decaoxide (P₄O₁₀), sulfur
dioxide (SO₂) and dichlorine heptoxide (CI₂O₇)
are dissolved in water? What can you conclude
regarding the acid-base behavior of oxides of
nonetallic elements like C, N, S, CI, and P?
Activity 3.2
112
Important Inorganic Compounds
Acidic oxides are the oxides formed by the chemical combination of oxygen with non-
metals (Groups 14 -17).
These oxides are also called acid anhydrides, since they form acidic solutions when
reacted or dissolved in water. Acid anhydride means acid without water. Generally
speaking, acidic oxides are non-metal oxides. Examples of acidic oxides include
carbon dioxide, CO2, nitrogen dioxide, NO₂, and sulphur dioxide, SO₂. However, it
is very important to note that all non-metal oxides are not necessarily acidic oxides.
For example, carbon monoxide, CO, and di-nitrogen monoxide, N₂O, are non-metal
oxides, but they are neutral oxides which will be discussed later (D). There are acidic
oxides that do not react directly with water. The acids of such oxides are formed
by other methods. For example; SiO₂ is not soluble in water, but it neutralizes basic
oxides, thus it is acidic.
SiO₂ + Na₂O
Na2SiO₃ (sodium silicate)
The acid of SiO₂ (H2SiO₃) is prepared by the reaction of HCI with Na2SiO₃ as shown
below:
Na2SiO3 (aq) + HCI (aq)
H2SiO3 (aq) + 2NaCl (aq)
Chemical properties of acidic oxides
1. Acidic oxides (acid anhydrides) dissolve in water to form acidic solution (acid).
Acid anhydride + Water
Acid
CO2 + H2O
H2CO3 (Carbonic acid)
SO₂ + H2O
H2SO3 (Sulphurous acid)
2. Acidic oxides react with basic or metallic oxides to form salt.
Acidic oxide + Basic oxide
Salt
CO2 + Na₂O
Na2CO₃ (sodium carbonate)
SO₃ + CaO
CaSO₄ (calcium sulphate)
3. Acidic oxides react with bases to form salt and water. This reaction is called
neutralization reaction.
Acidic oxide + Base
Salt + Water
SO₂ + 2NaOH
Na2SO₃ + H2O
CO2 + 2LiOH
Li2CO₃ + H₂O
113
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 3.3
1. List some examples of acidic oxides.
2. Give two examples of non-metallic oxides which are not acidic oxides.
3. Complete and balance the following equations.
a. N2O5 + H2O
d. Ca(OH)₂ + SO₃
b. P₄O₁₀ + H2O
e. KOH + CO2
C. MgO + CO2
f. SrO + SO₂
B.
Basic Oxides
Basic oxides are oxides that are composed of metals and oxygen. Most metals form
oxides which exhibit basic properties and dissolve in water to give alkaline solutions.
But, all metal oxides are not necessarily basic oxides; for example AI2O₃ and ZnO
are amphoteric oxides, which will be discussed in part (C). Oxides of metals that
dissolve in water and react with it to form basic or alkaline solutions are called basic
anhydrides. There are metallic oxides which have basic properties but are insoluble in
water. These oxides react with acids to give salt and water
Example:
FeO + 2HCI
FeCl₂ + H2O
The oxides of active metals, group IA and heavier members of group IIA, dissolve in
water and readily form bases. The term base is used to describe both soluble and
insoluble basic oxides. Some examples of basic oxides are Li₂O, Na₂O, K₂O, MgO,
CaO, BaO, and CuO.
Discuss the following questions in your group and
present your conclusion to the class.
a. What products do basic oxides form in their
?
reactions with water, acidic oxides and acids?
b. What is the type of reaction that takes place
between lime (CaO) and carbon dioxide (CO₂)?
C. Write the balanced chemical equation for each of
Activity 3.3
the chemical reactions that occur in (a) and (b).
Chemical properties of basic oxides
1.
Basic oxides dissolve in water to form alkaline solutions. As they dissolve, they
react with water to form the corresponding metal hydroxides.
Basic oxide + Water
Base (Alkali)
Examples:
Li₂O + H2O
2LiOH
CaO + H2O
Ca(OH)₂
114
Important Inorganic Compounds
2.
Basic oxides react with acidic oxides to form salts.
Basic oxide + Acidic oxide
Salt
Examples:
BaO + SO₃
BaSO₄
Na₂O + CO2
Na2CO₃
3.
Basic oxides react with acids to form a salt and water.
Basic oxide + Acid
Salt + Water
Examples:
CaO + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + H2O
CuO + H2SO₄
CuSO₄ + H2O
Table 3.1 Some common indicators and the colour they develop in acidic and basic
solutions
Indicator
Colour in aqueous solution of
Colour in aqueous
acidic oxide
solution of basic oxide
Universal
Yellow - orange (in weakly acidic)
Blue (in weakly basic) and
Indicator
and red (in strongly acidic)
purple (in strongly basic)
Litmus
Red
Blue
Phenolphthalein
Colourless
Pink (red)
Methyl orange
Red
Yellow
Note that acidic and basic oxides can be identified either by their effects on indicators
or chemical interaction they have with one another. Acidic oxides react with bases
while basic oxides react with acids. But acidic oxides do not react with acids and basic
oxides do not react with bases.
Experiment 3.1
Test for Acidity and Basicity of Oxides
Objective: To identify basic and acidic oxides.
Apparatus: Deflagrating spoon, gas jar and gas jar lid, test tubes.
Chemicals: Sulphur, magnesium or calcium metal, water, universal indicator, litmus
paper (blue and red).
Procedure:
1.
Take a small amount of powdered sulphur in a deflagrating spoon and
heat it.
115
Chemistry Grade 10
As soon as sulphur starts burning, introduce the spoon into a gas jar. Cover
the gas jar with a lid to ensure that the gas produced does not escape.
Remove the spoon after some time. Add 10 mL of water into the gas jar
and quickly replace the lid. Shake the gas jar well. Take two test tubes and
pour 5 mL of the solution to each test tube. Add a few drops of universal
indicator solution to the first test tube and blue litmus paper in the second.
2. Ignite a small amount of magnesium or calcium metal on a deflagrating
spoon and insert in to a gas jar. Add 10 mL water to the ash formed and
shake. Take two test tubes and pour 5 mL of the solution to each of the
test tubes. Add a few drops of universal indicator in the first and red litmus
paper to the second test tube.
Questions
a. What compounds are formed by the combustion of sulphur and magnesium
or calcium? Write chemical equations to show the reactions.
b. What happens when water is added to the gas jars in which sulphur was
burnt?
c. What colours are observed by adding drops of universal indicator and
blue or red litmus to the solutions in the test tubes?
d. Why does the change in the colour of indicators occur in the various
solutions? Write a laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
Note: Universal indicator and litmus paper serve as indicators. Indicators are
substances used to identify whether a given solution is acidic or basic by showing
colour changes.
Exercise 3.4
1. Complete and balance the following chemical equations:
a. K₂O + H₂O
d. Li2O + SO₂
b. MgO + H2O
e. BaO + H2SO4
C. Na₂O + CO₂
f. CuO + HCI
2. Classify the following oxides as basic or acidic:
a. MgO
d. N2O₅
g. K2O
b. BaO
e. Cu2O
h. SO₂
C. P₄O₁₀
f. Fe2O3
116
Important Inorganic Compounds
C.
Amphoteric Oxides
?
What trend do you observe in the properties of
oxides of the elements in a period as you go from left
to right in the periodic table? Which elements form
a basic oxide, which elements form acidic oxides?
Discuss this in your group and present to the class.
Activity 3.4
An oxide which shows both acidic and basic behavior is called amphoteric oxide (see
Figure 3.1).
Acid
Salt + Water
Amphoteric Oxide
Salt + Water
Base
Figure 3.1 The reaction of amphoteric oxide with acids and bases.
For example, oxides of aluminium (AI₂O₃) and zinc (ZnO) are amphoteric. These oxides
react with strong bases as well as strong acids.
A.
Reactions showing amphoteric nature of aluminium oxide (AI₂O₃)
HCI
AICI₃ + H₂O
AI2O₃
NaAIO₂ + H₂O
NaOH
B.
Reactions showing amphoteric nature of zinc oxide (ZnO)
HCI
ZnCl₂ + H₂O
ZnO
Na₂ZnO₂ + H₂O
NaOH
Some other examples of amphoteric oxides are PbO, PbO₂, SnO, and SnO₂. It is
also important to realize that hydroxides which react with both acids and bases are
described as amphoteric hydroxides. For example, aluminium hydroxide, AI(OH)₃,
reacts with both acids and bases to form salt and water. So, AI(OH)₃, is amphoteric
in nature.
What is the common characteristic of acidic, basic and amphoteric oxides? Acidic
oxides form salts when reacted with basic oxides and bases. Basic oxides also produce
117
Chemistry Grade 10
salts in their reactions with acidic oxides and acids. Amphoteric oxides form salts when
they react with acids and bases. Thus, acidic oxides, basic oxides and amphoteric
oxides are salt-forming oxides.
Exercise 3.5
1. Write the chemical equations to show the amphoteric properties of, AI2O3 and
PbO when they react with:
a. NaOH
C. KOH
b. HNO3
d. H2SO4
Experiment 3.2
Investigating Amphoteric Behaviour of Oxides
Objective: To observe the amphoteric behaviour of AI2O3.
Apparatus: Spatula, reagent bottles, beakers, and glass rod.
Chemicals: AI2O3, HCI, NaOH, Universal indicator and water.
Procedure:
1. Mix 20 mL concentrated HCI and 80 mL water in one reagent bottle;
2. Dissolve 8 g NaOH in 100 mL water in another reagent bottle.
3. Add universal indicator to the acid and base, and observe the colour change.
4. Take two beakers and place a spatula full of AI2O3 in each of the beakers.
5. Pour the HCI solution (which you prepared) into one of the beakers and NaOH
solution into the other. Stir the mixture with a glass rod.
6. Add universal indicator in the solutions of beakers and observe the colour
change.
Questions
1. Does AI2O3 react with the solutions in both beakers?
2. What does the change in colour of the indicator in the mixtures indicate?
3. Write the chemical equations to show what has happened?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
118
Important Inorganic Compounds
D.
Neutral Oxides
1. Explain the acid-base behavior of oxides according
to the electropositive character (oxidation state) of
the oxide's central atom. Consider all nitrogen oxides
a. Assign oxidation state for each.
b. Classify them as soluble and in soluble in water.
C.
Which oxidation state (higher or lower) favors
solubility in water?
d. Which of the nitrogen oxides produce acidic
solution in water?
?
2. In general, oxides of nonmetals are acidic whereas
oxides of metals are basic or amphoteric. Can an
oxide be neither acidic nor basic?
Discuss in your group and present to the class
Activity 3.5
Neutral oxides react neither with acids nor with bases to form salt and water. Hence,
neutral oxides do not show basic and acidic properties. Examples of neutral oxides
are water, H2O, carbon monoxide, CO, dinitrogen monoxide, N₂O, and nitrogen
monoxide, NO. Neutral oxides are very few in number. Neutral oxides are not salt-
forming oxides.
E.
Peroxides
Discuss the following in your group and present your
conclusion to the class.
?
a. Oxides contain O2- ions or the group -0- or =0.
What is the oxidation state of oxygen in oxides?
b. What is the oxidation state of oxygen in AI2O3,
N₂O₅, P4O 10' KO₂ and SO₂?
C. What kind of bonds form oxygen in these oxides?
Activity 3.6
Compounds which contain oxygen with oxidation number -1 are called peroxides. In
peroxides, the two oxygen atoms are linked to each other and with atoms of other
elements. Thus, peroxides contain the peroxide, "-0-0-" link. Some examples of
peroxides are hydrogen peroxide, H₂O₂, sodium peroxide, Na₂O₂, calcium peroxide,
CaO₂, barium peroxide, BaO₂, and strontium peroxide, SrO₂.
Most peroxides of metals are formed by burning the metals in a sufficient amount of
oxygen.
119
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 3.2:
2Na (s) + O2 (g)
Na2O2 (s)
Ca (s) + O2 (g)
CaO2 (s)
There are many organic peroxides (ROOR') which are important activators in a
process called polymerization, which creates plastic polymers.
Chemical Properties of Peroxides
1. Peroxides are powerful oxidizing agents; they react with different substances
by losing oxygen.
Example 3.3:
PbS (s) + 4H₂O₂(aq)
PbSO4 (s) + 4H₂O (I)
2KI (aq) + H2SO4 (aq) + H2O2 (aq)
I2 (s) + K2SO₄ (aq) + 2H2O (I)
2. Peroxides react with aqueous acids to form hydrogen peroxide.
Example 3.4:
Na2O₂ (s) + 2HCI (aq)
2NaCl (aq) + H2O2 (aq)
CaO2 (s) + H2SO4 (aq)
CaSO4 (s) + H2O2 (aq)
Hydrogen Peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide, H₂O₂, is a colorless liquid whose solutions are usually used as
bleach and an antiseptic. Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to release oxygen. This
reaction is slow but can be speed up by the addition of catalysts like MnO₂ or Pt.
2H₂O₂(aq)
2H2O (I) + (g)
Hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidizing agent. Its oxidizing power is responsible
for its effectiveness as an antiseptic for mouthwash and cleansing wounds. When
hydrogen peroxide is added to a colored dye, the molecule responsible for the color
will oxidize and so the color will disappear, showing its bleaching action. For example,
if hydrogen peroxide is added to a black dye (paint) that contains lead sulphide, PbS,
the black colour turns white. This is due to the oxidation of PbS to PbSO₄. The equation
for this process is:
PbS (s) + 4H2O2
PbSO4 + 4H2O (I)
120
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.3
Distinguishing Peroxides from Other Oxides
Objective: To identify peroxides from other oxides.
Chemicals: CaO or MgO, AI2O3 or ZnO or PbO, Na2O₂ or BaO₂, P₄O₁₀' KI, dilute
H2SO4, starch, water.
Materials: Reagent bottle, six beakers, dropper, and spatula.
Procedure:
1. Take three beakers. In the first beaker, dissolve 20 g KI in water to prepare
a 250 mL solution. Dilute 2 mL concentrated H2SO4 by pouring it in 18 mL of
water in the second beaker.
2. Prepare starch solution in the third beaker by boiling 1g starch in 100 mL
water.
3. Take four beakers and pour 50 mL KI solution to each of them. Acidify the
solutions in each of the beakers by adding 5-10 drops of dilute H2SO ₄.
4. Add a spatula full of CaO or MgO in the first, AI2O3 or ZnO or PbO in the
second, Na2O₂ or BaO₂ in the third and P4O10 in the fourth beaker and then
add about 5 mL starch solution to each of the four beakers.
Questions
1. In which beaker do you see a color change?
2. What is the cause of the colour change?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the change?
4. Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Exercise 3.6
1. Classify the following oxides as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral and
peroxides
a. Na₂O
f. N2O5
k. Li2O
b. NO
g. CaO
I. H3PO₄
C. CO2
h. CO
m. AI2O3
d. ZnO
i. CaO2
n. SO₂
e. MgO
i. Na₂O₂
121
Chemistry Grade 10
2. Write an acidic oxide that should react with water to form each of the
following acids?
a. H2SO3
C. HNO3
e. H3PO3
b. H2SO4
d. H2CO3
f. H3PO4
3. Identify the basic anhydrides that react with water to form each of the following
bases:
a. Ca(OH)₂
C. Mg(OH)₂
e. Sr(OH)₂
b. KOH
d. NaOH
f. Ba(OH)₂
4. Complete and write the balanced equation for each of the following
a. MgO + H2SO4
C. AI2O3 + HNO3
e. NaOH + CO2
b. CaO + H3PO4
d. K₂O + H2SO4
f. ZnO + H3PO4
5. How peroxides differ from oxides? Write the structures of H2O2' Na₂O₂, CaO2
6. How can you identify whether an oxide is acidic, basic or neutral?
3.3 Acids
Discuss in your group and present it to the class.
a. Describe the reason why unripe citrus fruits or
?
lemon juice give sour taste?
b. List as many sour foods as possible which you have
ever tasted.
C. Give some examples of acids that you have
Activity 3.7
encountered in your everyday life?
By the end of this section, students will be able to
define acids in terms of the concepts of Arrhenius;
give examples of acids based on Arrhenius;
categorize acids as monoprotic and poly protic based on the number of
ionizable(replaceable) hydrogen atom;
group acids as binary and ternary based on the number of elements, they contain
define strong and weak acids;
differentiate between strong and weak acids;
define concentrated and dilute acids;
describe the conceptual difference between strong and concentrated acids;
explain the conceptual difference between weak and dilute acids;
apply the necessary precautions while working with acids;
define pH;
describe the pH scale;
identify a given pH-labelled solution as acidic, basic or neutral;
122
Important Inorganic Compounds
perform activities to determine the pH of some common substances using universal
indicators or pH meter;
calculate the pH of a given acidic solution;
calculate the concentration of hydrogen ion from the given information;
perform activities to investigate some physical properties of acids;
do activities to investigate some chemical properties of acids;
discuss the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acidic oxides with
water and formation of volatile acids from non -volatile acids as the three
methods of preparation of acids;
carry out simple experiment to prepare acids in laboratory;
describe the uses of the three common laboratory acids;
explain the general properties of acids.
Acids play key roles in our bodies, in our homes, and in the laboratories. We seem to
like the sour taste of acids; we add them to salad dressings, and spices. Many foods,
including citrus fruits and some vegetables, contain acids.
Acetic acid in vinegar, citric acid in lemons and other citrus fruits, are among the
acids that we encounter every day. Hydrochloric acid is the acid in gastric juice; it is
essential to digestion. Phosphoric acid gives flavour to many carbonated beverages.
In Latin the word acidus is used for sour. In the study of chemistry the term acid has
been used to name a group of compounds which have a sour taste.
Arrhenius Definition of Acids
The simplest definition of acids is suggested by Savante Arrhenius, a Swedish Chemist.
Arrhenius defined an acid as a substance that releases hydrogen ion or proton, H⁺,
or hydronium ion, H3O+, in aqueous solution. In general, the ionization of acids takes
place as follows.
HA(aq)
H⁺(aq) + A⁻ (aq) or HA(aq) + H₂O(I)
H₃O⁺(aq) + A⁻(aq)
Example 3.5:
HCl(aq)
H⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq) or HCl(aq) + H₂O(I)
H3O⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq)
H2SO₄(aq)
2H⁺(aq) + SO, ²-(aq) or H₂SO₄(aq) + 2H₂O(I)
2H₃O⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq)
According to this definition, for a substance to be an Arrhenius acid, it should contain
ionizable hydrogen. Some examples of Arrhenius acids are HNO3, H2SO4, H3PO4,
HBr, HI and HF.
Although the Arrhenius concept has limited scope yet, it led to the development of
more general theories of acid-base behavior. Broader Acid-base definitions will be
dealt in grade 12 chemistry.
123
Chemistry Grade 10
Classification of Acids
?
Sulphuric acid, H2SO4, has two hydrogen atoms and
it is a diprotic acid. Propionic acid, 2 COOH, has
six hydrogen atoms but is classified as a monoprotic
acid.
Discuss the reason in your group and present it to the
Activity 3.8
class.
A.
Classification of Acids Based on the Number of lonizable Hydrogen
Acids are classified as monoprotic, diprotic and polyprotic depending upon the
number of replaceable hydrogen ions (H⁺) or hydronium ions (H₃O⁺ ions) per molecule
of the acid.
An acid that contains only one ionisable hydrogen atom per molecule is called
monoprotic.
Example 3.6: Hydrochloric acid (HCI) and nitric acid (HNO₃) are monoprotic
acids because each give only one H+ ion upon dissociation in aqueous solution.
HCI (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl- (aq)
HNO3 (aq)
H+ (aq) + NO3- - (aq)
Polyprotic acids are those acids containing more than one ionizable (replaceable)
hydrogen ion in aqueous solution. Polyprotic acids which contain two ionizable hydrogen
atoms such as H2SO4, H₂S, and H2CO3 are called diprotic acids; those containing three
ionizable hydrogen atoms like H3PO4 are called triprotic acids. The dissociation of
polyprotic acids in aqueous solution is shown in the following chemical equations:
H2SO4 (aq)
2H+ (aq) + SO₄²⁻ (aq)
H2CO3 (aq)
2H+ (aq) + CO3²⁻ (aq)
H3PO4 (aq)
3H+ (aq) + PO4³⁻ (aq)
?
Ammonia (NH₃) and phosphoric acid (H₃PO₄) have
three hydrogen atoms but ammonia does not behave
as a triprotic acid. It is a base. Why? Discuss in your
group and present it to the class.
Activity 3.9
B.
Classification of Acids Based on the Number of Elements they Contain
Acids can also be classified depending on the number of their constituent elements
as binary and ternary acids. Binary acids are those acids composed of only two
different elements. The two elements are hydrogen and a non-metal.
124
Important Inorganic Compounds
Examples of binary acids are HCI, HBr, HF, HI, and H2S.
Ternary acids also called oxy-acids are acids composed of three different elements.
The three elements usually are hydrogen, oxygen and a non-metal. Examples are
H₂SO₄, H2CO3, HCIO₄, and H3PO4
1. Add a drop of lemon juice on your tongue and try
to identify its taste. Repeat your observation with
?
orange juice. Try to classify them as acid or base,
depending on their taste.
2. Why should curd and acid-containing substances
not be kept in brass and copper vessels? (Brass is
Activity 3.10
an alloy of copper and Zinc). Discuss in class.
Acids generally have the following properties:
General Properties of Acids
I. Acids have a sour taste. Aqueous solutions of acids have a sour taste. Lemon juice
and orange juice taste sour due to the presence of citric acid. Citric acid in lemon
juice and orange juice is harmless. However, concentrated acids are corrosive and
poisonous. So the test 'taste' is never allowed to identify acids especially in the
laboratories.
II. Acids change the color of certain acid-base indicators. The common indicators
available in high school laboratories are litmus, phenolphthalein, methyl orange
or methyl red and universal indicator. Note that natural dyes like red extract of
cabbage leaves, petals of some colored flowers and turmeric also act as indicators
to test the presence of acid or base.
Experiment 3.4
Effect of Acids on Indicators
Objective: To detect the acidity of a solution using indicators.
Chemicals: Lemon juice, dilute HCI, dilute HNO3' dilute H2SO4
phenolphthalein, litmus, methyl red, universal indicator
Apparatus: Test tubes, test tube rack, test tube holder, and reagent bottles.
125
Chemistry Grade 10
Procedure:
Take four clean test tubes and place some lemon juice in the first, dilute HCI in
the second, dilute HNO3 in the third and dilute H2SO4 in the fourth. Dip a strip of
blue litmus paper into each of the four test tubes and observe. Follow the same
procedure and repeat the experiment until each acid has been tested by each
indicator. Record your observation.
Questions
1. What colours have you observed when each indicator was added to each of
the four acid solutions? Record the colour change of each indicator in each
solution (lemon juice, dilute HCI, HNO3 and H2SO 4) using the following table.
2. Why do all the acids show similar color changes in the same indicator?
3. What can you say about the acid-base behavior of indicators? Are indicators
acidic or basic ?
Table 3.2 Colour of indicators in lemon juice, dilute HCI, HNO3 and H2SO4
Indicator
Colour of indicator in
Lemon juice
Dilute HNO3
Dilute HCI
Dilute H2SO4
III. Acids react with active metals to yield hydrogen gas. Acids react explosively
with metals like sodium, potassium and calcium. The reaction is very dangerous and
should not be performed. However, dilute acids (HCI, H2SO 4) react moderately
with reactive metals like: Mg, Zn, Fe and Al to form their respective salts with the
evolution of hydrogen gas.
Example 3.7:
H2SO4 + Zn
ZnSO₄ + H2
6HCI + 2AI
2AICI₃ + 3H2
Concentrated nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid react with copper
producing nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide gases, respectively, instead
of hydrogen. This is because concentrated HNO3 and hot concentrated H2SO4
are oxidizing acids. The reactions of these acids with copper are given by the
following equations:
Cu + 4HNO3
Cu(NO₃)₂ + 2NO2 + 2H2O
Cu + 2H2SO₄
CuSO4 + SO2 + 2H2O
126
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.5
Investigating the Reactions of Metals with Dilute Acids
Objective: To investigate the reaction between active metals and dilute acids.
Chemicals: Dilute H2SO4, dilute HCI, zinc, magnesium and iron
Apparatus: Test tubes, test tube holder, test tube rack, burner, match, cork and
spatula.
Procedure:
Take three test tubes and place a spatula-full of powdered zinc in the first,
powdered magnesium in the second and iron filings in the third. Pour dilute HCI
into each of the test tubes until the metals are completely covered by the acid. To
test the type of gas evolved, cover one of the test tubes with a cork which has a
glass delivery (jet tube as shown in Figure 3.2). Bring a burning match stick close
to the glass tube mouth, the gas burns with a pale blue flame with a characteristic
sound. Repeat the experiment with dilute H2SO4 after placing each of the three
metals in three different test tubes.
Questions:
A. What does the formation of bubbles indicate?
B. What sound do you hear when the burning splint is close to the mouth of the
test tube?
C. Which gas is evolved during the reaction?
D. Which metal's reaction with dilute HCI or H2SO4 is the most violent?
E. Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Blue flame
Narrow jet tube
Cork
Clamp
Liquid HCI or
dil. H2SO₄
Zinc granules or
Magnesium metal
Figure 3.2 Action of dilute acids on relatively active metals.
Acids react with carbonates and hydrogen carbonates to form salt, water and carbon
dioxide gas
127
Chemistry Grade 10
Acid + Hydrogen carbonate
Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
Acid + Carbonate
Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
Example 3.8
2HCI + CaCO3
CaCl₂ + H2O + CO2
HCI + NaHCO3
NaCl + H2O + CO2
Experiment 3.6
Reactions of Acids with Carbonates and Hydrogen Carbonates
Objective: To investigate the reaction between acids and carbonates and
bicarbonates.
Chemicals: Dil. H2SO4, dil. HCI, Zinc, Magnesium, iron
Apparatus: Test tubes , test tube holder, test tube rack, burner, match, cork and
spatula
Procedure:
1. Take three conical flasks and add powdered Na2CO3 in the first, powdered
CaCO3 to the second and powdered sodium bicarbonate to the third. Pour
dilute HCI into each of the three conical flasks until the acid covers the
carbonates and bicarbonate. Hold damp blue litmus paper close to the mouth
of the conical flasks. Repeat this with damp red litmus paper and record your
observations. Bubble the gas through limewater as shown in Figure 3.3.
2. Repeat the experiment using the same carbonates and hydrogencarbonate
with dilute H2SO4 and dilute HNO3
HCI
Thistle
funnel
Double
bore cork
CO2
Na2CO3
Lime water
Figure 3.3 Test for Carbon dioxide.
128
Important Inorganic Compounds
Questions
A. What does the formation of bubbles in the conical flasks indicate?
B. Did the colour of the damp blue litmus paper change when you held it close
to the mouth of the conical flasks? What about the colour of damp red litmus?
C. What happened to the colour of lime water when you bubbled the gas
through it? If there was any change, what did it prove? Write a balanced
chemical equation for the change?
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
IV. Concentrated acids react with sulphites to form salts with the liberation of sulphur
dioxide gas.
Sulphite + Acid
Sulphur dioxide + Salt + Water
CaSO₃ + H2SO4
SO₂ + CaSO4 + H2O
NaHSO₃ + HCI
SO₂ + NaCl + H2O
Experiment 3.7
Neutralization Reaction
Objective: To investigate the reaction between acids and bases
Chemicals: 1 M HCI, 1 M NaOH, 0.5 M Ca(OH)₂, red and blue litmus papers
Apparatus: Four 150 mL beakers, two droppers, stirring rod, two watch glasses.
Procedure
1. Make 1 M NaOH solution by dissolving 4.0 g NaOH in enough water to make
100 mL solution.
2. Make a 1 M HCI solution by dissolving 8.3 mL of concentrated HCI in enough
distilled water until the volume of the solution is 100 mL.
3. Dissolve 3.7 g of Ca(OH)₂ in enough distilled water to make 100 mL solution.
4. To a 150 mL beaker add 10 mL HCI solution and 9.5 mL NaOH solution
and stir thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus paper. Continue adding
NaOH solution dropwise using a dropper, stirring after each addition and
checking with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red stays
red. Put 2 mL of the neutral solution in a watch glass and allow the water to
evaporate until the next day.
5. To another 150 mL beaker add 10 mL Ca(OH)₂ solution and 9.5 mL HCI
solution. Repeat all the steps, which you followed in procedure 4.
129
Chemistry Grade 10
Questions
A. Is there any colour change, when you dip blue and red litmus papers into the
solution of the acid and the base?
B. Why is it necessary to add NaOH solution dropwise (one drop at a time) in
procedure 4?
C. During this experiment, under what conditions does the blue litmus remain
blue and the red remain red?
D. What are the products formed in procedures 4 and 5? Write balanced
chemical equations for the reactions?
F. Write a laboratory report on your observations and submit to your teacher.
V. Acids react with bases (oxides and hydroxides of metal and ammonium hydroxide)
to form salts and water. The reaction of acids with basic oxides or bases to form
salt and water is called neutralization reaction
Acid + Base (basic oxides or hydroxides of metal)
Salt + Water
Example 3.9: reaction of acids with basic oxides
2HCI + MgO
MgCl₂ + H2O
H2SO4 + CaO
CaSO₄ + H2O
Example 3.10: Reaction of acids with hydroxides of metals
H2SO4 + 2NaOH
Na2SO₄ + 2H2O
HNO3 + KOH
KNO3 + H2O
VI. Aqueous solutions of acids are electrolytes, meaning that they conduct electrical
current. Some acids are strong electrolytes because they ionize completely in
water, yielding a great number of ions. Other acids are weak electrolytes that
exist primarily in a non-ionized form when dissolved in water.
Example 3.11: A solution of hydrochloric acid (HCI) conducts electricity as it
contains replaceable H atom which is furnished in solution as H+ ion and carries
the current.
HCI (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl- (aq)
HCI is a strong electrolyte because it gives large amount of ions in aqueous
solution.
Strong electrolytes give bright light. CH₃ COOH gives few ions in aqueous solution;
hence it is a weak electrolyte. Weak electrolytes give dim light.
130
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.8
Can Aqueous Acid Solution Conduct Electricity?
Objectives: To investigate the conductivity of acids
Chemicals: 1 M HCI, 1 M HNO3, 1 M CH₃ COOH,
Apparatus: Three 150 mL beakers, two graphite electrodes, insulated electric
wires, two dry cells, and bulb
Procedure:
Take about 100 mL of 1 M HCI in the first beaker, the same volume and concentration
of HNO3 and CH₃COOH in the second and third beakers respectively.
Arrange the set up as shown in Figure 3.4. First test the conduction of electricity
through HCI solution by inserting the two graphite electrodes. See whether the
bulb glows or not. Is the light bright or dim? Record your observation. Repeat the
same activity with HNO3 and CH2COOH. Rinse the electrodes after use in each
of the acid solutions. Compare the intensity of light produced with HNO3 and
CH3COOH.
AC plug
230 volt
Bulb
Beaker
dil.HCI solution
Graphite rods
Figure 3.4 Conductivity of acid solutions.
Questions
A. In which of the acid solutions does the bulb produce?
I) bright light? II) dim light?
B. What conclusions can you draw from your observations?
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
131
Chemistry Grade 10
Strength of Acids (Strong and Weak Acids)
Discuss in your group and present your conclusion to
the class.
1. Add a few drops of citric acid solution and
hydrochloric acid separately on a piece of waste
cotton cloth; What happens? Based on your
?
observations, can you classify these acids as weak
acid or strong acid?
2. Why is it safe to put acetic acid-containing vinegar
on food yet extremely dangerous to use dilute nitric
acid for the same purpose?
Activity 3.11
Based on their degree of dissociation, acids are divided into strong acids and weak
acids. If an acid completely dissociates in an aqueous solution, it is called a strong
acid. Strong acids produce large amount of H+ ions in the aqueous solution as they
dissociate completely. Hydrochloric acid (HCI), nitric acid (HNO₃), and sulfuric acid
(H₂SO₄) are some examples of acids that dissociate completely in aqueous solution.
Their dissociation is indicated by a single arrow
(-)
as shown below:
HCI (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl⁻ (aq)
HNO3 (aq)
H+ (aq) + NO3- - (aq)
H2SO4 (aq)
2H+ (aq) + SO₄ 2- (aq)
A dilute aqueous solution of strong acids contains predominantly the ions derived
from the acids instead of the acid molecules. For example, HCI and HNO3 are almost
completely ionized in water.
An acid is called weak if it dissociates only partially in aqueous solution. Weak acids
release few hydrogen ions in aqueous solution. The aqueous solution of a weak acid
contains hydronium ions, anions and dissolved molecules of the acid. Examples of weak
acids are acetic acid (CH₃COOH), oxalic acid (H₂C₂O₄), carbonic acid (H2CO₃). These
acids dissociate only partially as indicated by the double arrow
(=)
shown below:
CH3COOH
H+ + CH3COO⁻
H2C2O4
2H+
+
C2O₄²⁻
H2CO3
2H+ + CO3²⁻
Organic acids which contain the acidic carboxyl group - COOH, are generally weak
acids.
132
Important Inorganic Compounds
Exercise 3.7
1.
a. Give examples of organic acids and inorganic acids.
b. Classify your examples as strong and weak acids
2. Why do HCI, HNO3, etc. Show acidic characteristics in aqueous solutions while
solutions of compounds like alcohol and glucose do not show acidic property ?
Concentrated and Dilute Acids
Discuss in your group and present your conclusion to
?
the class.
a. In a solution, if there is 96% H2O and the rest is
H2SO4, what kind of solution is it?
b. In a solution, if there is 96% H2SO4 and the rest is
H2O, what kind of solution is it?
Activity 3.12
The terms "concentrated" and "dilute" are used to describe the relative amount of
acid present in a given solution. A concentrated acid has a relatively large amount of
solute dissolved in the solvent. A dilute acid has a relatively smaller amount of solute
dissolved in the solvent. Both strong acid and a weak acid may be concentrated or
diluted depending on the number of moles of acid present.
Precautions in Handling Acid
Concentrated acids are corrosive and may cause visible destruction or irreversible
alterations to living tissue by chemical action at the site of contact. Hence, the following
safety precautions should be taken when handling acids:
a. Wear goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat
b. If a concentrated acid is spilled or splashed on your body, first wash the affected
part with running water and then with 10% Na2CO₃ solution
C. To dilute concentrated acids, pour the concentrated acid in to water and not water
in to the acid.
d. If corrosive acids are swallowed, administer weak bases such as Mg(OH)₂ or
AI(OH)₃.
e. Use bellows to pipette acid instead of sucking using yours lips
f. If an acid enters your eye, wash with water repeatedly and then consult a doctor
g. If concentrated acid is spilled on to cloth, immediately wash it with running water
pH and pH scale
The molar concentrations of H3O+ in aqueous solutions are generally very small and
expressing acidity as the concentration of H3O+ becomes cumbersome. Instead, a
133
Chemistry Grade 10
more convenient quantity called pH is used as a measure of the acid strength of a
solution. pH scale is used to rank solutions in terms of acidity or basicity (alkalinity).
Concentration of hydrogen ion [H⁺] in pure water is the basis for the pH scale. Water
is a weak electrolyte because it ionizes very slightly into ions in a process called
autoionization or self-ionization; H2O 1L H+ + OH-
The ionic product constant of water 'Kw' is given as
Kw = [H⁺][OH⁻] = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴ at 25 °C
It is known that the amount of [H⁺] and [OH⁻] in pure water are equal
[H⁺] = [OH⁻] or
[H⁺]² = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
[H⁺] = 1.0 x10⁻⁷
at 25 °C
As it is difficult to deal with such small figures having negative exponents, it is convenient
to convert these figures into a positive figure using a numerical system. It is taking
the common (base-10) logarithm of the figure and multiplying it with -1. 'p' before
a symbol means' negative logarithm of the symbol. Therefore, pH is the negative
logarithm of molar concentration of the hydrogen ions.
pH = log[H⁺]
With reference to this equation, a scale develops according to the molar concentration
of H⁺ ions that is called pH scale. It ranges from o to 14. According to this scale, pH
of water is calculated as: pH =- - log[H⁺] = -log (1x10⁻⁷) = 7,
similarly pOH = - log[OH⁻] = -log(1x10⁻⁷) = 7
pH value normally varies from O to 14. Therefore:
pH + pOH = 14
UNIVERSAL INDICATOR
COLOUR CHART
O 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
ACIDIC
NEUTRAL
ALKALINE
UNIVERSAL INDICATOR
UNIVERSAL INDICATOR
CHANGING COLOUR TO
CHANGING COLOUR TO
ORANGE (PH=1)
YELLOW GREEN (PH=4)
SOLUTION OF
SOLUTION OF
0. 1mol dm⁻³ CH₂COOH
0.1 mol dm⁻³ HCL
Figure 3.5 Measurement of pH using a universal indicator.
Hence, the sum of the pH and pOH of the solution is always 14 at 25 °C. The pH of
a solution can be measured using a universal indicator solution (see Figure 3.5). When
134
Important Inorganic Compounds
universal indicator solution is added to an acid solution, it develops different colors
depending on the pH of the solution. In order to identify the pH, we need to compare
the color is developed with the standard color chart. A solution of a compound with
pH 7 or pOH 7 is considered as a neutral solution. Solutions of pH less than 7 are
acidic and those more than 7 are basic. pH values of some common items are given
in Figure 3.6 as examples.
Car
Stomach
Drain
Battery
Lemon
Tomato
Milk
Blood
Tablets
Soap
Cleaner
Decreasing
PH
Increasing
o
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Acidic
Neutral
Alkaline
Stomach Acid Vinegar Coffee
Water
Baking
Ammonia
Bleach
Soda
Solution
Figure 3.6 pH values of some common items.
As the pH value decreases the acidity of the solution increases. For example, if two
solutions A and B have pH values of 4 and 6, respectively, then we can conclude that
solution A is more acidic than solution B. The hydrogen ion concentration in solution A
is one hundred times greater than that in B.
Example 3.12: Calculate the pH value of a solution when hydrogen ion
concentration is 1.0 X 10⁻⁵mo L⁻¹
Solution: pH is related to hydrogen ion concentration by an equation
pH = - log[H⁺]
It is given that
[H⁺] = 1.0 X 10⁻⁵ mol L-¹ = 10⁻⁵ mol L⁻¹
pH = - log[H⁺] =. log(10⁻⁵)
= -(-5 log (10) = 5 X 1=5
Example 3.13: Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration of an aqueous solution
when its pH is 9.
Solution: The concentration of hydrogen ion and the pH value of an aqueous
solution are related by pH = - log [H⁺]
-pH = log [H⁺]
[H⁺] = antilog (-pH) = 10⁻⁹ = 1.0 X 10⁻⁹ mol L⁻¹
The Relationship Between pH and Concentration
Since the pH scale is logarithmic, a solution of pH 1 has 10 times higher concentration
of [H⁺] than that of a solution of pH 2; 100 times than that of a solution of pH 3 and
135
Chemistry Grade 10
so on. Hence, low pH value means strong acid while high pH value means a strong
base and vice versa.
Example 3.14: A solution of hydrochloric acid is 0.01M. What is its pH value?
Solution: Hydrochloric acid is a strong acid so it ionizes completely.
That is: HCl(aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl⁻ (aq)
0.01
0.01
0.01
pH = - log[H⁺]
By putting the values of H+ ions in the above equation:
pH = - log[H⁺] = - log(1.0 X 10⁻²) = 2
Example 3.15: The hydrogen ion concentration in a dilute solution of citric acid is
1 X 10⁻⁶ M. What is the pH of the solution?
Solution:
pH = - log[H⁺] = -log 1 X 10⁻⁶ = 6
Example 3.16: Calculate the pH value of 0.05 M H₂SO₄. Assume that H2SO4 is
completely ionized.
Solution: H2SO4 is a strong acid and ionizes as
H2SO4 (aq)
2H⁺(aq) + SO, 4 -(aq)
0.05
2 X 0.05
Molarity of
H+ = [H⁺] = 0.1 mol L⁻¹
pH =-log(H⁺)= -log(0.1) = 1
Exercise 3.8
1. Find the pH of 0.01. M sulphuric acid?
2. HCI and H2SO₄ are strong acids. Why do the equimolar solutions of the two
acids have different pH?
3. Two solutions A and B have pH values of 2 and 6 respectively. How many times
greater is the hydrogen ion concentration in solution A than that of solution B?
136
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.9
pH of Solutions of Common Substances
Objective: To determine the pH of different substances
Chemicals: Lemon juice, vinegar, tonic water, tomato juice
Materials: Beakers, and universal indicator solution or pH indicator paper
Procedure:
Take four beakers and place lemon juice in the first, vinegar solution in the second,
tonic water in the third and filtered tomato juice solution in the fourth. Then add
a few drops of universal indicator solution or dip a piece of pH indicator paper
into each of the solutions. Compare the colour developed with standard colour
chart to decide the pH of each solution.
Questions:
a. What is your conclusion based on your observations?
b. Were the substances used in this experiment acidic or neutral? Why?
c. Record your observations using the following Table:
Table 3.3 Colour and corresponding pH.
Substance
Color developed
pH
Lemon juice
Vinegar solution
Tomato Juice
Tonic water
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Preparation of Acids
Acids can be prepared by:
1. The reaction of oxides of non-metals (acidic oxides) and water:
Acidic oxide + Water
Acid
Example 3.17: N2O5 (s) + H2O (I)
2HNO3 (aq)
P4O10 (s) + 6H2O (I)
4H₃PO₄(aq)
2.
Direct combination of some non-metals like S and CI with hydrogen:
This method is mostly used to prepare binary acids (acids consisting only two elements
Nonmetal + Hydrogen
Binary acid
137
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 3.18: H2 (g) + CI2 (g)
2HCI (g)
H2(g) + S (s) )
H2S (g)
When gaseous hydrogen chloride and hydrogen sulphide dissolve in water, they form
hydrochloric acid, and hydrosulphuric acid respectively.
3. Using a non-volatile acid: Volatile acids can be prepared by heating their
salts with a non-volatile acid .For example, concentrated sulphuric acid (H₂SO₄) is a
nonvolatile acid and it is used for the preparation of volatile acids Hydrochloric acid
(HCI) and nitric acid (HNO₃) according to the following equations:
NaCl (s) + H2SO4 (I)
NaHSO₄ (s) + HCI (I)
Nonvolatile acid
Volatile acid
NaNO₃ (s) + H2SO4 (I)
NaHSO₄ (s) + HNO3(I)
Nonvolatile acid
Volatile acid
Experiment 3.10
Preparation of Chlorous Acid
Objective: To investigate the product formed from Ba(CIO₂)₂ and H2SO4
Chemicals: Ba(CIO₂)₂, concentrated H2SO₄, water, blue, red litmus papers, methyl
red.
Materials: Two 250 mL beakers, glass rod, dropper, test tubes, test tube rack.
Procedure:
1. Dissolve 12 g Ba(CIO₂)₂ to prepare 100 mL solution in one beaker. Dilute 2 mL
concentrated H2SO4 with water to prepare 50 mL of dilute H2SO4 solution in the
second beaker.
2. Add 80 mL of Ba(CIO₂)₂ solution to the dilute solution of H2SO4 in the second
beaker. Is there any formation of the white precipitate? What do you think is
the precipitate formed? Wait for some time till the precipitate settles. Continue
adding Ba(CIO₂)₂ solution using a dropper, one drop at a time until formation of
white precipitate stops. After all the precipitate settles, take 5 mL of the clear
liquid in a test tube and test with litmus or methyl red.
Questions:
a. Is the final solution acidic or basic?
b. Which acid is formed?
c. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report as a group and present to the class
138
Important Inorganic Compounds
Use of Some Important Acid
?
1. List uses of some common acids in your daily life.
2. High consumption of sulphuric acid in a country
indicates the economic growth of the country. What is
the reason? Discuss in groups and present to the class.
Activity 3.13
Table 3.4 Uses of the common acids H2SO4, HCI and HNO3
Acid
Use
Sulphuric acid,
H2SO₄ is the leading industrial chemical. It is used:
H2SO₄
In production of sulphate and phosphate fertilizers, synthetic,
fibers, paints, drugs, detergents, paper and dyes
In petroleum refining
In production of metals
As electrolyte in car batteries
Hydrochloric
It is present naturally in the gastric juice of our body and helps
Acid, HCI
in the digestion of food
Industrially, HCI is used for pickling of iron and steel (to remove
surface impurities) before galvanizing and tin plating
Used to produce aniline dyes, drugs, photographic films, plas-
tics like polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
Used to recover magnesium from sea water
Nitric Acid,
Used industrially in the manufacture of
HNO3
*
Explosives such as trinitrotoluene (TNT) and trinitroglycerine
Fertilizers such as KNO, 3 and NH₄NO₃
Rubber, chemicals, plastics, dyes and drugs.
Reading Assignment
Read from reliable sources the uses of common acids H3PO4, H2CO3, CH3COOH and
discuss in class with your group
Exercise 3.9
1. Which one of the following substances are Arrhenius acids:
a. HBrO₄
e. HBr
b. BCI₃
f. PCI₅
C. H2S
d. HF
139
Chemistry Grade 10
2. Classify the following acids as monoprotic, diprotic or triprotic, binary or
ternary, strong or weak acids. (give three answers for each type):
a. HCIO₄
d. H2SO3
g. HCI
i. HCN
b. H2SO4
e. HF
h. H3PO4
k. HNO3
C. H2CO3
f. H2S
i.HNO₂
I. CH3COOH
3. A reagent bottle (labelled as A) is filled with HCI solution and the other
(labelledas B) is filled with water. Both liquids in the bottles are colourless. What
method do you recommend to identify the acid and water?
4. What is the basis for the classification of acids as strong and weak?
5. What is the pH of a solution having the following hydrogen ion concentrations?
a. 5 X 10⁻³ M
C. 2.0 X 10⁻⁶ M
b. 0.003 M
6. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentrations in solutions having the following pH
values:
a. 4
b. 2
C. 5
7. How many moles of H2SO4 are present in 0.500 L of a 0.150 M H2SO4 solution?
8. Identify the following solutions as acidic or basic, estimate [H₃O⁺] values for
each, and rank them in order of increasing acidity:
a. Saliva, pH =6.5
b. Orange juice, pH = 3.7
C. Pancreatic juice, pH = 7.9
d. Wine, pH = 3.5
3.4
Bases
Discuss the following questions in your group and
present your conclusions to the class.
1. What is the main ingredient in stomach antacid ?
2. Make a list of some bitter-tasting foods and
beverages.
?
3. Have you ever wondered about the origin of the
saying "it is a bitter pill (kosso) to swallow"? Discuss
and give a meaning to the saying.
4. Have you ever had soap in your mouth? How does
it taste?
Activity 3.14
After completing this section, you should be able to
define bases in terms of the concepts of Arrhenius;
give examples of bases based on Arrhenius;
discuss the general properties of bases;
140
Important Inorganic Compounds
define strong and weak bases;
distinguish between strong and weak alkalis (soluble bases);
define concentrated and dilute alkalis;
distinguish between concentrated and dilute alkalis (soluble bases);
use the necessary precautions while working with bases;
define pOH;
show the mathematical relationship between pH and pOH;
calculate the pOH of a given basic solution;
calculate the concentration of hydroxide ion from the given information;
carry out activities to investigate some chemical properties of bases;
discuss the reaction of active metals with water, the reaction of basic oxides with
water and double displacement reactions as the three methods of preparation
of bases;
carry out simple experiments to prepare bases in laboratory;
explain the uses of the two common laboratory bases.
Bases are either oxides or hydroxides of metals, which are therefore called basic
oxides and hydroxides respectively. They are of great importance in chemical
industries and in our daily lives, directly or indirectly. For example, sodium hydroxide,
NaOH is used in the production of soap, paper, textile etc.
Potassium hydroxide, KOH is used to produce soft soap, fertilizers etc. Calcium
hydroxide, Ca(OH)₂, is used to manufacture mortar and bleaching powder, to remove
soil acidity etc.
Arrhenius Definition of Bases
According to the Arrhenius theory, a base is a substance that produces a hydroxide ion
(OH⁻) when it is dissolved in water. Soluble bases are called alkalis.
For example, sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide are bases because they
produce OH- ion when dissolved in water.
NaOH (aq)
Na (aq)+ + OH⁻(aq)
KOH (aq)
K⁺ (aq) + OH- (aq)
Note that the ions produced by the base can come from either of two sources. Metal
hydroxides, such as NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH)₂, are ionic compounds that already
contain ions and merely release those ions when they dissolve in water. Ammonia,
however, is not ionic and contains no ions in its structure. Nonetheless, ammonia is a
base because it undergoes a reaction with water when it dissolves, producing NH₄⁺
and OH- ions:
NH3 (aq) + H2O (I)
1L
NH₄OH(aq)
NH₄⁺ (aq) + OH⁻(aq)
The reaction of ammonia with water is a reversible process whose equilibrium strongly
favors unreacted ammonia.
141
Chemistry Grade 10
General Properties of Bases
1. What is the taste of carbonated beverage, coffee
and tonic water? How can it be differ from the taste
of lemon juice or vinegar?
2. Explain the reason why a dilute solution of sodium
?
bicarbonate can be used to treat bee stings,
whereas a dilute solution of acetic acid can be
used to treat wasp stings.
Discuss with your group and present your conclusion to
Activity 3.15
the class.
1. Alkalis have a soapy feeling and a bitter taste: Bases have a bitter taste; feel
slippery like soap to the skin in dilute aqueous solutions. Strong bases such as
NaOH and KOH are very corrosive and poisonous. So they should be neither
brought into contact with the skin nor tasted.
2. Alkalis change the color of indicators: Aqueous solutions of bases turn the color
of red litmus to blue, phenolphthalein to pink (red), methyl red to yellow and
universal indicator blue (purple). This property is because of the OH- ion given by
the base.
3. Alkalis release hydroxide ion in aqueous solution: The characteristic properties
of bases in aqueous solutions are due to the presence of the hydroxide ion, OH-
which they release on dissolution.
Example 3.19: NaOH (aq)
Na (aq)⁺ + OH- (aq)
KOH (aq)
K+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
4. Bases neutralize acids or acidic oxides to form salt and water:
Example 3.20: Base + Acid (or Acidic Oxide)
Salt + Water
NaOH (aq) + HCI (aq)
NaCl (aq) + H2O (I)
2NaOH (aq) + CO2 (aq)
Na2CO3 (aq) + H₂O(I)
5. Aqueous solutions of bases conduct electricity: Soluble bases are electrolytes.
Solutions of strong bases are good conductors while solutions of weak bases are poor
conductors
142
Important Inorganic Compounds
Discuss with your group and present your conclusion
to the class.
1. What is the difference between concentrated base
and strong base, dilute base and weak base? Can
?
a strong base be a dilute base and a weak base
concentrated base? Discuss in class.
2. Why solutions of weak bases give dim light and
solutions of strong bases give bright light? Discuss
Activity 3.16
in class.
Strength of Bases (Strong and Weak Bases)
A strong base is almost completely ionized in aqueous solution to give its constituent
cations and anions. That is the extent of ionization of a strong base is very high. Thus,
the amount of hydroxide ions ( OH⁻) in the solution of a strong base is large.
KOH (aq)
K+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
Hydroxides of alkali (Group IA) metals and lower members of alkaline earth metals
such as LiOH, NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH)₂ are examples of strong bases. Strong bases
are strong electrolytes as they produce large amount of ions and conduct high current.
A weak base is only partially ionized into its cations and anions in aqueous solution.
That is, the extent of ionization of a weak base is small. Thus, the amount of hydroxide
ions (OH⁻) in the solution of a strong base is small.
NH 4 OH (aq)
1L
NH₄⁺ (aq) + OH- (aq)
The double arrow shows that the dissociation of a weak base does not proceed to
completion. This means an aqueous solution of a weak base contains only a small
amount of ions derived from the dissociation of the base and a large amount of the
non-ionized base. For example, a solution of ammonia containing 0.1 mole NH3 per
litre of solution ionizes only to the extent of 1.3%. Weak bases are weak electrolytes
as they allow low current. Examples of weak bases include Mg(OH)₂ and Ca(OH)₂.
Concentrated and Dilute Bases
The concentration of an alkali is a measure of the number of moles of the alkali
dissolved in 1 litre of solution and is therefore expressed in mol per liter. Concentrated
bases contain relatively large amounts of a base in a given volume of solution
while dilute base solutions contain only a small amount of base. The concentration is
expressed in terms of mole per litre (Molarity).
The greater the number of moles of the base per liter of the solution, the more
concentrated is the solution. For example, a solution containing ten moles of NaOH
per litre is more concentrated than the solution containing two moles of NaOH per
143
Chemistry Grade 10
liter. The latter solution is more dilute than the former. Thus, both a strong base and a
weak base may be concentrated or dilute depending on the number of moles of the
base present per liter.
Precautions in Handling Bases
Strong bases like NaOH and KOH are known as caustic alkalis. The word "caustic"
refers to a substance that can cause burning. Thus, it is very important to avoid contact
of these bases with any part of our body or clothing. Not only strong bases but also
weak bases are corrosive. For example, concentrated ammonia solution can cause
blindness if splashed into the eye.
The following safety precautions are useful in handling bases in school laboratories or
anywhere while working with them
a. Wear eye goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat.
b. If bases are spilled on your working tables wipe the spillages immediately.
C. Whenever bases are splashed on your cloth, wash the affected part with running
water.
d. If a base enters your eyes, wash with water repeatedly as first aid treatment and
seek medical advice.
e. If a base is swallowed by accident, drink 1-2% acetic acid or lemon juice
immediately.
f. Whenever bases come into contact with your skin, wash the affected part with
plenty of water and then wash the affected part with a very dilute solution (about
1%) of a weak acid such as acetic acid.
pOH (note that 'p' is small, O and H are capitals!)
1. Since water, H2O, has H+ and OH-, it is both acidic
?
and basic. Do you agree?
2. Why pure water doesn't change the color of either
red litmus or blue litmus?
3. If [OH⁻] increases in a solution what happens to its
[H⁺]? Share your comments with your group.
Activity 3.17
pOH is a measure of the concentration of hydroxide ions in an acidic or a basic
solution. It is defined as the negative logarithm of hydroxide, OH- ion concentration.
pOH = - [OH⁻]
Relationship Between pH and pOH
The pH and pOH are related mathematically as pH + pOH = 14
This equation can be derived using the ionic product of water, Kw, as follows:
The ionic product of water, Kw is the product of the concentration of [H⁺] or [H₃O⁺]
and [OH⁻].
144
Important Inorganic Compounds
Electrical conductivity measurements of pure water such as distilled water show that
concentrations of H3O and OH are 1.0 X 10⁻⁷ M at 25°. Therefore, the ionic product
of pure water is Kw = [H⁺] or [H₃O⁺] X [OH⁻]
= (1.0 X 10⁻⁷) X (1.0 X 10⁻⁷) = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
[H⁺][OH⁻] = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
Taking the logarithm of both sides of the equation g10{[H⁺][OH⁻]} = log1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
We get {-log₁₀ [H⁺]} + {- log₁₀ [OH⁻]} = 14
Hence, pH + pOH = 14
Example 3.21: Find out the pH and pOH of a 0.0001M solution of NaOH?
Solution: Potassium hydroxide solution is a strong base. It ionizes completely such
that one mole of NaOH gives one mole of OH ions.
NaOH(aq)
Na⁺(aq) + OH-
0.0001M
0.0001M 0.0001M
Therefore, 0.0001M solution of NaOH produces 0.0001M OH ions
[OH⁻] = 0.0001M= 1 X 10⁻⁴
pOH = -log[OH⁻] = - log1 X 10⁻⁴ = 4
pH = 14 - 4= 10
Exercise 3.10
1. Which solution has a higher [H₃O⁺] concentration, one with pH =5, or with pH
=9? Which solution has the higher OH concentration?
2. Give the pH and pOH for each solution with the following concentrations:
a.
[H₃O⁺] = 1.0 X 10⁻⁵
b.
[OH] = 1.0 X 10⁻⁹ M
3. Give the hydroxide ion concentrations of solutions with the following values of
pH. Which of the solutions is most acidic? Which is most basic?
a. pH 13.0
b. pH 3.0
C. pH 8.0
Preparation of Bases
Bases containing hydroxide ion (hydroxide bases) can be prepared by the following
methods:
I. By the reaction of highly reactive metals from Group IA and Group IIA (below
magnesium) with water. This reaction produces the metal hydroxide with the liberation
of hydrogen gas
2Li (s) + 2H2O (I)
2LiOH (aq) + H2 (g)
145
Chemistry Grade 10
2Na (s) + 2H2O( (I)
2NaOH (aq) + H2 (g)
Ca (s) + 2H2O (I)
Ca(OH)₂ (aq) + H2 (g)
II. By the reaction of Group IA or Group IIA metal oxides with water, which gives the
metal hydroxides?
Metal oxide + Water
Metal hydroxide
Na₂O (s) + 2H2O (I)
2NaOH (aq)
BaO (s) + 2H2O (I)
Ba(OH)₂ (aq)
III. By double displacement reaction
The reaction of an aqueous solution of a soluble base and a soluble salt, gives another
soluble base and an insoluble salt as products
Ba(OH)₂ (aq) + K2SO₄ (aq)
2KOH (aq) + BaSO₄ (s)
Ca(OH)₂ (aq) + Na2CO3 (aq)
2NaOH (aq) + CaCO3 (s)
Common uses of NaOH and Ca(OH)₂
Sodium hydroxide, NaOH (lye or caustic soda) is used in the manufacture of soaps
and detergents, degreasers and as the main ingredient in oven and drain cleaners.
Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)₂ (slaked lime) is used in the manufacture of cement and
lime water. It is usually added to neutralize acidic soil. Ca(OH)₂ is used also for lime
water test for carbon dioxide.
Experiment 3.11
Chemical Behavior of Bases
Objectives: To investigate the thermal stability and reaction of bases with acids.
Chemicals: NaOH or KOH, Ca(OH)₂, HNO3, water, blue and red litmus papers,
cobalt chloride
Apparatus: Test-tube, test-tube rack, test-tube holder, Bunsen burner, three bea-
kers, dropper, measuring cylinder, glass rod and watch glass.
Procedure:
1. Place 4.5 g NaOH or KOH in one test-tube and the same amount of Ca(OH)₂
in another test-tube. Heat the test-tube containing NaOH or KOH gently using
a Bunsen burner, by holding the test tube with a test tube holder. Hold the
cobalt chloride paper partly inserted in the test tube. See whether the cobalt
chloride paper shows a colour change or not. Repeat the same experiment
with the second test tube that contains Ca(OH)₂.
146
Important Inorganic Compounds
2. Dissolve 3.6 g KOH in distilled water to prepare 100 mL solution in one
beaker. Dilute 2 mL concentrated HNO3 to make a 50 mL solution in another
beaker. Add 10 mL KOH solution and 9.5 mL HNO3 to the third beaker, stir
thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus papers. Continue adding HNO3
using a dropper, one drop at a time stirring after each addition and checking
with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red remains red.
3. Put 5 mL of the neutral solution on a watch glass and allow the water to
evaporate until the next day.
Questions:
1. What type of reaction occurred between the KOH and HNO3? Write the
balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
2. What was left on the watch glass?
3. Which hydroxide was melted on heating? Which base was decomposed on
heating to give metal oxide and water? How do you know this? Write the
balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Write a laboratory report and
present it to the class.
Experiment 3.12
Preparation of Bases
Objective: To prepare bases from metal oxides and using double displacement
reaction
Chemicals: Water, MgO, K2SO₄, Ba(OH)₂ solution
Apparatus: Spatula, balance, three beakers, measuring cylinder, dropper, glass
rod.
Procedure:
1. Add a half a spatula measure of MgO to a test tube containing clean water.
Shake well and then test whether the solution is acidic or basic using red litmus
paper. Does the colour of the red litmus paper change?
2. Add 7 g K2SO₄ to the first and 7 g Ba(OH)₂ to the second beaker. Add water
to each beaker and stir with a glass rod to prepare a 100 mL solution of each
sample. After dissolution is complete, take 20 mL Ba(OH)₂ solution and pour it
into the third beaker. Measure 20 mL K2SO₄ solution, mix it with the solution in
the third beaker and shake well. Observe what is happening. Continue add-
ing K2SO₄ solution drop by drop using a dropper while shaking the solution
after the addition of each drop.
147
Chemistry Grade 10
When the formation of a white precipitate does not occur anymore stop adding
K2SO₄ solution and test whether the solution in the third beaker is acidic or basic
using litmus paper.
Questions:
1. Did the colour of red litmus paper change when dipped into the solutions
obtained in procedure 1. Is the solutions acidic or basic?
2. Why do you think is the white precipitate formed in procedure 2?
3. What is the nature of the final solution in the third beaker?
4. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions 1 and 2.
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
3.5 Salts
Discuss the following in class and present your conclusion
to the class.
1. List as many salts as you can that are used in home,
medicine or agriculture.
2. What is the natural source of salts? How can you
?
define salts?
3. Make a list of coloured salts available in your school
laboratory.
4. What is the most common salt in seawater such as in
Red Sea?
Activity 3.18
By the end of this section, students will be able to
define salts;
give examples of salts;
classify salts as acidic and normal salts;
discuss the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acids with bases,
neutralization and the reaction between acids and metals as the methods of salt
preparation;
carry out simple experiment to prepare a salt by neutralization;
list some important salts;
explain the uses of some important salts;
discuss the properties of salts;
explain the chemical tests of some salts by conducting activities.
Salts are ionic compounds generally formed by the neutralization of an acid with a
base. A salt gets its name from the names of the metal ion (derived from the base)
148
Important Inorganic Compounds
and the acid radical derived from the acid. For example, NaCl is formed from Na⁺
derived from NaOH and CIT is derived from HCI. Hence, NaCl (sodium cloride) is a
salt of NaOH and HCI. Similarly, KNO₃ (potasium nitrate) is a salt of KOH and HNO3.
Salt formation
Na⁺OH⁻
+
H+CI-
Na+Cl⁻ + H2O
Base
Acid
Salt
Water
Salt formation
K+OH-
+
H+NO3⁻
KNO3 + H2O
Base
Acid
Salt
Water
During neutralization reaction, the cation of the base combines with the anion of the
acid and a salt is formed (while H+ and OH combine to form H₂O) as shown above.
Salts are also defined as ionic compounds formed when the ionizable hydrogen of
acids are partly or completely replaced by metal ions or ammonium ion.
Classification of Salts
Discuss in your group and present the conclusion to the
class.
Recall the concept of the neutralization reaction
between an acid and a base to give a salt and water.
?
a. What would be the nature of the salt, if all the acid
hydrogen ions are not replaced by metal ions or
ammonium ions?
b. What would be the nature of the salt, if all the
base hydroxide ions are not replaced by the anions
Activity 3.19
of the acid?
Salts can be classified into three main groups as shown below in Figure 3.7:
Normal Salts
Salts
Acidic Salts
Basic Salts
Figure 3.7 Classification of Salts
I.
Normal Salts
A salt formed by the complete replacement of ionizable H+ ions of an acid by a
positive metal ion or NH₄⁺ + ions is called normal or neutral salt. These salts are neutral
to litmus.
149
Chemistry Grade 10
HCI (aq) + KOH (aq)
KCI (aq) + H2O (I)
H2SO4 (aq) + ZnO (aq)
ZnSO (aq) + H2O (I)
HNO₃(aq) + NH₄OH (aq)
NH₄NO₃( aq) + H2O (I)
II. Acidic salts
These salts are formed by the partial replacement of replaceable H⁺ ions of an acid
by a positive metal ion.
H2SO4 (aq) + КОН(аq)
KHSO₄(aq) + H₂O(I)
H3PO₄(aq) + NaOH(aq)
NaH₂PO₄(aq) + H₂O(I)
These salts KHSO₄ and NaH₂PO₄ turn blue litmus red. For example, when KHSO₄
dissolves in aqueous solution, it releases the ions K⁺, H⁺, SO ⁴². It releases hydrogen
ions hence it is acidic.
Acidic salts react with bases to form normal salts, K2SO₄ and Na₃PO₄
KHSO (aq) + KOH (aq)
K2SO₄ (aq)+ H2O (I)
NaH₂PO₄(aq) + 2NaOH (aq)
Na₃PO₄(aq) + H2O (I)
III. Basic Salts
These are salts in which not all of the hydroxide ions in a base have been replaced
by the anions of the acid. Basic salts are formed by the incomplete neutralization of
a polyhydroxy base by an acid.
AI(OH)₃ (aq) + HCI (aq)
AI(OH)₂CI (aq) + H₂O(I)
Zn(OH)₂ (aq) + HNO3 (aq)
Zn(OH)NO₃(aq) + H₂O(I)
The above basic salts further react with acids to form normal salts.
AI(OH)CI (aq) + HCI (aq)
AICI₃ (aq) + H₂O(I)
Zn(OH) (aq) + 2HNO3 (aq)
Zn(NO₃)₂ (aq) + 2H₂O(I)
General Methods for the Preparation of Salts
?
How salts could be prepared? List a few methods to
prepare sodium chloride in the laboratory? Discuss in
your group and present it to the class.
Activity 3.20
Usually soluble salts are prepared by methods that involve crystallization, while
insoluble salts are prepared by methods that involve precipitation.
1. Preparation of Soluble Salts
A. The reaction of an acid and a metal (Direct Displacement method)
This is direct displacement method in which hydrogen ion of acid is replaced by a
reactive metal. Such as calcium, magnesium, zinc and iron, e.g.
150
Important Inorganic Compounds
Active metal + Acid
Salt + Hydrogen
Mg(s) + 2HCI (aq)
MgCl₂(aq) + H₂(g)
Zn (s) + H2SO4 (aq)
ZnSO₄ (aq) + H2 (g)
Note that the reactions of Group IA metals like sodium and potassium are very
vigorous and it is not advisable to use the metals of Group IA for the preparation of
salts by this method.
B. The reaction of an acid and a base (Neutralization method)
It is a neutralization reaction in which acid and base react to produce a salt and water
Acid + Base
Salt + Water
HCI (aq) + NaOH(aq)
NaCl(aq) + H₂O(g)
Exercise 3.11
Identify the base and the acid used for the formation of each of the following
salts
a. Zinc sulphate (ZnSO₄)
C. Silver acetate (CH₃COOAg)
b. Calcium phosphate Ca₃(PO₄)₂
d. Sodium carbonate (Na2CO₃)
C. By the reaction of an acid and metallic oxide
Mostly the insoluble metallic oxides react with dilute acids to form salt and water
Metallic oxide + Dilute Acid
Salt + Water
CuO(s) + H2SO4 (aq)
CuSO₄(aq) + H₂O(aq)
ZnO (s) + 2HNO3 (aq)
Zn(NO₃)₂ (aq) + H2O (I)
D. The reaction of an acid and a carbonate or bicarbonate:
Dilute acids react with metallic carbonates to produce salts, water and carbon dioxide
gas.
Metal carbonates or Bicarbonates + Dilute acid
Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
Na2CO3 (aq) + 2HNO3 (aq)
NaNO₃(aq) + H₂O(I) + CO₂(g)
Ca(HCO₃)₂ (s) + 2HCI (aq)
CaCl₂ (aq) + 2H2O (I) + 2CO2 (g)
2.
Preparation of Insoluble Salts by Double Decomposition (Precipitation)
In this method, usually solutions of soluble salts are mixed. During the reaction,
exchange of ionic radicals (i.e., metallic radicals exchange with acidic radicals) takes
place to produce two new salts. One of the salts is insoluble and the other is soluble.
The insoluble salt precipitates (solidify in solution).
AgNO₃(aq)
+
NaCl(aq)
AgCI(s) + NaNO₃(aq)
Na2CO₃(aq) + CuSO₄(aq)
CuCO₃ (s) + Na2SO₄ (aq)
151
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 3.13
Preparation of Sodium Chloride
Objective: to prepare sodium chloride from sodium bicarbonate
Chemicals: Sodium bicarbonate, concentrated hydrochloric acid.
Apparatus: Evaporating dish, graduated cylinder, Burner.
Procedure
1. Add to the dish about 5 g of NaHCO₃ and weigh again. Record the mass in
blank (a) in the table below.
2. Add 5 to 6 mL of distilled water to the dish to wet the bicarbonate. Cover the
dish with a watch glass.
3. Move the watch glass aside slightly and add, in small portions, about 6 mL of
concentrated hydrochloric acid from a 10 mL graduated cylinder. These small
portions of acid should be added so that the acid runs down the inside wall of
the evaporating dish. After the addition of 6 mL of acid, continue adding acid
only as long as CO2 (gas) continues to be evolved. Remove the watch glass
and evaporate to dryness over a water bath (the evaporating dish is placed
on top of a beaker containing boiling water).
4. Next, heat the dish on wire gauze with the burner for about 3 minutes. Allow
the dish to cool and weigh accurately. Again, heat the dish, cool, and weigh.
Continue heating and weighing until the dish reaches constant mass. Record
this constant mass in blank (d) in the table below.
Questions:
1. What is the product formed? Write the balanced chemical equation for the
reaction.
2. What is the change as the reaction occurs? What does this show?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Some of the most important bases are listed corresponding to their uses in the
following table.
152
Important Inorganic Compounds
Table 3.5 Some important salts and their uses.
Salts
Uses
Sodium chloride (common
1. Preparation and preservation of food
salt, NaCI)
2. Raw material for the manufacture of sodium,
chlorine, and sodium hydroxide
3. Component of Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS)
4. Manufacture of baking soda (NaHCO₃) and
Na2CO₃
5. In making a freezing mixture which is used by ice
cream vendors
Ammonium nitrate,
Nitrogenous fertilizer and in explosives
(NH₄NO₃
Copper (II) sulphate,
1. Used to make Bordeaux mixture (mixture of CuSO₄
(CuSO₄)
and Ca(OH)₂ and other fungicides. Bordeaux
mixture is used to prevent fungal attack of leaves
and vines
2. Useful in electroplating and dyeing
Iron (III) chloride, (FeCl₃)
1. Used in the treatment of waste water
2. Used for etching printed circuits
Potassium nitrate, (KNO₃)
1. Used in making gun powder ((mixture of KNO₃,
carbon and sulphur) and other explosives
2. Used as fertilizer in agriculture
Calcium sulphate,
Used for plastering walls and supporting fractured
(CaSO₄.2H₂O, Gypsum)
bones.
Barium sulphate, (BaSO₄)
1. Given to patients as a "barium meal" before
gastrointestinal x-ray photography
2. Used as a white pigment
Iron (II) sulphate (FeSO₄)
Given as iron tablets to patients who suffer from
anemia
Properties of Salts
Salts can be classified depending on the anion (negative ion) they possess, because
the anion is partly responsible for the solubility of the salt.
1. Solubility of salts
When salts are added to water or water is added to salt, different types of actions
take place. Some salts are soluble in water; some are insoluble while some salts are
only slightly soluble.
2. Tendency to absorb water from the atmosphere or release water to the atmosphere.
Salts can be classified as hygroscopic, deliquescent and efflorescent depending
on their tendency to absorb water from or release water to the atmosphere.
153
Chemistry Grade 10
Hygroscopic salts are those which absorb water from the atmosphere but remain
solid.
Example: Anhydrous copper (II) sulphate, CuSO₄
Deliquescent salts absorb water from the atmosphere to form a solution. The process
of absorbing water from the atmosphere by a solid to form a solution is called
deliquescence.
Example: Calcium chloride(CaCl₂), Sodium nitrate (NaNO₃), Iron(III) chloride (FeCl₃)
Efflorescent salts lose their water of crystallization to the atmosphere. The loss of
water of crystallization by solid crystals to the atmosphere is known as efflorescence.
It is very important to note that all deliquescent substances are hygroscopic, but all
hygroscopic substances are not necessarily deliquescent.
Example 3.22: Hydrated sodium carbonate (Na₂CO₃₁⁰H₂O), Hydrated sodium
sulphate (Na₂SO₄ 10H2O)
3. Aqueous solutions of soluble salts are good conductors of electricity, because
they release mobile positive and negative ions in solution.
NaNO₃ (aq)
Na+ (aq) + NO3- (aq)
CaCl₂ (aq)
Ca2 (aq) + (aq)
4. Thermal stability of salts: Thermal stability of a salt is the property of a salt to
resist irreversible change in its chemical or physical structure, often by resisting
decomposition at a high relative temperature. When different salts containing
the same anion are heated, they may not show similar behavior. Some salts are
thermally stable while others undergo decomposition. The following examples
illustrate this fact.
A. Thermal decomposition of carbonates
All the carbonates of Group IIA undergo thermal decomposition to the metal oxide
and carbon dioxide gas. The term "thermal decomposition" describes splitting up a
compound by heating it. Carbonates are salts containing a carbonate, CO₃², as an
anion.
If "M" represents any one of the elements, the following describes this decomposition:
MCO₃(s)
MO(s) + CO₂
The carbonates of Group IIA are: MgCO₃, CaCO₃, SrCO₃, BaCO₃
The carbonates become more thermally stable down the group. In Group IA, lithium
carbonate behaves in the same way, producing lithium oxide and carbon dioxide:
Li2CO₃(s)
Li₂O(s)+CO₂
The rest of the Group IA carbonates do not decompose at laboratory temperatures,
154
Important Inorganic Compounds
although at higher temperatures this becomes possible. The decomposition temperatures
again increase down the group.
Most transition metals decompose on heating to give the metal oxides and carbon
dioxide:
Example 3.23:
CuCO3 (s)
CuO (s) + CO2 (g)
B. Thermal decomposition of nitrates
Nitrates are salts containing a nitrate, NO₃⁻, as an anion. The Group IIA and most
transition metal nitrates undergo thermal decomposition to the metal oxide, nitrogen
dioxide and oxygen gas.
Nitrate
Metal oxide + Nitrogen dioxide + Oxygen
Example 3.24: 2Mg(NO₃)₂ (s)
2MgO (s) + 4NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
2Pb(NO₃)₂ (s)
2PbO (s) + 4NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
Nitrates of sodium and potassium decompose on heating to give nitrites (instead of
the oxides) and oxygen gas;
2NaNO3 (s)
2NaNO₂ (s) + O2 2 (g)
2KNO3 (s)
2KNO₂ (s) + (g)
The carbonate and nitrate of lithium differ from those of sodium and potassium; they
decompose on heating in the following manner:
4LiNO3 (s)
2Li2O (s) + 4NO2 (s) + O2 (g)
Li2CO3 (s)
Li2O (s) + CO2 (g)
Note that both the nitrates and carbonates of lithium are thermally unstable similar to
Group IIA. This reveals that lithium behaves more like Group IIA rather than Group IA.
Chemical Tests of Some lons in Salt
?
1. Do you know why fireworks give different colors?
Consult books in your library, and discuss in your
group. Explain to the class.
2. How do chemists know of the presence of certain
ions in a compound?
Activity 3.21
155
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 3.14
Test for Cations-I
Objective: To identify the presence of Li⁺, Na⁺, K+, Ca²⁺, Sr²⁺ and Ba²⁺ in salts
by flame tests.
Chemicals: Distilled water, salts containing Li+, Na⁺, K+, Ca²⁺, Sr²⁺ and Ba²⁺.
Apparatus: Platinum or nichrome wire, watch glass, Bunsen burner.
Procedure:
1. Place a small amount of the salt containing a Li+ ion on a watch glass, moisten
it with pure concentrated HCI, dip the tip of the platinum or Nichrome wire
into the moist salt and then bring to the Bunsen flame.
2. Observe the colour produced.
3. Repeat the same step for salts containing Na+, K+, Ca²⁺, Sr²⁺ and Ba²⁺ and
record your observations. Rinse the platinum or nichrome wire with distilled
water after each test.
Question:
a. Write the colour of the flame produced in the following table.
Table 3.6 Metal ion and corresponding flame colour
Metal ion in the salt
Colour of flame produced
Lithium (Li+)
Sodium (Na⁺)
Potassium (K+)
Calcium (Ca²⁺)
Strontium (Sr²⁺)
Barium (Ba²⁺)
b. Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Flame tests are used to identify the presence of a relatively small number of metal
ions in a compound. Certain metals give a characteristic color to a Bunsen flame when
their solid salts or moist salts are heated directly in the flame. A flame test is commonly
used to identify the presence of lithium, sodium, potassium, calcium, strontium and
barium ions in salts.
156
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.15
Test for Cations - II
Objectives: To identify the presence of Cu²⁺, Fe2⁺ and Fe³⁺ in salts.
Chemicals: Ammonia solution, sodium hydroxide solution, salts containing each of
Cu²⁺, Fe2⁺ and Fe³⁺ ions
Apparatus: Beakers, test tubes, test tube rack, glass rod.
Procedure:
1. Dissolve a salt containing Cu²⁺ in the first beaker, Fe2⁺ in the second and Fe³⁺ in
the third. Take three test tubes and add a 2 mL solution of (each ion) Cu²⁺ salt
to the first, Fe2⁺ salt solution to the second and Fe³⁺ salt solution to the third.
2. Add aqueous ammonia in small quantities until it is in excess, to the first test
tube containing a copper (II) salt solution and record your observations.
3. Add sodium hydroxide solution in small quantities, until it is present in excess, to
the second and third test tubes, and record your observations.
Questions:
1. What does the formation of a blue precipitate in the first indicate? Write the
chemical equation for the blue precipitate formation.
2. Observe the colours of the precipitates formed and complete the following
Table 3.7 Colour observed and its indication.
Colour observed
Confirms the presence of
Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions. Write a laboratory report
in group and present to the class.
Experiment 3.16
Test for Sulphates
Objective: To identify for the presence of sulphate using barium salts.
Chemicals: Any soluble sulphate salt (such as sodium sulphate), barium chloride
or barium nitrate solution, and dilute HCI.
Apparatus: Beakers, test tubes, and test tube rack,
Procedure: Add some sodium sulphate solution to a test tube and acidify the solu-
tion by adding a few drops of dilute HCI. Then add BaCl₂ or Ba(NO₃)₂ solution
and note if a white precipitate is formed.
Questions:
1. Name the white precipitate formed?
2. Why is it necessary to add a few drops of dilute HCI?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class
157
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 3.17
Test for Carbonates and Hydrogen Carbonates
Objective: To distinguish between carbonates and hydrogen carbonates
Chemicals: Na2CO₃, NaHCO₃, dilute HCI, lime water
Apparatus: Conical flasks, Beaker
Procedure:
1. Take 20 mL solution of Na2CO3 and add it to one conical flask and 20 mL
NaHCO3 solution to another. Add the same amount of dilute HCI to each of the
conical flasks; Fit a rubber stopper to which a delivery tube is inserted to each
conical flask. Allow the gas produced to pass through lime water and observe the
changes.
2. Again take Na2CO3 solution in one conical flask and NaHCO3 solution in the
other. Add the same amount of CaCl₂ solution to each of the conical flasks.
Questions:
1 What happened to the lime water in each case?
2. Which solution formed a white precipitate upon the addition of CaCl₂ solution?
3. Write balanced chemical equations for all the reactions.
Write a laboratory report and present it to the class.
Experiment 3.18
Test for Nitrates (Brown Ring Test)
Objectives: To identify the presence of nitrate in a solution.
Chemicals: Nitrate solution, iron (II) sulphate solution, concentrated H2SO4
Apparatus: Test tube, test tube rack, beaker,
Procedure:
Take 2 mL of nitrate solution in a test tube and add an equal volume of freshly
prepared iron (II) sulphate solution. Hold the test tube in an inclined position and
carefully pour concentrated sulphuric acid down along the inclined side of the
test tube. The acid sinks to the bottom. Carefully observe the changes in test tube.
Questions:
1. Where is the brown ring formed?
2. Write the chemical equation for the formation of the brown ring.
3. What does the formation of brown ring in the solution indicate? Write a
laboratory report
158
Important Inorganic Compounds
Exercise 3.12
1. You are provided separate solutions of NaCl, HCI, NaOH and Phenolphtha-
lein (Marked 1). All the solutions are colorless. How would you recognize the
solutions of acid, base and salt?
2. Suggest at least three methods for the preparation of salts.
3. Classify the following salts as soluble or insoluble in water:
a. NH₄CI
e. AgNO₃
i. CaSO₄
b. K₃PO₄
f. CaCl₂
i. BaCO₃
C. FeCO3
g. PbSO₄
d. AgCl
h. Na₂S
4. Why do aqueous solutions of soluble salts conduct electricity?
5. Which carbonates do not decompose on heating?
6. Nitrates mostly decompose by heat to give metal oxide, nitrogen dioxide and
oxygen. Which nitrates do not give these products on heating?
7. What reagents do you use to identify the presence of the following ions in
salts?
a. Halide ions
C. Sulphate, SO 4²⁻ ions?
b. Fe²⁺ and Fe³⁺ ion
Plant Nutrients
By the end of this topic, students will be able to
explain the applications of some salts as fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides;
give examples of salts used for fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides.
Form groups, discuss the following questions in class
and present it to the class.
1. Plants need nitrogen for their growth, and there is
plenty of nitrogen in the air. If this is so, why do we
apply nitrogenous fertilizers to the soil to support
?
plants growth?
2. Some people prefer to eat organic food that has
been grown without fertilizers and pesticides.
Does eating organic food overcome the problems
Activity 3.22
caused by artificial fertilizers?
Essential plant nutrients could be either macronutrients or micronutrients, depending on
the amount required by plants.
159
Chemistry Grade 10
Table 3.8 Essential plant nutrients
Macronutrients
Micronutrients
These are the elements required
These are the elements required by plants in
in relatively large amounts by
relatively small (trace) amounts.
plants.
These elements are iron, cobalt, zinc, manganese,
These elements are nitrogen,
molybdenum, copper, boron and chlorine. The
phosphorus, potassium, calcium,
elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are
magnesium, sulphur, carbon,
obtained by plants from air and water. These are
hydrogen and oxygen.
not considered as mineral nutrients.
Nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium are said to be primary mineral nutrients. What
are the roles of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium in plant growth?
Nitrogen (N)
is a very important plant nutrient and absorbed by plants in the form of nitrate
ions (NO₃⁻).
is utilized in the synthesis of amino acids, proteins, coenzymes and nucleic acids
which are taking place in the growth and development of plants
is also involved in the synthesis of chlorophyll to produce a deep green color.
Phosphorus (P)
is absorbed by plants mainly in the form of H2PO₄⁻ - and HPO3²⁻ in small amounts.
facilitates early growth and root formation, quick maturity and promotes seed
or fruit production.
has a role in the formation of some amino acids and proteins, coenzymes, nucleic
acids and high energy phosphate compounds like Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP).
Potassium (K)
is absorbed by plants in the form of the K⁺ ion.
is a component of enzymes that facilitate the process of photosynthesis protein
synthesis, and adjusts stomata movement.
is the most important ion in controlling the turgidity of plant cells.
increases in the solute potential (sap concentration) within the cells which leads to
an increase in the amount of water that enters the cells osmotically.
Exercise 3.13
1. What is the importance of the following elements for the growth of food crops?
A. Nitrogen
B. Phosphorus
C. Potassium
2. In what form do plants absorb these elements?
3. Why nitrogen is not absorbed by plants in the form of N2? And phosphorous
not in the form of P ₄²
160
Important Inorganic Compounds
Fertilizers
Fertilizers are materials that are added to soils to increase the growth, yield or
nutritional value of crops. There are organic( natural) and synthetic (artificial)
fertilizers.
Organic (natural) fertilizers are fertilizers derived from animals and plants.
Organic fertilizers provide readily available nutrients to plants after some
period of decay and decomposition and can supply the elements nitrogen,
phosphorus, potassium and various trace elements to the soil.
Synthetic (artificial) fertilizers contain nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium, and
are known as complete fertilizers.
A mixed artificial fertilizer may contain nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.
Such type of fertilizer is called a complete fertilizer.
The term NPK is used to describe fertilizers containing the elements nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium.
Examples of artificial fertilizers are ammonium sulphate, (NH₄)₂SO₄, potassium nitrate
(KNO₃), ammonium nitrate (NH₄NO₃), and diammonium hydrogen phosphate, DAP
(NH₄)₂HPO₄). The most important mineral nutrients that need to be added to the soil
are usually nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.
All three elements are needed in large quantities. Commercial fertilizers are
normally given a "grade", which reflects the percentages they contain of N,
P and K by dry weight. For example, a NPK fertilizer may be described as
10:10:10 indicating that there is 10% of each element in the fertilizer.
The suitable proportions are best determined in relation to the tested fertility of
the soil and the requirements of the particular crop that is being grown on it. This
means fertilizers of the same composition are not used for different purposes.
In nitrogen-deficient soil, a fertilizer containing a higher percentage of nitrogen
than phosphorus and potassium must be used. In addition to this, all fertilizers
are not used for the treatment of all kinds of soil. For example, ammonium
sulphate is more suitable for use in basic soils than in acidic or neutral soils.
Exercise 3.14
1. Explain the terms mixed fertilizer, complete fertilizer and fertilizer grade
2. Classify the following as organic or synthetic fertilizers:
A. NH₄NO₃
B. Urea
C. (NH₄)₂SO₄
3. Can the same fertilizer be applied to all types of soil? Explain.
Pesticides
Pesticides are chemicals that can be applied to crops to kill pests that affect
plant growth and development.
161
Chemistry Grade 10
Herbicides
Herbicides (weed killers) are chemicals used to manipulate or control
undesirable plants. Some examples of herbicidal salts are: Common salt ( NaCI),
copper sulphate ( CuSO₄), sodium arsenite (NaAsO₂), Ammonium sulphamate
(NH₄SO₃NH₂), sodium chlorate (NaCIO₃).
Reading Assignment
Read about the use of more salts as pesticides and herbicides from a reliable source
and present it to your class.
Check List for Reference
Key Terms of the Unit
Alkalis
for water (kw)
Non-volatile acid
Acid salt
Dilute acid
Normal salt
Acidic oxide
Electrolyte
pH
Acid, basic and
Efflorescent
Peroxide
normal salt
Fertilizer
pOH
Amphoteric oxide
Flame test
Pesticide
Arrhenius acid
Hygroscopic
Polyprotic acid
Arrhenius base
Litmus
Salt
Basic salt
Macronurient
Strong acid
Basic oxide
Molarity
Strong base
Binary acid
Micronutrient
Ternary acid
Concentrated acid
Monoprotic acid
Universal indicator
Deliquescent
Neutral oxide
Weak acid
Dissociation constant
Neutralization
Weak base
Unit Summary
Inorganic compounds are those compounds that originate from mineral constituents
of the earth's crust. Inorganic compounds may be classified as oxides, acids, bases
and salts.
Oxides are binary compounds consisting of oxygen and any other element. Most
common oxides are classified as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral oxides and
peroxides. Acidic oxides are oxides of non-metallic elements. Basic oxides are
oxides of metals. These metal oxides which dissolve in water are also called basic
anhydrides. Amphoteric oxides are those oxides which show the properties of
both acids and bases. Neutral oxides are those oxides which do not show basic
or acidic properties. Peroxides are oxides containing a peroxide (-0-0-) link and
the oxidation state of oxygen is -1.
Arrhenius acids are substances that release hydrogen ions or protons in aqueous
162
Important Inorganic Compounds
solution. Arrhenius bases are substances that release hydroxide (OH-) ions in
aqueous solution. Strong acids and strong bases ionize almost completely in
aqueous solution. Weak acids and weak bases ionize only slightly in aqueous
solution.
pH is the negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration pH = -log [H⁺].
pOH is the negative logarithm of hydroxide ion concentration pOH = -log[OH⁻].
KW = [H⁺][OH⁻] = 1 X 10⁻¹⁴ at 25°C.
pKw = pH+ pOH = 14 at 25°C
Salt is an ionic compound containing a cation derived from a base and anion
derived from an acid. Salts may be classified as acidic, normal and basic salts.
An acid salt is formed when ionizable hydrogen atoms of an acid are replaced
partly by a metal ion or ammonium ion. A normal salt is formed when all ionizable
hydrogen atoms of an acid are completely replaced by a metal or ammonium ion.
A basic salt is a salt containing ionizable hydroxide ion.
Hygroscopic salt absorb water from the atmosphere. Deliquescent salt absorb
water from the atmosphere and dissolve in the water absorbed to form solutions.
Deliquescent salt absorb water from the atmosphere and dissolve in the water
absorbed to form solutions. Efflorescent salt lose their water of crystallization to
the atmosphere.
Plant nutrients are minerals required by plants for their growth and development.
The elements plants need for their growth and development are classified as
Macronutrients and micronutrients depending on the amount utilized by them.
Fertilizers are natural products or synthetic chemicals that are added to the soil
to increase its crop producing potential. Synthetic fertilizers are classified as
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium fertilizers. Pesticides are chemicals used in
agriculture to kill pests that reduce crop yields.
Review Exercises
Part I: Match the substances in column X with those properties in column Y
Column X
Column Y
1.
Apple (pH = 3.3)
A.
Strongly Acidic
2.
Tomato (pH =4.4)
B.
Strongly Alkaline
3.
Household ammonia (pH = 11.9)
C.
Neutral
4.
Distilled water (pH =7)
D.
Weakly acidic
5.
Hydrochloric acid (pH = 0.0)
E.
Weakly alkaline
6.
Grapes (pH = 4.5)
7.
Milk of magnesia (pH = 10.5)
8.
Dish-washing powder (pH = 12)
163
Chemistry Grade 10
Part II: Match the ions or molecules in column X with the correct test reagent in
column Y
Column X
Column Y
9.
Iron (II) ion
a.
Silver nitrate
10.
lodide ion
b.
Acidified barium nitrate
11.
Sulphate ion
C.
Heat with aluminium
12.
Carbon dioxide
d.
Iron (II) sulphate & sulphuric acid
13.
Nitrate ion
e.
Sodium hydroxide
f.
Limewater
Part III: Fill in the blanks by using the correct words /terms given in the brackets
14. The pH value of an acid is
than 7. (greater/less)
15. A solution is said to have
character when its pH value is greater than seven
(basic/acidic)
16. The pH value of a neutral solution is
at 298K. (Zero/7)
17. The pH of 10⁻⁶ is
than the pH of 10⁻⁴ HCI. (greater/less)
18. The pH of water decreases when
is dissolved in it. (NH₃/SO₂)
19. The hydrogen ion concentration of a solution with pH = 3 is
than the solution
with pH = 6. (greater/less)
20. An acid produces
ions in aqueous solution. (Hydrogen/hydroxide)
21. The concentration of H+ ions given by HCI is
than that given by equal
concentration of CH₃COOH (greater/less).
Part IV: Select the correct answer from the given choices
22. Which one of the following is a diprotic acid?
a. Hydrochloric acid
C. Sulfuric acid
b. Phosphoric acid
d. Acetic acid
23. Which of the following is not the characteristic of an acid:
a. An acid changes the color of an indicator
b. An acid has a bitter taste
C. An acid ionizes in water
d. An acid produces hydronium ions in water
24. When an acid reacts with an active metal:
a. Hydronium ion concentration increases
b. Hydrogen gas is produced
C. Metal forms anions
d. Carbon dioxide gas is produced
25. The pH of a solution is 8. What is the pOH of the solution?
a.
8
C.
6
b.
8 X 10⁻⁷
d. 2.1 X 10⁻⁶
26. Which of the following solutions would have a pH value greater than 7?
a. [OH⁻] = 2.4 X 10⁻² M
d. [OH] = 4.4 X 10⁻⁹ M
b. 0.0001 M HCI
C. [H₃O⁺] = 1.53 X 10⁻² M
164
Important Inorganic Compounds
Part V: Give Short Answers
27. The hydrogen ion concentration in an acidic solution is 10⁻⁵ ? What is the pH
value of the solution?
28. An element combines with oxygen to form an oxide. This oxide dissolves in
water. This aqueous solution changes blue litmus to red. Write: A. the nature of
the aqueous solution (alkaline or acidic) B. the nature of the element (metal or
nonmetal)
29. What do you understand by the statement 'acetic acid' CH₃ COOH, is a monoprotic
acid?
30. Write the balanced equations for the reaction of zinc oxide with:
a. hydrochloric acid
b. aqueous sodium hydroxide
31. How many times will the hydrogen ion concentration change when the pH value
of an aqueous solution is changed from 6 to 5?
32. Write the balanced chemical equations for the preparation of the following salts:
a. A soluble sulphate by the action of an acid on a metal
b. A soluble sulphate by the action of an acid on an insoluble metal oxide
C. An insoluble sulphate by the action of an acid on another salt
33. Calcium oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to form calcium chloride and water.
a. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
b. Farmers often add calcium oxide to the soil. Explain why they do this.
34. Fertilizers are spread on fields by farmers.
a. Why do farmers use fertilizers?
b. State the names of three elements most commonly found in fertilizers.
C. Ammonium sulphate is a fertilizer. Describe how you can make ammonium
sulphate in the laboratory from aqueous ammonia and sulphuric acid.
d. Ammonium nitrate is also a fertilizer. Write a word equation to show how
ammonium nitrate can be produced.
35. State the names of a suitable acid and alkali you can use to make each of the
following fertilizers:
a. Ammonium sulphate
b. Potassium phosphate
C. Ammonium nitrate
36. A classmate states, "All compounds containing H atoms are acids, and all
compounds containing OH groups are bases." Do you agree? Give examples
and explanations.
165
4
ELECTROCHEMISTRY
UNIT
ENERGY CHANGES AND ELECTROCHEMISTRY
Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
describe energy changes in chemical reactions;
describe how a chemical reaction produces electric current and how electricity
brings about a chemical reaction in electrochemical cells;
distinguish the difference between metallic conduction and electrolytic
conduction;
develop skills in writing the oxidation half-reaction, reduction half-reaction
and cell reaction for the electrolysis of molten electrolytes that occur in
electrolytic cells;
describe the three types of Voltaic cells;
explain the difference between electrolytic cells and voltaic cells and
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, classifying, comparing and
contrasting, inferring, predicting, communicating, measuring, asking questions,
interpreting data, drawing conclusion, applying concepts, relating cause and
effect and problem solving.
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Start-up Activity
1. Describe the different types of chemical reactions
and their characteristics.
2. Argue for or against this idea "without energy, there
is no development!"
3. Describe the energy sources of our country
Ethiopia? Compare their relative importance to the
country's development. Which one is the principal
source? Which one is the most important source that
is underutilized? What are the different forms of
energy contained in each of these sources?
4. Discuss the relevance of hydroelectric dams such
as the GERD (The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam) to the country's development vis-à-vis climate
change? What energy changes are involved? What
about batteries? How do they generate electrical
energy and how light bulbs convert it into light? Can
you make a battery? Some people do not want to
think about these types of questions. They just spend
money to buy one and gratify their needs. But
others are very curious to learn new things and want
to create their own device named in honor of their
names (Made by Mr/Miss "X"). Which category are
you from?
4.1 Introduction
At the end of this section, students will be able to describe energy changes in chemical
reactions.
1. We feel warm when we stand in the sunlight.
Discuss the reason.
2. Your body sweats when you take a hot shower after
an intensive physical exercise?
3. Why do you burn wood, or charcoal at your home?
?
What energy change is involved?
4. The major component of dynamite is nitroglycerin,
a very unstable material, mixed with diatomaceous
earth. What type of energy change occurs when
Activity 4.1
dynamite explodes?
167
Chemistry Grade 10
You have studied in unit 1 that chemical reactions almost always involve energy
change. This means, the energy of the reaction mixture is different before and after
the reaction. For example, coke is mainly carbon, and the combustion of carbon in
oxygen, which can be represented by the chemical equation
C(s) + O₂(g)
CO₂(g)
results not only in the formation of gaseous carbon dioxide, but also in the release
of energy in the form of heat and light. During this process, the chemical energy
contained in fossil fuels is converted into heat and light energy. Similarly, natural gas
(principally methane, which has the formula CH₄) bums in oxygen
CH₄(g) + O₂(g)
CO₂(g) + 2H₂O(g)
gives not only the gaseous products carbon dioxide and water, but energy in the form
of heat and light.
To study the energy change, (ДЕ), involved in chemical reactions like the combustion
reaction we have just cited, scientists conceptually divide the universe into two: the
system (the part being studied) and the surroundings (everything else).
Universe = System + Surrounding
A system is part of the universe that is being studied. Surrounding is anything else
than the system in the universe. Each particle in a system under investigation, such as a
reaction mixture in a test tube, has potential energy and kinetic energy, and the sum
of all these energies is the internal energy, E of the system.
Internal energy of a system is the sum of potential energy and kinetic energies of the
components of the system.
(Internal Energy) system = (potential energy + kinetic energy) system
Potential energy is stored energy. It is stored in chemical bonds. Kinetic energy is the
energy due to motion. It causes work to be done through movement.
When the reactants in a chemical system change to products, the system's internal
energy is changed. This change, E, is the difference between the internal energy
after the change (Efinal) and before the change (Eᵢnᵢₜᵢₐ|):
Where A (Greek delta) means "change (or difference) in" and refers to the final state
minus the initial state. Thus, E is the final quantity of energy of the system minus the
initial quantity.
168
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Note that the total energy of the universe remains constant. When the system loses
a certain amount of energy, the surrounding gains the same amount of energy. This
means, energy is simply being exchanged between the two components of the universe
keeping the total energy of the universe constant (Figure 4.1).
Surroundings
Surroundings
System
Heat
Exothermic
Temperature
System
Heat
Endothermic
Temperature
Figure 4.1 Energy exchange between system and surrounding.
Energy transferred from system to surroundings or vice versa appears in two forms:
heat and work. For instance, the various chemicals that make up gasoline contain a
large amount of chemical (potential) energy that is released when the gasoline is
burned in a controlled way in the engine of the car. The release of that energy does
two things: some of the potential energy is transformed into work, which is used to
move a car; at the same time, some of the potential energy is converted to heat and
makes the car's engine very hot. Therefore, the energy changes of a system occur as
either heat (q) or work (w), or some combination of both.
AE=q+w
4.1.1 Exothermic and Endothermic Chemical Reactions
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define endothermic reaction;
describe endothermic reaction;
define exothermic reaction;
describe exothermic reaction;
elucidate endothermic and exothermic reactions using diagrams;
do simple experiment to demonstrate exothermic and endothermic reactions.
169
Chemistry Grade 10
1. From your discussion on Activity 4.2, you can
conclude that reactions that cause the surrounding
to heat up are called heat releasing reactions and
the process is exothermic. Reactions that take up
energy from the surrounding such as the reaction
flask are called heat absorbing and the process
is endothermic. Based on this information, discuss
whether energy (in the form of heat) is released or
absorbed during
a. baking of bread (consider the heat of stove before
and after the cold dough is loaded)
b. cooking food
C. burning of wood and then classify each of them as
exothermic or endothermic.
What other processes can you cite from your daily life
?
experience that either releases heat or absorbs heat?
2. Is photosynthesis an endothermic or exothermic
reaction? Write the balanced equation and draw
an energy diagram indicating all the necessary
Activity 4.2
information. Repeat this activity for respiration.
All of the combustion reactions mentioned in the previous section release energy in the
form of heat. Such reactions are described as being exothermic (from the Greek exo
meaning outside and therme meaning heat). One of the examples cited earlier is the
combustion of coke in oxygen, which obviously results in the release of a considerable
amount of energy. Similarly, although on a much more modest scale, when NaOH
dissolves in water, the test-tube becomes warm. In other words, the process results in
a temperature rise. This observation indicates that the dissolving process for NaOH is
also exothermic; that is, it is accompanied by the release of energy, which heats up
the solution.
NaOH(s)
Na⁺(aq) + OH (aq)
The other is the reaction between calcium chloride and water:
CaCl₂(s) + 2H₂O(1)
Ca(OH)₂(aq) + 2HCI(g) + heat
In this case too, heat is released during the reaction, elevating the temperature of the
reaction mixture, and thus the reaction flask becomes hot. But, when potassium nitrate,
KNO3, dissolves in water, the mixture gets colder. This process can be represented by
the following equation:
KNO₃(s) + Heat H2O K+ (aq) +
170
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Reactions like this are described as being endothermic (from the Greek endo meaning
within).
To study whether the energy being released or absorbed during a chemical reaction,
we need to set the temperature and pressure constant. Thus, if a reaction takes place
at constant temperature and pressure, the heat transferred is called the enthalpy of
reaction, and this is denoted by the symbol H:
AH=HProducts - Hreactonts
reactants
For an exothermic reaction: H is negative, H < O.
For an endothermic reaction: H is positive, H > O.
The relative energies of reactants and products in exothermic and endothermic
reactions can be represented as shown schematically in Figure 4.1 a and b, respectively.
Reactants enthalpy level
(a)
Products enthalpy level
(b)
Reactants
Products
Enthalpy
H < 0
ДН > 0
Enthalpy
Reactants
Products
Products enthalpy level
Reactants enthalpy level
Reaction progress
Reaction progress
Figure 4.1 Enthalpy diagram for (a) exothermic reactions (b) endothermic reactions.
The device used to measure the heat released (or absorbed) by a chemical reaction
is called calorimeter. To find the energy change during chemical reaction, we measure
the change in temperature and determine the quantity of heat released or absorbed
using the following relation:
q α AT or
q = constant X ДТ
or
q/4T = constant
The proportionality constant in the above equation is called heat capacity. Every
object has its own heat capacity. Heat Capacity of a substance is defined as the
quantity of heat required to change its temperature by 1 K.
Heat capacity = q/4T
The unit of heat capacity is Joule per Kelvin (J/K). Heat capacity is related to a
substance's ability to retain heat and the rate at which it will heat up or cool down. For
171
Chemistry Grade 10
example, a substance with a low heat capacity, such as iron, will heat and cool quickly,
while a substance with a high heat capacity, such as water, heats and cools slowly.
A related property is specific heat capacity (c). Specific heat capacity (c) of a
substance is defined as the quantity of heat required to change the temperature of 1
gram of the object by 1 K:
Specific heat capacity (c) = (Heat capacity)/mass = q/(mass X )
If we know c of the object being heated (or cooled), we can measure the mass and the
temperature change and calculate the heat absorbed (or released):
q = c X mass X ДТ
Notice that metals have relatively low values of c and water has a very high value: for
instance, it takes over 30 times as much energy to increase the temperature of a gram
of water by 1 K as it does a gram of gold. This is one of the properties that make
water unique and responsible for its use as a coolant in car radiators and in industries
Exercise 4.1
1. Where does the energy released during chemical reaction come from?
2. How is the energy that you get from food stored in your body? How is it
supplied to the cellular process in your body when needed?
3. Explain the energy changes involved when
a. quicklime or calcium oxide (CaO) reacts with water to form slaked lime
[Ca(OH)₂]?
CaO(s) + H₂O(I)
Ca(OH)₂ (aq)
b. limestone (CaCO₃) decomposes to give quicklime (CaO)
C. nitroglycerine (major component of dynamite) decomposes
4C3H₅ (NO₃)₃(I)
12CO₂(g) + 10H₂O(g) + O2 (g) + 6N2 (g)
Is it exothermic or endothermic? Explain! Draw an enthalpy diagram for each of
these three reactions.
4. On a hot summer day the water in a lake stays cool even though the air above
it heats quickly, and the water stays warm at night after the air has cooled.
Can you explain this?
5. Have you encountered an earthen stove "Injera Mitad" that takes longer time
to feel hot? Explain why. Which stove stays warm for longer time after the
heat source is disconnected, the one heats up quickly or slowly?
6. What property of substance is responsible for the observations in Q1 and
Q2?
172
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
4.1.2 Importance of Chemical Changes
At the end of this section, students will be able to discuss the importance of chemical
changes in the production of new substances and energy.
1. Discuss the importance of chemical changes in your
life process. Consider, for instance, oxidation of glucose
in your body cells. The photosynthesis and combustion
?
reactions, the digestion, etc. Do you think life is possible
without chemical reactions or chemical changes?
2. Can you mention some pharmaceuticals and their use?
How are they made?
3. What two major uses of chemical reactions or changes
Activity 4.3
can you suggest from the above discussion?
Chemical reactions are the most important types of events in the universe. It's through
chemical reactions that plants grow, produce fruit, and become compost for new plants.
It's because of chemical reactions that human beings (and all other animals) reproduce,
digest, grow, hear, and think. Chemical changes are involved during digestion and
respiration. You get energy because of respiration. You get food because of the
chemical change called photosynthesis. Therefore, the two principal advantages of
chemical changes are production energy and useful substances.
Experiment 4.1
Energy Changes in Chemical Reactions
Objective: To explore the energy changes involved in the reaction between acetic
acid and baking soda.
Materials needed: Plastic cup or beaker, vinegar (acetic acid), baking soda
(NaHCO₃), spatula/teaspoon, thermometer.
Procedure:
Pour about 10 mL of vinegar into a small plastic cup. Then, place a thermometer
into the vinegar. Record the initial temperature (Ti).
While the thermometer is in the cup, add about ½ teaspoon of baking soda to
the cup.
Watch the thermometer for any change in temperature. After it has stopped
changing, record the final temperature (Tf).
173
Chemistry Grade 10
1. Based on your observations of the baking soda and vinegar reaction, is the
reaction exothermic or endothermic?
2. Use energy level diagram to visualize the energy changes
3. Repeat the above steps using calcium chloride instead of vinegar. Briefly,
dissolve 1/2 a spoonful of calcium chloride in 20 mL water in a test tube.
Record your observation. In a second test tube, dissolve equal amount of
baking soda and record your observation. Allow both solutions to cool to
equal (room) temperature and record this temperature as Ti. Mix the two
solutions in a plastic cup/beaker and record the final temperature.
4. Discuss the endothermic and exothermic processes observed in the above
procedure.
5. Write the reaction equation and use energy level diagram to visualize the
energy changes during reaction of calcium chloride and baking soda.
4.2 Energy Changes in Electrochemistry
At the end of this section, students will be able to
describe electrochemistry;
define electrical conductivity;
explain metallic conductivity;
explain electrolytic conductivity;
differentiate between metallic conduction and electrolytic conduction.
4.2.1 Electrochemistry
1. You know that metals are good conductors of heat and
electricity. But what is electricity? What are the sources?
What is the analogy between electricity and water flow
via tap to your home? How do metals conduct electricity?
Can you suggest other materials that conduct electricity?
2. What do substances need to possess in order to
?
conduct electricity?
3. What about batteries such as hand batteries and
car batteries? What is the energy change involved?
4. Can you suggest devices that generate electrical
Activity 4.4
energy? Discuss the uses of electrical energy?
174
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that deals with the interconversion of electrical
energy and chemical energy. It is concerned with the use of electricity to cause chemical
reactions (changes) to happen or generating electricity from chemical reactions. Thus,
electrical energy and chemical energy are inter-convertible.
4.2.2 Electrical Conductivity
Why do metals conduct electricity? Do you know any non-metal which conducts
electricity? Electrical conductivity is the ability of a substance to transmit electricity.
The materials that allow the passage of electricity through them are called electrical
conductors. Electricity is constituted by movement of charged particles or charge
carriers. Electrons carry negative charge whereas ions may carry positive (cations) or
negative (anions) charges. Depending on the nature of the particles responsible for
the flow of electric charges through conductors, electrical conductivity can be classified
as metallic conductivity and electrolytic conductivity.
a) Metallic conductivity
Electrical conductivity in metals is a result of the movement of electrically charged
particles called electrons. The atoms of metal elements are characterized by the
presence of valence electrons; which are electrons in the outer shell of an atom that
are free to move about. It is these "free electrons" that allow metals to conduct an
electric current. Because valence electrons are free to move, they can travel through
the metallic lattice that forms the physical structure of a metal. Silver is the best
electrical conductor.
Metallic lattice can be described as an atmosphere of positive ions in a sea of mobile
electrons (Figure 4.3). The electrons entering the metal displace (repel) the freely
moving electrons at the point of entry. The displaced electrons occupy new positions
by pushing neighboring electrons ahead. This will continue until electrons are forced
out of the wire at the opposite end. The charge carriers in metallic conduction are
electrons. Hence, metallic conductivity is also called electronic conductivity.
+
+
+
Electrons
+
Electrons
+
+
in
out
Free electron
Nucleus
Figure 4.3 Electrical conductivity in metals.
175
Chemistry Grade 10
Non-metals are generally non-conductors of electricity, because they do not have
freely moving electrons. Graphite is a form of carbon in which the carbon atoms are
bonded in trigonal planar fashion to the three other carbon atoms, to form inter-
connected hexagonal rings, as shown in Figure 4.4. Electrons move freely through the
hexagonal layers, making graphite a good conductor of electricity.
Covalent bonds
1.42A
Van der waals forces
3.35A
Figure 4.4 Structure of graphite.
b) Electrolytic conductivity
Electrolytes are substances that transmit electricity in a molten state or in aqueous
solution. Unlike metallic conductivity, the conductivity of electrolytic solutions depends
on the type and concentration of ions in solution. Based on their degree of ionization
or the extent to which they produce anions and cations, electrolytes can be classified
as strong electrolytes or weak electrolytes. Recall from unit 2 that many ionic
compounds such as NaCl dissociate completely in water and are therefore called
strong electrolytes.
NaCl (aq)
Na+ (aq) + CIT (aq)
When electrical potential is applied through an electrolyte solution, the positive ions
(cations) move in one direction and the negative ions (anions) move in the opposite
direction. This movement of ions through the electrolyte, brought about by the
application of electricity, is called electrolytic conductivity. Hence, the charge-carriers
in electrolytic conductivity are ions (anions and cations). That is electrolytic conductors
are also called ionic conductors.
Difference between metallic conduction and electrolytic conduction
Metallic Conduction
Electrolytic Conduction
Conduction through metals is due to
Conduction through electrolytes is due to
the movement of electrons.
the movement of ions.
No change in the chemical properties
It may cause chemical decomposition of
of the conductors is observed.
the electrolytes.
176
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
It does not involve any transfer of
It involves the transfer of matter as ions.
matter.
The resistance of metals is due to
The resistance of electrolytic solutions is
obstacles of vibrating kernels of
due to factors like concentration inter-ionic
metal atoms.
attractions, the viscosity of solvent etc.
It decreases with the increase in
It increases with the increase in
temperature.
temperature.
Note that metallic conduction is a physical process, but electrolytic conduction is
accompanied by chemical changes that occur on the surface of the electrodes.
Experiment 4.2
Conductivity of Materials
Objectives: To test the conductivity of substances and classify them as strong,
weak or non-conductors of electricity.
Apparatus: Copper wire, light bulb, power supply (DC) or dry cells, scotch tape,
distilled water, 1M NaCl solution, 1 M HCI, 1 M acetic acid solution, 1 M sugar
solution, pencil graphite, wood, magnesium ribbon and an iron nail.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the conductivity apparatus as shown in Figure 4.5.
Beaker
Test metal
Coper wire
Bulb
Bulb
DC source or
Battery
Aqueous
solution
+
DC source or
A
B
Battery
Figure 4.5 Conductivity apparatus for (A) metals and (B) electrolytic solution
2. Pour some distilled water in the beaker (as illustrated in Figure 4.5B), dip the
electrodes into the water and turn the switch on. Set-up the experiments to
test the conductivity of pencil graphite, magnesium ribbon, wood or an iron
nail as illustrated in Figure 4.5A.
177
Chemistry Grade 10
3. Repeat the experiment with separate solutions of table salt, copper sulphate,
hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, ammonia solution, molten
lead bromide and sugar solution. (use 1.0 M solutions of each).
Observations and Analysis:
a. Does the bulb glow when the switch is turned on?
b. Solutions of which substances make the bulb glow and not glow, when you turn
on the switch?
c. Solutions of which substances make the bulb to glow with a: i) bright light? ii)
dim light?
d. Classify the substances used in this experiment as strong conductors, weak
conductors and non-conductors by completing the table below:
Strong Conductors
Weak Conductors
Non-conductors
e. Which substances in the experiment are used as: i strong electrolytes ii weak
electrolytes
Repeat the experiment with lemon juice, and orange juice and answer the
questions.
Note that if the solution contains ions, current flows through the circuit and the
light bulb glows. The brightness of the bulb increases with current strength, which
increases with the number of ions in the solution. Strong electrolytes dissociate
completely and produce more ions in solutions brighter light than weak electrolytes
that dissociate slightly.
f. In your experiment using set-up 4.5 A, what observations did you make?
In which case did the bulb glow and in which case did not? Pencil graphite,
magnesium ribbon, wood, or iron nail?
Write a laboratory report on what you have observed and submit to your teacher.
Exercise 4.2
1. Na and Ca metals conduct electricity in solid state but NaCl and CaCl₂
conduct electricity only when they are dissolved in water or when they are in
the molten form, but not in the solid state. Why?
2. Why are solutions of strong electrolytes better conductors of electricity than
weak electrolytes?
3. Which of the following substances are capable of conducting electricity?
Give reason for your answer.
a. Iron
C.
Solid sodium chloride
b. Sulphur
d. Molten calcium chloride
178
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
distinguish between strong and weak electrolytes;
use conductivity apparatus to test conductivity of substances.
All solutes that dissolve in water fall into one of two categories: electrolytes and
nonelectrolytes. An electrolyte is a substance that, when dissolved in water, results in a
solution that can conduct electricity. In order to conduct a current, a substance must
contain mobile ions. All ionic compounds are electrolytes. When ionic compounds
dissolve, they dissociate (break apart) into ions, which are then able to conduct a
current. Thus, we can represent sodium chloride dissolving in water as
H2O
NaCl(s)
Na⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq)
What this equation says is that all the sodium chloride that enters the aqueous solution
ends up as Na⁺ and Cl⁻ ions; there are no undissociated NaCl units in solution.
Even insoluble ionic compounds, such as CaCO₃, are considered electrolytes because
they can conduct a current in the molten (melted) state. Some polar covalent compounds
such as acetic acid (CH₃COOH) that can, at least partially, dissociate into ions when
dissolved in water are also classified as electrolytes.
A nonelectrolyte is a substance that does not conduct an electric current in either
aqueous solution or in the molten state. Most polar covalent compounds, such as table
sugar (C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁), and all nonpolar covalent compounds are good examples of
nonelectrolytes. When these compounds dissolve in water, they do not produce ions.
An equation can still be written that simply shows the solute going into solution without
dissociating into ions. For example, the process of dissolving sucrose in water can be
written as follows:
C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁(ₛ)
C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁(aq)
Individual C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁
molecules in solution
C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁
crystal
Strong and Weak Electrolytes
A strong electrolyte is a substance that when dissolved in water dissociates completely
into its ions. All ionic compounds are strong electrolytes. NaCl is a good example. A
weak electrolyte is a substance that when dissolved in water dissociates partially into
its ions. For example, acetic acid (CH₃COOH)- the compound in vinegar and nitrous
acid (HNO₂) only partially ionizes into respective ions (H⁺ and CH₃COO- or H+ and
179
Chemistry Grade 10
NO₂-) when dissolved in water. Aqueous nitrous acid is composed of only about 5%
ions and 95% intact (undissociated) nitrous acid molecules. Table 4.1 shows some strong
and weak electrolytes.
HNO2(aq)
1L
H⁺(aq) + NO2⁻(aq)
CH₃COOH(aq)
1L
H⁺(aq) + CH₃COO⁻(aq)
Table 4.1: Classification of Solutes in Aqueous Solutions.
Strong Electrolyte
Weak Electrolyte
Nonelectrolyte
HCI
CH₃COOH
(NH₂)₂CO (urea)
HNO3
HF
CH3OH (methanol)
HCIO₄
HNO₂
C2H₅OH (ethanol)
H2SO₄
NH₃
C₆H₁₂O₆ (glucose)
NaOH
H2O
C₁₂H₂₂O₁₁ (sucrose)
Ba(OH)₂
lonic compounds
Experiment 4.3
The Distinction Between Electrolyte and Nonelectrolyte Solutions
Objective: To distinguish between electrolyte and nonelectrolyte solutions
Chemicals: Water, Table salt
Apparatus: power source, wires, beaker (or water glass) and light bulb
Procedure
1. Construct the light bulb experiment as shown in Figure 4.6.
2. Fill the glass with water as shown in the Figure. Write your observation
3. Add a tea spoonful of fine NaCl in the water and let it dissolve. Make sure
the circuit is complete. Write your observation.
Caution: Bare wires are a hazard! Skin will conduct an electric current and
will cause a shock. Do not touch the bare part of the wires when the light-bulb
apparatus is plugged in.
180
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Question
In which case does the light bulb glow? With just water or salt dissolved in it?
Explain your observations. Try the same experiment using table sugar (sucrose)
instead of salt. Apply the concept to test whether the drinking water in your
locality is salty or potable. Note that the brightness of the light bulb depends on
the concentration of the salt.
Figure 4.6 Setup for electrolytic conductivity test.
Exercise 4.3
1. Classify each of the following as electrolytes or nonelectrolytes:
a. air
d. lemon water
g. ammonia
b. pure water
e. sulphuric acid
solution
C. saline solution
f. nitric acid
2. The diagrams show three compounds (a) AB₂, (b) AC2, and (c) AD₂ dissolved
in water. Which is the strongest electrolyte and which is the weakest? (For
simplicity, water molecules are not shown.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
181
Chemistry Grade 10
4.3 Electrochemical Cells
At the end of this section, students will be able to describe the importance of
electrochemical cells in daily life (Votic cell and car battery).
Consider the catabolic biochemical reactions such
as breakdown of glucose during respiration which
releases energy (exothermic) and anabolic reactions
such as joining of amino acids to form proteins
(endothermic). Where do you think these reactions
take place in your body? What about photosynthesis
?
in plants? Where does it take place? Can you
draw analogy between the places (setup) where
biochemical reactions take place in your body to the
setup for redox reactions to produce electrical energy
Activity 4.5
or produce useful compounds?
An electrochemical cell is a system that incorporates a redox reaction to produce
or use electrical energy. It consists of two or more electrodes that are dipped into
an electrolyte (see Figure 4.7 & 4.10) in which a chemical reaction either uses or
generates an electric current, and the electronic circuitry for controlling and measuring
the current and the potential. Electrodes are strips of metal or graphite that allow
electrons to leave or enter the electrolytes. They can be chemically active or inert.
Active electrodes directly take part in reactions. Examples include zinc and magnesium.
Inert electrodes do not directly take part in chemical reactions. They only serve to
transfer electrons. Examples include platinum and graphite.
Depending on the purpose or the types of reactions taking place, electrochemical cells
are divided into two. These are Galvanic (Voltaic) cells and Electrolytic cells.
4.3.1 Galvanic (Voltaic) Cells
What is a galvanic cell?
A Galvanic cell or voltaic cell is an electrochemical cell in which chemical energy
contained in reactants is converted into electrical energy via a spontaneous redox
reaction. Galvanic cell or voltaic cell was so named after the Italian scientists Luigi
Galvani and Alessandro Volta, who constructed early versions of the device.
Examples include the cells we use in our hand batteries (dry cells), flashlight batteries,
wrist watches, cameras and car batteries. The redox reactions between the chemicals
in these cells are responsible for the generation of electricity. The reaction proceeds
on its own and without any external influence. This type of chemical reaction is called
spontaneous redox reaction. Therefore, Galvanic cells are electrochemical cells in
182
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
which spontaneous redox reactions generate electricity. Galvanic cells are classified
into primary cells, secondary cells, and fuel cells. Here, we shall be concerned with
the primary and secondary cells only. Fuel cells will be discussed in grade 11. Both
primary and secondary cells are batteries that store electrical energy in the form of
chemical energy. The chemical energy is converted into electrical energy when we the
battery is in use.
Primary Cells (Battery Cells)
Primary cells or also known as battery cells are galvanic cells that are not rechargeable.
This is because once the chemicals in the cells that serve as reactants are completely
used up, it is not possible to recover them by charging the cells. Examples of primary
cells include Daniell's cell and zinc-carbon (Leclanche) dry cells. The common feature
of all Galvanic cells is that they contain two electrodes in contact with an electrolyte.
The electrolyte in a Galvanic cell can be in the form of a solution (Daniell cell) or
a paste (Leclanche cell). The cells containing electrolytes in the form of solution are
called wet cells, and those containing electrolytes in the form of paste are called dry
cells.
An example of a wet primary cell is the Daniell cell. It consists of a zinc strip placed
in ZnSO₄ solution in one compartment and a copper strip placed in copper sulphate,
CuSO₄, solution in another compartment (Figure 4.7).
Voltmeter
e⁻
e⁻
Zinc
Copper
anode
CI
K+
cathode
The anode (zinc)
Salt bridge
The cathode (copper)
electrode loses its mass
electrode gains mass
Cotton
plugs
Cu2
Zn²⁺
SO2
ZnSO₄ solution
CuSO₄ solution
2e
2e
Zn
Zn2+
Cu
Zn is oxidized
Net reaction
Cu²⁺ reduced
to Zn²⁺ at anode.
to Cu at cathode.
Zn(s)
Zn²⁺ (aq) + 2e
Zn(s)+ Cu²⁺ (aq)
Zn²⁺ (aq) + Cu(s)
2e+ Cu²⁺ (aq)
Cu(s)
Figure 4.7 The Daniell Cell.
Each compartment is called a half-cell, and the reactions occurring in each compartment
are called half-cell reactions. The solutions in the two compartments are linked by a
183
Chemistry Grade 10
salt bridge. The salt bridge consists of a delivery tube filled with warm mixture of
conc. KCI solution and agar solution, which is then allowed to cool so that it sets in the
form of a gel.
In the anode compartment, the zinc atoms from the zinc electrode lose two electrons
each and become zinc ions, Zn²⁺. The ions enter into the solution, and the electrons
remain on the electrode and flow through the external wire to the copper electrode
(see anode half reaction below). This situation causes the zinc electrode to be negative
and the solution to have an overall positive charge. In the process the anode (zinc)
electrode loses its mass. That is why the anode of the galvanic cell is sometimes called
sacrificial electrode. On the other hand, in the compartment containing the copper
electrode, copper ions, Cu²⁺, from the solution move to the cathode and gain two
electrons each, to become copper atoms and deposit on the surface of the copper
electrode (see cathode half reaction below). This condition causes the electrode to
be positive and the solution to have a negative charge. In addition, the cathode
continuous to grow in mass as more and more copper deposits on it. The electron flows
from anode to cathode in the external conductor.
The half-cell reactions and the cell reaction in Daniell cells are represented as
Anode reaction: Zn(s)
Zn²⁺(aq) + 2e-
Cathode reaction: + 2e-
Cu(s)
Overall (cell) reaction: Zn(s) + Cu²⁺(aq)
+ Cu(s)
Due to the oxidation-reduction reaction in the cell, the Daniell cell generates electricity.
What is the purpose of the salt bridge in Figure 4.7? From the preceding discussion,
it is clear that the solution in which the zinc electrode is placed has an overall positive
charge while the solution in the copper compartment has a negative charge. Unless
the two solutions are neutral, the cell cannot produce electricity. Thus, the purpose of
the salt bridge is to maintain electrical neutrality between the two solutions.
Although, wet cells like the Daniell cell can serve as a source of electricity, they are not
portable since they contain solutions. Due to this practical problem of using wet cells,
dry cells were developed. In a dry cell, a moist electrolyte paste is used instead of
solutions. This cell was invented by Georges Leclanche, a French chemist.
We commonly use Leclanche cells as convenient, portable sources of energy. Flashlights
and radios are examples of devices that are often powered by the zinc-carbon,
or Leclanché, dry cell (Figure 4.8). This voltaic cell has a zinc can as the anode; a
graphite rod in the center, surrounded by a paste of manganese dioxide, ammonium
and zinc chlorides, and carbon black, as the cathode. It produces electricity as a result
of a spontaneous redox reactions:
Anode reaction: Zn(s)
Zn²⁺(aq) + 2e-
Cathode reaction: (aq) + 2MnO₂(s) + 2e
Mn₂O₃(s) + H₂O(I) + 2NH₃(aq)
184
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Overall (cell) reaction:
Zn(s) + 2NH₄ (aq) + 2MnO₂(s)
Zn²⁺ (aq) + Mn₂O₃(s) + H₂O(I) + 2NH₃(aq)
Positive terminal
+
Air space
Asphalt seal
Porous paper
Paste of MnO₂, ZnCl₂
NH₄CI, and C
Graphite rod
(cathode)
Zinc can (anode)
Metal jacket
Insulator
Negative terminal
Figure 4.8 Zinc-carbon dry cell (Leclanche cell).
A buildup of ammonia gas around the cathode may disrupt the current. However, this is
prevented by the reaction between Zn²⁺ and NH₃ to form a complex ion, [Zn(NH₃)₂]²⁺
which crystallizes as a chloride salt through reaction with chloride (spectator ion).
Zn²⁺(aq) + 2NH₃(aq) + 2Cl⁻(aq)
Zn(NH₃)2CI₂(s)
Therefore, the overall reaction occurring in a Leclanche cell is often written as:
Zn(s) + 2NH₄CI(aq) + 2MnO₂(s)
The voltage of this dry cell is initially about 1.5 V, but it decreases as current is drawn
off. The voltage also deteriorates rapidly in cold weather. There are other examples
of dry cells, such as the alkaline dry cell, silver oxide cell, and copper oxide cell which
are left for interested students to read.
Exercise 4.4
A voltaic cell is constructed from a half-cell in which a cadmium rod is dipped
into a solution of cadmium nitrate, Cd(NO₃)₂, and another half-cell in which a
silver rod is dipped into a solution of silver nitrate, AgNO₃. The two half-cells are
connected by a salt bridge. Silver ion is reduced during operation of the voltaic cell.
Draw a sketch of the cell.
Label the anode and cathode, showing the corresponding half reactions at
these electrodes.
Indicate the electron flow in the external circuit (with a lightbulb) and the
signs of the electrodes.
185
Chemistry Grade 10
Project 4.1
Constructing Simple Galvanic Cells
Objectives: To construct a simple Galvanic cell.
Direction: Construct a modified zinc-carbon dry cell (Leclanche cell) using your own
materials.
Write a project report and submit to your teacher. Demonstrate the functioning of
the developed cell in the class. Your report should describe the basic features of the
developed cell. The equations for the redox reactions involved. The half-reaction
reactions and where (the electrode) they occur. Compare the performance (light
intensity) of your cell with the commercially available cells.
b. Secondary (Rechargeable) Cells
Unlike primary cells, secondary cells are rechargeable. The electrode reactions can
be reversed, and the original reactants can be regenerated. This can be achieved by
passing a direct current through the cell. The process is called charging or recharging.
A secondary cell needs to be recharged when it stops producing electricity. A lead
storage battery is an example of a secondary cell. A lead storage battery is the
common automobile battery that usually delivers either 6 or 12 volts, depending on
the number of cells used in its construction. The inside of this Voltaic cell consists of
electrodes of lead alloy grids; one electrode is packed with a spongy lead to form
the anode, and the other electrode is packed with lead (IV) oxide to form the cathode
(see Figure 4.9). Both are bathed in an aqueous solution of 35% sulfuric acid, H2SO4.
A single lead-storage cell delivers 2 volts. Therefore, a 12 V battery contains six cells
connected in series (Figure 4.9).
Intercell connectors
-
PbO₂
plates
Pb plates
H₂SO₄(aq)
Intercell connectors
Figure 4.9 A Lead - Storage Battery. Each cell delivers about 2 V, and a battery
consisting of six cells in series gives about 12 V
When a lead-storage battery is in operation (on discharge), the following reactions
occur at the electrodes:
186
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Anode reaction: Pb(s) + SO 4 (aq)
PbSO (s) + 2e-
Cathode reaction: PbO₂(s) + 4H⁺(aq) + SO 4 (aq) + 2e-
PbSO (s) + 2H₂O(I)
Overall (cell) reaction: Pb(s) + PbO₂(s) + 4H⁺(aq) + 2SO4 (aq)
2PbSO, (s) + 2H₂O(I)
From the electrode reactions it can be noticed that PbSO₄ is produced at both
electrodes. Lead-storage battery, as a secondary cell, is rechargeable when it runs
down. The electrode reactions can be reversed by applying a potential across the
electrodes that is slightly larger than that which the battery can deliver. The reaction
that takes place on recharging a lead storage battery is given by the following
equation.
2PbSO (s) + 2H₂O(I)
Pb(s) + PbO₂(s) + 2H₂SO₄(aq)
Note: The electrode that served as anode during discharging (use) is forced to behave
as cathode during recharging. Consequently, the direction of the electron flow that
was from left (Pb = anode) to right (PbO₂ = cathode) is changed to right (PbO₂ =
anode) to left (Pb = cathode). Oxidation always takes place at anode and reduction
at cathode. The direction of electron flow is always from anode to cathode.
Project 4.2
Do you know how car batteries are maintained? Your teacher will arrange a visit to
the nearby car battery maintenance center. Before the trip, prepare the following
questions for interview.
Why car battery fails?
What are the components in the car battery?
How are they assembled to a self-contained device?
What is the advantage of car battery over other types of batteries such as dry cells?
Each dry cell can generate 1.5 V. If we assemble 8 of them in series, we can generate
12.0 V. So, why can't we use this option?
How the health or the degree of discharge is tested?
How is the battery recharged?
After getting answers for the above questions, and reaching conclusion after discussion
in group, write a report about what you have learnt during your visit and present it
to the class.
4.4
Electrolysis
At the end of this section students will be able to
define the term electrolysis;
define the terms electrode, anode, cathode, electrolyte, anion, and cation;
describe electrolytic cell;
draw labelled diagram of an electrolytic cell;
define the terms' half-reaction and cell reaction;
187
Chemistry Grade 10
write the oxidation half-reaction, reduction half reaction and cell reaction for the
electrolysis of molten or fused electrolytes;
perform an activity to show electrolysis of molten electrolytes.
1. In the voltaic cells such as primary or secondary
you have just learnt, chemical reaction generates
electricity or chemical energy is converted into
electrical energy. What about the reverse? Which
of the two types of voltaic cells can be adapted to
serve as electrolytic cell; the primary or secondary?
2. Can you infer the meaning of the word "electrolysis"
by breaking it into 'electro' and 'lysis'? Remember
that you applied an electrical potential across the
electrodes to cause the reaction:
?
2PbSO₄(s) + 2H₂O(I)
Pb(s) + PbO₂(s) + 2H2SO₄
(aq) in secondary cells.
Now, based on the information from the above analysis
can you define electrolysis?
Activity 4.6
In contrast to spontaneous redox reactions, which result in the conversion of chemical
energy into electrical energy, electrolysis is a process by which electrical energy is
used to drive an otherwise nonspontaneous reaction. Electrolysis stands for "electro"
means electricity and "lysis" means to separate or break. So in terms, electrolysis
would mean "breakdown via electricity". An electrochemical cell in which electrolysis
occurs is called electrolytic cell (Figure 4.10). It has two components, electrodes (anode
and cathode) and electrolyte.
In electrolytic cell, the electrode connected to the positive terminal of the source (e.g.
battery) is positively charged and is called the anode. It is the electrode through
which electrons leave the cell. The electrode connected to the negative terminal of
the source is negatively charged and is called the cathode. It is the electrode through
which electrons enter the cell (see Figure 4.10).
188
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Current flow
+
e- flow
+
-
Z
Z
Anode
Cathode
Z⁺ (aq)
Figure 4.10 A sketch of an electrolytic cell.
During electrolysis, the ions of the electrolyte migrate to the electrodes of the opposite
charge. The positive ions are attracted to the cathode and are called cations. Since
the cathode has excess electrons, the cations will discharge by gaining electrons. This
process of gaining electrons is called reduction. The negative ions are attracted by
the positive electrode (anode) and are called anions. These ions are discharged by
losing electrons (get oxidized) at the anode. This process of losing electrons is called
oxidation. Thus, the cathode is the electrode at which reduction occurs and the anode
is the electrode at which oxidation takes place.
4.4.1 Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) Electrolytes
lonic solids can melt at elevated temperature. NaCl, for instance, melts at 801 °C. The
process is called melting or fusion. When ionic solids melt, they dissociate into positive
and negative ions that are free to move. To understand the chemical reactions that
occur during electrolysis of molten (fused) electrolytes, consider electrolysis of molten
NaCl. Figure 4.11 shows a simple electrolytic cell. Wires from a battery are connected
to electrodes that are dipped into molten sodium chloride. At the electrode connected
to the negative pole of the battery, globules of sodium metal form; chlorine gas
evolves from the other electrode. The half-reactions are
Na⁺(I) + e⁻
Na(I)
CI⁻ (I)
1/2Cl₂(g) + e⁻
189
Chemistry Grade 10
The anion (CI) migrates
The cation (Na⁺) migrates
toward the positively charged
toward the negatively
anode and get discharged.
charged cathode and get
+
Chlorine gas evolves at anode:
discharged. Sodium metal
e
2Cl-(aq)
Cl₂(g) + e
forms at cathode:
e
e
Na⁺(aq) +
e
Na(s)
Cathode
Anode
e
e
e
Cl:
TO
Na+
+
Molten
receiving through Battery
9
NaCl
volt
Electronice leaving through electrode-solution
Figure 4.11 Electrolysis of molten sodium chloride. Sodium metal is produced
commercially this way.
The reduction of Na⁺ to Na occurs at the cathode, and the oxidation of Cl⁻ to CI₂
occurs at the anode (note the labeling of electrodes in Figure 4.11.
You obtain the cell reaction by adding the half-reactions.
Na⁺(I) + e-
Na(I)
CI- (I)
1/2Cl₂(g) + e-
Na⁺(I) + CI- (I)
Na(I) + ½ Cl₂(g)
As you can see from the cell reaction, the electrolysis of molten NaCl is used commercially
to obtain sodium metal from sodium chloride. A number of other reactive metals are
obtained by the electrolysis of a molten salt or ionic compound. Lithium, magnesium,
and calcium metals are all obtained by the electrolysis of the chlorides.
190
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Exercise 4.5
1. A lead-storage buttery is an example of
a. an electrolytic cell called secondary cell
b. galvanic cell called secondary cell
C. rechargeable electrolytic cell called secondary cell
d. only b and c
2. How do you know if an electrode is a cathode or an anode in voltaic cells and
in electrolytic cells?
3. Can you suggest why positive and negative ions are named as cations and
anions respectively?
4. Distinguish between Voltaic cells and electrolytic cells.
5. During electrolysis of fused PbBr₂,
a. Which ions are responsible for the conduction of electricity through the
molten salt?
b. What half-cell reactions occur at the anode and cathode?
Experiment 4.4
Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) Lead Bromide
Objectives: To observe substances produced at the electrodes during electrolysis.
Materials required: Stand and clamp, two graphite electrodes, wires, switch,
light bulb, test tube (bigger in size), Bunsen burner, lead bromide crystals (melting
point: 373°C).
Precaution: Bromine causes very severe burn on the skin.
Procedure:
1. Assemble the materials as shown in Figure 4.12.
2. Place small amount of lead bromide crystals in a beaker. Insert the two
electrodes, as shown in Figure 4.12, until they are in contact with the lead
bromide crystals. Then turn on the switch. Does the bulb glow?
3. Heat the lead bromide in a beaker gently, using a Bunsen burner. When the
lead bromide melts, turn on the switch.
191
Chemistry Grade 10
+
Bulb
Switch
Bromine gas
Molten lead
Molten lead
bromide
Figure 4.12 Electrolysis of Fused Lead Bromide.
Observations and Analysis:
1. Does the bulb glow? If yes, what is the reason?
2. Write the dissociation reaction for PbBr₂.
3. Identify the ions which migrate to the respective electrodes
4. Write the products formed at each electrode.
5. Identify the half reactions as oxidation and reduction.
6. Write the cell reaction
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
Consider the text entitled 'Energy and Climate'
below and answer the following questions!
1. Discuss the impact of nation's energy demand on
climate.
2. Explain the role of youth in controlling climate
change.
3. Which type of nations do you think contribute largely
?
to climate change, developed or developing?
4. Discuss how Ethiopia should benefit from large-
scale tree planting.
5. Explain the relevance of tree planting in the carbon
capture and sequestration.
Activity 4.7
192
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
Energy and Climate
Today, no scientific challenge is greater than reversing the climatic effects of our
increasing dependence on the combustion of fossil fuels-coal, petroleum, and
natural gas. Because these fuels form so much more slowly than we consume them,
they are nonrenewable. In contrast, wood and other fuels derived from plant and
animal matter are renewable.
All carbon-based fuels release CO2 when burned. The ability of CO2 to absorb
heat plays a vital temperature-regulating role in the atmosphere. Much of the
sunlight that shines on Earth is absorbed by the land and oceans and converted to
heat. Like the glass of a greenhouse, CO2 traps some of the heat radiating back
from Earth's surface and, thus, warms the atmosphere. This process is called the
natural greenhouse effect which changes Earth's climate.
Scientists are trying to develop alternative energy sources that do not release
greenhouse gases. In addition to developing alternative energy sources to reduce
fossil-fuel consumption, some researchers are studying carbon capture and
sequestration, accomplished by large-scale tree planting and by liquefying CO2
released from coal fired power plants and burying it underground or injecting it
deep into the oceans.
The climate change is a concern to the global nations too. In 1997, the United
Nations Conference on Climate Change in Kyoto, Japan, created an international
treaty that set legally binding limits on release of greenhouse gases. It was
ratified by 189 countries, but not by the largest emitter of CO2, the United States.
The 2005 conference in Montreal, Canada, presented overwhelming scientific
evidence that confirmed the human impact on climate change, but the 2009
conference in Copenhagen, Denmark, which was attended by representatives
from 192 nations, failed to produce a legally binding agreement on emission
targets. In late 2010, however, the conference in Cancun, Mexico, resulted in some
financial commitments to help developing countries rely on alternative energy
sources.
Exercise 4.6
1. Write the half-reactions for the electrolysis of the following molten compounds:
a. KCI; b. KOH.
2. Is the polarity of the electrodes in Galvanic cells similar to that of the electrodes
in electrolytic cells? Explain your answer.
193
Chemistry Grade 10
Key Terms of the Unit
anode
endothermic reaction
heat capacity
cathode
energy
internal energy
conductivity apparatus
energy change
kinetic energy
Daniell cell
enthalpy
Leclanche cell
electrical conductivity
enthalpy change
potential energy
electrochemical cell
exothermic reaction
primary cell
electrochemistry
galvanic cell
salt bridge
electrode
half - cell
secondary cell
electrolysis
half - reaction
specific heat capacity
electrolyte
heat
voltaic (galvanic) cell
electrolytic cell
heat of reaction
work
Unit Summary
All chemical reactions accompany energy change.
There are many forms of energy and they are all interconvertible.
The internal energy of a substance is the sum of its potential energy and kinetic
energy.
Potential energy is stored energy.
Potential energy is stored in chemical bonds and as intermolecular forces.
Chemical energy is a form of potential energy.
The energy change occurs when energy transfer takes place between system
and surrounding.
Energy transfer takes place in the form of heat or work or both.
Any chemical reaction that gives off heat to the surroundings is called an
exothermic reactions; any Chemical reaction that absorbs heat from the
surroundings is called an endothermic reaction.
Enthalpy is a measure of energy change of the system of reactant and products.
Enthalpy change is calculated as enthalpy of products minus enthalpy of
reactants.
Enthalpy change is positive for endothermic reactions and negative for
exothermic reactions.
Like any other reaction, redox reactions also involve energy change.
The energy change in redox reactions is dealt in electrochemistry.
Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that studies how chemical reactions
produce electricity and how electricity is used to bring about chemical reactions
in electrochemical cells.
Electrical conductivity is the ability of substances to conduct electricity.
Metallic conductivity is the flow of electricity through metals, and the conduction
of electricity through metals is due to the presence of freely moving (delocalized)
valence electrons.
Electrolytes are substances that conduct electricity in solution or in a molten state.
The conduction of electricity through electrolytes is due to the movement of
194
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
anions and cations towards electrodes of opposite charge, and the charge
carriers in electrolytic conduction are ions.
Cations carry positive charge whereas anions carry negative charge
Electrochemical cells include Galvanic (Voltaic) cells and electrolytic cells.
Galvanic cells convert chemical energy into electrical energy.
Electrolytic cells convert electrical energy into chemical energy.
Electrolysis is a process in which electricity is used to bring about an oxidation-
reduction reaction in an electrolytic cell and produces useful substances.
Electrolysis is also the process of decomposition of an electrolyte, using electrical
energy.
Electrodes are either metal strips or graphite rods.
Primary cells are voltaic cells that are not rechargeable, and the reactions
taking place in them are irreversible.
Secondary cells are voltaic cells that are rechargeable since the reactions taking
place in them are reversible.
Unlike electrolytic cells, the anode is negative and the cathode is positive in
galvanic/voltaic cells.
In voltaic cells, the polarity (charge) of the electrodes is determined by the
redox reactions.
In electrolytic cells the polarity of the electrodes is determined by the external
power source.
An anode is the electrode attached to the positive terminal of a direct current
source in electrolytic cell, at which oxidation (loss of electrons) by anions occurs,
and electrons leave the cell.
A cathode is the electrode attached to the negative terminal of a DC source in
electrolytic cell, the negative electrode at which reduction of cations occurs and
electrons enter the cell.
Oxidation always takes place at anode and accompanied by reduction at
cathode.
During electrolysis, anions move to the anode and cations move to the cathode.
The reaction taking place at each electrode (cathode or anode) is said to be a
half-cell reaction.
Cell reaction is the reaction that takes place in the entire cell and obtained by
adding half reactions.
Review Exercise
Part I: Choose the correct answer from the suggested options
1. The energy released during chemical reactions comes from
a. the bond being formed
b. the bond being broken
C. the heat supplied from the surrounding
d. all
195
Chemistry Grade 10
2. Which of the following is not correct about voltaic cells?
a. the anode is negative
b. the cathode is positive
C. oxidation takes place at the cathode
d. redox reactions produce electricity in the cell
3. Which one of the following is used to produce useful compounds?
a. Voltaic cells
b. Electrolytic cells
C. Daniel's cell
d. Batteries
4. Electrolysis is not used for the:
a. purification of metals
b. production of metals
C. electroplating of metals
d. production of electricity
5. Which substance is not used in the Leclanche cell?
a. H2SO4
b. NH₄CI
C. MnO₂
d. powdered carbon
6. Which one of the following is correct about automobile batteries?
a. the electrodes are graphite electrodes
b. each cell in the battery delivers 1.5 volts
C. the electrolyte is aqueous H2SO4 solution
d. lead (IV) oxide is used as anode
7. Which of the following occurs during electrolysis of the molten binary salt of a
metal:
a. the metal will deposit on the cathode
b. reduction will take place at the anode
C. oxidation will take place at the cathode
d. no current will flow through the molten salt
8. Two copper electrodes dipped in copper sulphate solution are connected to al 2
volt battery. The electrode connected to the end of the battery marked with a"-" is:
a. anion
C. anode
b. cathode
d. cation
9. The charge-carriers in electrolytic conduction are:
a. anions only
C. cations and anions
b. cations only
d. delocalized electrons
10. During the electrolysis of fused lead bromide, the anode half reaction involves:
a. oxidation of lead atoms to ions
b. reduction of bromine atoms to give bromide ions
C. reduction of lead ions to form free metal
d. oxidation of bromide ions to elemental bromine
196
Energy Changes and Electrochemistry
11. Voltaic cells and electrolytic cells are similar in that:
a. the anode is positive and cathode is negative in both types of cells
b. oxidation half-reaction occurs at the cathode in both types of cells
C. both types of cells contain two electrodes in contact with electrolytes
d. reduction half-reaction occurs at the anode in both types of cells
12. Four different solutions of equal volume (1L) were prepared by dissolving one
mole of each of the following substances. The conduction of electricity is least in
the solution containing:
a. HCI
C. CH₃COOH
b. HNO₃
d. KCI
13. Which of the following is a wet voltaic cell:
a. Leclanche cell
b. cells used in mobile telephones
C. lead-storage cell
Part II: Give short answers to each of the following questions
14. Under what condition is the heat of a reaction equal to the enthalpy change of
the same reaction?
15. Describe at least two exothermic processes and two endothermic processes.
16. Decomposition reactions are usually endothermic, whereas combination reactions
are usually exothermic. Give a qualitative explanation for these trends.
17. Draw an enthalpy diagram for a general exothermic reaction; label the axis,
reactants, products, and H with its sign.
18. Draw an enthalpy diagram for a general endothermic reaction; label the axis,
reactants, products, and H with its sign.
19. Consider these changes.
a. Hg(I)
Hg(g)
b.
30₂(g)
20₃(g)
C. CuSO₄.5H₂O(s)
CuSO (s) + 5H₂O(g)
d. H₂(g) + F₂(g)
2HF(g)
At constant pressure, which of the reactions is exothermic and which is endothermic?
20. Why are ionic compounds like NaCl, KCI, CaCl₂, PbBr₂, etc. non-conductors in the
solid state but conductors in aqueous solutions?
21. Describe the basic features of a galvanic cell. Why are the two components of the
cell separated from each other?
22. Explain the differences between a primary galvanic cell-one that is not
rechargeable-and a storage cell (for example, the lead storage battery), which
is rechargeable.
23. During electrolysis of fused CaCl₂,
a. Which ions are responsible for the conduction of electricity through the molten
salt?
b. Which ion migrates towards anode?
C. Which ion migrates towards cathode?
d. What half-cell reactions occur at the anode and cathode?
197
H.SO.
HNO
00000000000
Lead
Gold
5
Diamond
Carbon
UNIT
Silver
Copper
Sulfur
Phosphorus
I
METALS AND NONMETALS
Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
describe the general properties of metals and nonmetals;
describe the extraction, chemical properties and uses of aluminium, iron,
copper, nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen, sulphur, and chlorine;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, classifying, communicating, and
asking questions, applying concepts and problem solving.
Metals and Nonmetals
Start-up Activity
Discuss in your group and explain your ideas to the
class.
1. What properties did you consider when classifying
elements as metalic or non metalic? How are this
properties related to the uses of the elements?
2. Which elements, metals or non metals, are
a. mostly used in electrical wires, cooking utensils,
and boilers?
b. used for breathing, purifying water, and
fertilizers?
3. List at least eight metals and eight non metals
used in our daily lives?
4. How do metals and nonmetals exist in nature?
5.1
Introduction
By the end of this unit, you will be able to
describe the source of metals and non-metals;
explain the natural occurrence of metals and nonmetals.
Natural resources are resources that exist without any actions of human kind such
as sunlight, land, fossil fuels (crude oil, coal, and natural gas), crops, water and air.
Natural resources can be classified as renewable and non-renewable resources.
Renewable resources are resources that can be replenished (replaced) by natural
processes. Examples are water, air and plant materials (biomass). Non-renewable
resources are resources that are found in a fixed amount in nature and cannot be
replenished. Fossil fuels, nuclear energy, metallic and non metallic minerals are
examples of non-renewable resources. Metallic minerals are minerals which contain
one or more metallic elements. Non-metallic minerals are the minerals that do not
contain metals. Metallic minerals occur in rare, naturally formed concentrations known
as mineral deposits.
The principal source of metallic and nonmetallic minerals is the planet Earth. The
majority of metals and non-metals are extracted from their minerals. Minerals such
as iron haematite (Fe₂O₃) or aluminum bauxite (AI₂O₃.2H₂O), sulphides such as zinc
blende (ZnS), or carbonates such as malachite (Cu(OH),.CuCO₃) are examples of
metallic minerals. Diamond, gravel, and mica are examples of nonmetallic minerals.
Metals and non-metals can also be found in seawater. Some non-metallic elements,
such as oxygen and nitrogen, are found in the atmosphere.
199
Chemistry Grade 10
5.2 General Properties of Metals and Production of Some
Metals
At the end of this section, students should be able to
mention general properties of metals;
describe the uses of some common metals.
In this section, you will study the general characteristics and extraction of metals, uses
of some common metals, alloys and production of Aluminium, Copper and Iron.
5.2.1 Properties and Extraction of Metals
Discuss in your group the following metal properties
using an example and present your conclusion to the
class.
a. A metal which is liquid at room temperature. Is
?
there any metal that exists in the gaseous state at
room temperature?
b. A metal which is the best conductor of heat
C. A metal which is the poorest conductor of heat
d. A metal which can be cut with a knife
Activity 5.1
About 80 % of the known elements are metals. These metals have some common
properties
A. Some physical properties of metals
They have a shining appearance( lustrous) and can be polished. Gold is shining
yellow and copper is brown. Iron, aluminum, zinc and silver are lustrous grey or
silvery.
They are malleable, (can be beaten into thin sheets). Aluminum foils, which are
used to wrap cigarettes, medicines, etc., gold and silver ornaments of different
designs, are due to the malleability of these metals.
They are ductile, i.e. they can be drawn into wires. For example copper, gold, iron
and silver are ductile.
They are hard and have tensile strength except lithium, potassium, sodium.
They generally have a high density except lithium, potassium, sodium.
They are usually sonorous-produce metallic sound when struck (e.g. school bell)
B. Chemical properties of metals
Metals possess positive valency and have a tendency to lose electrons.
M(g)
Mⁿ⁺(g) + ne⁻
200
Metals and Nonmetals
They have 1, 2, or 3 valence electrons.
They are oxidized by losing electrons and act as reducing agents
They mostly form basic oxides and some amphoteric oxides ( refer to Unit 3)
They form chlorides that are true salts and electrovalent.
They form hydrides which are ionic, unstable and reactive.
They usually replace hydrogen from dilute non-oxidising acids like HCI and H₂SO₄.
Exceptions are copper, silver and gold.
C. Reactivity series of metals
If we take solution of different metals and place other metals in these solutions, we
can compare the reactivity of metals with respect to each other. The arrangement
of metals in the decreasing order of their activity is known as activity or reactivity
series. The most active metal is at the top and the least active metal is at the bottom
of the reactivity series. The hydrogen, a nonmetal, has been included in the series
only for the comparison of the activity of the metals. The metals above hydrogen like
potassium, sodium, calcium and magnesium in the reactivity series liberate hydrogen
gas when treated with dilute acids. The metals below hydrogen in the reactivity series
like copper, silver, and gold do not liberate hydrogen when treated with dilute acids.
A less reactive metal (low in reactivity series) can be displaced from its compound
or from its salt solution by a more reactive metal (high in reactivity series). Thus,
potassium can displace all the metals from their salt solution
(Most active metal)
Potasium (K)
Sodium (Na)
Calcium (Ca)
Magnesium (Mg)
These metal are
Aluminum (Al)
more reactive
Zine (Zn)
Decreasing
than hydrogen
Iron (Fe)
chemical
Tin (Sn)
reactivity
Lead (Pb)
[Hydrogen] [H] (nonmetal)
Copper (Cu)
These metal are
less reactive
Mercury (Hg)
than hydrogen
Silver (Ag)
Gold (Au)
(Least active metal)
Figure 5.1 Reactivity series of metals.
Metals at the top of the reactivity series are strong reducing agents. Metals at the
bottom in the reactivity series are weak reducing agents. Hence, potassium is the
strongest reducing agent whereas gold is the weakest reducing agent in the above
reactivity series.
201
Chemistry Grade 10
D. Natural occurrence and extraction of metals
Noble metals Ag, Au, Bi, Cu, Pd, Pt exist in nature as uncombined or free state. More
active metals like alkali and alkaline earth metals never exist in uncombined state.
They always exist in compounds. Active metals may exist in the form of carbonates,
halides, oxides, phosphates, silicates, sulphides and sulphates.
The constituents of the earth's crust which contain these metals or their compounds are
known as minerals. For example, sodium exist as the mineral halite (NaCI), potasium
as sylvite (KCI), magnesium as magnesite (MgCO₃), calcium as lime stone (CaCO₃).
At some places minerals contain a high percentage of particular metals and the metal
can be profitably extracted from it, such minerals are called ores. An ore taken out
from the earth contains a lot of impurities in the form of sand and other undesirable
materials called gangue. In fact, metals exist in these ores in the form of compounds.
The science and technology of extracting metals from their ores and of compounding
alloys is called metallurgy.
The three principal steps in the extraction of a metal from its ore are (1) preparation
(concentration) of the ore, example : oil floatation, magnetic separation, (2) production
of the metal. Example: roasting, calcination, and (3) purification of the metal ( last
step), example: chemical reduction, electrolytic reduction, as shown in Figure 5.2.
Metal ore
Concentration of ore
Metals of high reactivity Metals of medium reactivity Metals of low reactivity
Electrolysis
carbonate ore
sulphide ore
Sulphide ores
of pure molten ore
calcination
roasting
Roasting
Pure metal
Oxides of metals
Metal
Reduction to metals
Metal refining
Purification of metal
Figure 5.2 General metallurgical processes of metals.
The most active metals such as K, Na, Ca. Mg are extracted from their compounds
only by electrolysis because there is no economic reducing agent that can reduce them
from their compounds. It is only using electricity (electrolysis) that these metals are
extracted or reduced.
202
Metals and Nonmetals
Project
Read from a reliable source about the uses of some common metals (sodium, potasium,
magnsium, calcium and tantalum) and their common compounds. Submit to your teacher
and discuss in class.
5.2.2 Alloys
Alloys are mixtures of two or more metals or metals and nonmetals when molten and
do not separate when solidified. The constituent elements are melted together and
then allowed to cool to form a solid material called alloy.
The different sized atoms of
other metals stop the layers
sliding over one another.
Pure metal
Alloy
Force
Force
In a pure metal the layers
The addition of the second
can slide over one another
atom makes this sliding difficult
Pure metal atom
Second element
Figure 5.3 Arrangement of metal atoms in pure metal and alloy.
Alloying of metals increases the hardness and strength, modify the color and melting
point, decreases the electrical conductivity and increase the resistance to corrosion of
metals. For example, amalgam is an alloy of mercury and another metal. Gun metal
is an alloy of copper (87 %), tin ( 10 %) and zinc (3 %).
Solder is called fuse metal. Its composition is 67 % tin and 33% lead. It melts at 183
°C which is lower than the melting points of tin (Sn melts at 232 °C). Solder is used to
join wires and electrical resistances, etc.
Gold alloys: Gold is a very soft metal and therefore hardened by alloying it with
copper and silver. The quantity of gold in an alloy is called its gold content. The gold
content of the alloy is expressed either in carats or as mass percent. A carat is equal
to the mass unit of gold in 24 mass units of the alloy. Thus, 24 carat represents pure
gold. It doesn't contain any other metal.
22 carat gold contains 22 parts of pure gold by mass in 24 carats of the alloy.
203
Chemistry Grade 10
Nowadays 22 carat gold is used to make jewelry. 18 carat contains 18 parts of pure
gold by mass in 24 parts of alloy. Thus, the mass percent of gold in different types of
alloys can be calculated as follows:
Mass % of gold in 24 carat gold = 24 X 100/24 = 100.00 (pure gold, no Cu or Ag)
Mass % of gold in 22 carat gold = 22 X 100/24 = 91.67 (alloy, 8.33 % Cu or Ag)
5.2.3 Production of Aluminum, Iron and Copper
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain Occurrence and extraction of Aluminum, Iron and Copper;
describe the the applications of Aluminum, Iron and Copper.
A. Aluminum
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, Occurrence and extraction of Aluminum;
describe the the applications of Aluminum.
Occurrence and extraction
Aluminum is the most abundant metal in the earth's crust and the third abundant element
after oxygen and silicon. Approximately eight percent of the earth's crust is aluminum.
In terms of consumption, it is the second most important metal after iron. Aluminum
does not occur in uncombined or free metal state in nature. Its main mineral is bauxite
(AI₂O₃.2H₂O). Other minerals containing aluminum are orthoclase (KAISi₃O₈), cryolite
(Na₃AIF₆), corundum (AI₂O₃), beryl (Be₃Al₂Si₆O) and china clay (AI₂Si₂O₂.,2H₂O).
1. What properties of aluminum make it useful for
packaging cigarettes and medicines?
2. Steel-cored aluminum cables are used for conducting
high-voltage electricity over long distances.
a. give two reasons why aluminum is used for these
cables.
?
b. what is the purpose of the steel core?
3. Can you mention materials, in your home or outside,
that are made of aluminum? What are their
properties for example weight, rusting, shape etc.?
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class
Activity 5.2
Industrially, aluminum is extracted from bauxite, AI₂O₃ 2H₂O, mainly by the Hall-
Héroult process or simply the Hall process. In this process, the bauxite must be purified
first, because it is often contaminated by silicon dioxide (SiO₂), iron oxide, and titanium
(IV) oxide. To separate the pure AI2O3 from the bauxite, the powdered ore is first
heated with a sodium hydroxide solution to convert the silica to soluble silicate.
204
Metals and Nonmetals
SiO₂ (s) + 2NaOH (aq)
Na2SiO3 (aq) + H2O (I)
Insoluble
soluble
At the same time aluminum oxide is converted to soluble sodium aluminate.
AI2O3 (s) + 2NaOH (aq)
NaAlO₂ (aq) + H2O (I)
Insoluble
soluble
The impurities like iron oxides and titanium (IV) oxide remain unaffected by the base
and are filtered off. Why they are not affected?
Then the solution is treated with acid to precipitate aluminium hydroxide.
AlO²⁻ (aq) + H₃O⁺ (aq)
AI(OH)3 (s)
Aluminum hydroxide is collected by filtration, washed, dried, and then heated strongly
in a furnace to get AI2O₃.
2AI(OH)₃ (s) Heat AI2O3 (s) + 3H2O (g)
Pure aluminum oxide is mixed with some cryolite, Na₃AIF₆, and then melted. Cryolite
is added to AI2O₃ to reduce its melting point from 2045°C to 1000°C. The molten
cryolite also provides a good conducting medium for the electrolysis process. The
molten mixture is then electrolyzed to obtain pure aluminum. The electrolytic cell, in
which the molten mass is electrolyzed, contains graphite electrodes as both anode and
cathode (See Figure 5.4).
e:
+
Anodes (Graphite)
e-
Cathode
(Graphite lining)
Steel tank
Mixture of
alumina, cryolite
and fluorspar
Molten
aluminium
Outlet for
molten
aluminium
Figure 5.4 Electrolytic reduction of aluminum based on the Hall's process.
AI2O₃ is converted to Al, by electrolysis. The reactions at the graphite (carbon)
electrodes are:
Anode reaction:
3C(s) (graphite electrode) + 60²-
3CO2(g) + 12e
Cathode reaction:
4AI³⁺(I) + 12e
4AI(I)
Over all reaction:
4AI³⁺(I) + 60²⁻(I) + 3C(s)
4AI(I) + 3CO2(g)
Or
2AI₂O₃(I) + 3C(s)
4AI(I) + 3CO2(g)
205
Chemistry Grade 10
Note that under the prevailing conditions in the electrolytic cell, the anode (graphite
electrode) will gradually oxidize to carbon dioxide and must be replaced regularly.
Molten aluminum is siphoned or drawn from the bottom of the electrolytic cell. We do
not use reducing agents for reduction of aluminum from aluminum oxide; why do you
think?
Physical Properties: Aluminum is a soft silvery-white and light metal having a density
of 2.7 g/cm³. It melts at 660°C. It can be shaped into wires, rolled, pressed or cast
into different shapes. It is a good conductor of heat and electricity.
Chemical Properties: Aluminum is a reactive metal, even though its reactions are not
vigorous in comparison with those of sodium, potassium, calcium and other metals of
group IA and IIA. It undergoes the following reactions:
i. Reaction with Oxygen
Aluminum has affinity for oxygen and reacts with atmospheric oxygen to form a thin
film of aluminum oxide on its surface.
4AI (s) + 302 (g)
2AI2O3 (s)
This thin film of oxide inhibits further reaction with oxygen. The thin film can be removed
by rubbing with mercury or mercury (II) chloride solution. What type of oxide is AI2O3?
ii. Aluminum burns in Nitrogen gas to form Aluminum Nitride.
2AI (s) + N2 (g)
2AIN (s)
iii. Reaction with dilute acids
Aluminum reacts with dilute acids like HCI and H2SO4, forming salts and liberating
hydrogen gas.
2AI (s) + 3H2SO₄ (aq)
AI₂(SO₄)₃ (aq) + 3H2 (g)
2AI (s) + 6HCI (aq)
2AICI₃ (s) + 3H2 (g)
Aluminum does not react with dilute or concentrated HNO3 due to the formation of a
protective oxide layer on its surface. Therefore, materials made of Al may be used
to transport HNO3.
iv. Aluminum burns in chlorine gas to form aluminum chloride
2AI (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2AICI₃ (s)
V. Aluminum reacts with sodium hydroxide solution
2AI (s) + 2NaOH (aq) + 6H2O (I)
2NaAI(OH)₄ (aq) + 3H2 (g)
206
Metals and Nonmetals
Uses of Aluminum
Discuss in your group and present your conclusion to
?
class.
1. Why should the food containing iron salts are not
cooked in aluminum utensils?
2. Aluminum is a highly reactive metal, however, still it
Activity 5.3
is used to make utensils for cooking.
Aluminum is a lightweight metal and resistant to corrosion, which is why it is used to
make the light alloys, such as duralumin (a mixture of AI, Cu, and Mg). Aluminum
alloy is widely used in the transportation industry to make airplanes, ships, and
automobiles. Due to its high thermal conductivity and corrosion resistance, it is used
to make household cookwares. It is also used in the manufacture of door and window
frames and building roofs, as a packaging material in the food industry, and for
power transmission lines. Al is also used in the thermite welding process.
Thermite Welding
Thermite welding is useful in welding rails, propeller shaft and other steel parts of
machinery that are difficult to repair by any other method. The process is explained
as follows:
Aluminum is more reactive than iron, therefore it displaces iron from iron oxide. In the
thermite welding process, powdered aluminum when mixed with iron (III) oxide and
ignited, produces a temperature of about 3000°C. This temperature is quite sufficient
for welding metals. The reaction in this process is as follows:
2AI (s) +
Fe2O3 (s)
2Fe (I) +
AI2O3 (s)
Aluminum
Iron oxide
Iron
Aluminum oxide
The mixture of powdered aluminum and iron oxide is called thermite. Similar reactions
are used to insulate other metals such as Chromium:
Al(s)
+
Cr2O3
2
Cr
(I)
+
AI2O3 (s)
Exercise 5.1
1. Aluminum is the most abundant metal but it is of the secondary importance
next to iron, in terms of consumption. Why?
2. Cryolite, Na₃AIF₆ is added to AI2O3 to reduce its melting point from 2045°C
to 1000°C. Explain why it is required to reduce the melting point of AI2O3?
207
Chemistry Grade 10
3. Write the balanced chemical equation for the dissociation of AI2O3 in the
molten state.
4. Identify the ions that move to the cathode and the anode during the electrolysis
of molten aluminum oxide? Write the half-reactions at the anode, cathode
and overall cell reactions
5. At which electrode will aluminum be produced during the process?
6. Why aluminum is preferred to copper for high voltage wires such as the line
from Koka Dam to Addis Ababa?
Project
Perform the following project activities referring to reliable resources and submit to
your teacher.
1. Make a list of materials made of aluminum you encounter at home, and in the
city or town where you live.
2. What property of aluminum makes it useful in the construction of cook wares?
3. Regarding the manufacturing of aluminum by electrolysis, answer the following
questions.
A. The electrolyte does not need heating to keep it in its molten state; why?
B. The graphite anode gradually disappears during the electrolysis. How? (Think
about the product that is given off at the anode).
Present your findings to the class
B. Iron
1. Iron is the cheapest among all metals. Give reasons
for this.
?
2. What is the difference between stainless steel and
wrought iron?
3. What do you understand by the term alloy? Is
stainless steel an alloy?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Activity 5.4
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Iron;
describe the the applications of Iron.
Iron is the second most abundant metal in the earth's crust after aluminum, and the
fourth most abundant element. It accounts for about 4.7% of the weight of the earth's
208
Metals and Nonmetals
crust. It has never been found as a free metal in nature. It exists only in the form of
compounds in nature, such as oxides, carbonates and sulphides. The chief ores of iron
are hematite (Fe₂O₃), limonite (Fe₂O₃.H₂O), magnetite (Fe₃O₄), and siderite (FeCO₃).
It is also found in the form of iron pyrites (FeS₂) which is commonly called fool's gold.
Iron is generally extracted from hematite (Fe₂O₃), magnetite (Fe₃O₄) and siderite
(FeCO₃).
Producing pig iron (impure iron)
The extraction of iron from its ores is carried out in a blast furnace. The raw materials
for the extraction of iron are iron ore, coke, limestone and hot air. The furnace is
charged with a mixture of iron ore, limestone and coke at the top and a blast of hot
air is blown at the bottom. The coke burns to form carbon dioxide and the temperature
approaches 2000°C near the bottom. As the carbon dioxide rises up, the coke reduces
it to carbon monoxide. The carbon monoxide then reduces the iron oxide to iron metal.
The reactions taking place in the blast furnace can be summarized as follows:
i. Oxidation of coke to carbon dioxide:
C (s) + O2 (g)
CO2 (g) + Heat
ii. Reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide: CO2 (g) + C (s)
2CO (g)
iii. Reduction of iron oxides to metallic iron by carbon monoxide:
3Fe2O₃ (s) + CO (g)
2Fe3O₄ (s) + CO₂(g)
Fe3O₄ (s) + CO (g)
3FeO (s) + CO2 (g)
FeO (s) + CO (g)
Fe (I) + CO₂(g)
iv. Decomposition of the limestone by heat in the blast furnace serves as a flux to
remove impurities: CaCO3 (s)
CaO (s) + CO2 (g)
The Blast Furnace
Charge: Iron ore, coke, limestone
Hot waste gases
Hot waste gases
250°C
Reducing iron ore:
700°C
3CO(g) + Fe₂O₃(g)
2Fe(I) + 3CO₂(g)
Carbon dioxide reacts with
coke:
Limestone decomposes and
CO₂(g) + 2C(s)
2CO(g)
slag forms:
850°C
CaCO₃(s)
CaO(s) + CO₂(g)
Hot air reacts with coke:
CaO(s) + SiO₂(s)
CaSiO₃(I)
C(s) + O₂(g)
CO2 (g)
1500°C
Sand
Slag
Hot air blast
Hot air blast
Molten
slag
Molten iron
Figure 5.5 Production of pig iron from iron ore in the blast furnace.
209
Chemistry Grade 10
v.
Calcium oxide (CaO) removes the impurities like sand or silica (SiO₂) to form
calcium silicate which is a glass-like material called slag.
CaO
+
SiO₂
CaSiO3
Lime
+
sand
calcium silicate
(Flux)
(Impurity)
(Slag)
The molten slag is lighter than the molten metal. Therefore, it floats over the molten
metal and thus the two can be easily separated. The slag is used mostly for the
manufacture of cement.
The iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron. It is impure and
contains about 2 % silicon, up to 1% phosphorus and manganese, and traces of
sulphur. These impurities make pig iron brittle. Pig iron, also known as crude iron, is an
intermediate product of the iron industry in the production of steel. When pig iron is
re-melted with scrap iron and cast in to moulds, it forms cast iron. Pig iron contains at
least 92% Fe and has very high carbon content, typically 3.5 - 4.5%. Along with silica
and other constituents of dross, which makes it very brittle and not useful directly as a
material except for limited applications.
1. Explain the principle of blast furnace
?
2. Why calcium carbonate is used in the blast furnace
in the production of pig iron ?
3. What is the composition and uses of slag?
Discuss in your group and present your conclusions to
the class.
Activity 5.5
The purest form of commercial iron is called wrought iron. It is obtained by removing
most of the impurities from pig iron. It is manufactured by heating impure iron with
hematite and limestone in a furnace. This increases the purity of the iron to 99.5%.
Wrought iron is a tough, malleable and ductile form of iron.
Steel making from pig iron (purification of pig iron)
The relatively high carbon-content of the iron recovered from the blast furnace (pig
iron) makes it very hard and brittle. The conversion of pig iron to steel is essentially
a purification process in which impurities are eliminated through oxidation. This
purification process is carried out in a furnace at high temperatures. Three distinctive
techniques are used to convert pig iron into steel. These are the Bessemer converter,
Open-hearth Furnace and the Basic Oxygen Process.
i. The Bessemer Converter: In the process of converting pig iron to steel, molten
pig iron from the blast furnace is transferred to a cylindrical vessel containing a
refractory lining of MgCO₃ and CaCO₃. A blast of hot air is blown through the
210
Metals and Nonmetals
molten metal from a set of small holes at the bottom of the vessel. The oxygen
passing through the molten metal converts silicon, phosphorus and sulphur to their
oxides, which then react with the lining to form a slag. The carbon in the pig
iron is also oxidized to carbon monoxide, so its concentration is also reduced.
The conversion of the pig iron to steel by this process requires only 15 minutes.
However, the reaction is difficult to control and the quality of the steel produced
can be quite variable.
ii. The Open-hearth Furnace: It has a large, shallow hearth, which is usually lined
with a basic oxide refractory (MgO and CaO). The furnace is charged with a
mixture of pig iron, Fe2O₃, scrap iron and limestone. A blast of hot air and burning
fuel is directed over the surface of the charge to maintain it in the molten state.
Impurities in the pig iron are oxidized by the Fe2O₃ and air. Carbon dioxide, and
sulphur dioxide formed by the oxidation of the carbon and sulphur, respectively,
in the pig iron bubble out of the mixture as waste gases.
The SiO₂ and other acidic oxides like P₄O₁₀ combine with CaO (from limestone) and
the refractory lining to form a slag.
The impurities in pig iron are oxidized in the following way:
C +
CO2
S
+
2
SO2
12P
+
3
3P₄O₁₀
20Fe
2
3Si + 2Fe2O3
3SiO₂ + 4Fe
Calcium oxide, formed by the decomposition of limestone, reacts with oxides of silicon
and phosphorus to form slag.
P4O10 + 6CaO
2Ca₃(PO₄)₂
SiO₂ + CaO
CaSiO3
Impurities manganese and silicon form
respective oxides and removed asslag.
2C + 2
2CO
2Mn + 2
2MnO
Carbon
Carbon monoxide
Manganese
Manganese dioxide
Si + O2
SiO₂
Silcon
Silcon dioxide
2MnO + SiO₂
MnSiO
(slag)
slag
molten tray
tuyeres
(a)
air in
211
Chemistry Grade 10
Gas liquid fuel
Burner
Alternate
Molten metal
burner
Hearth
Tap hole
Checker
Slag
Steel
Checker
Chamber
pot
ladle
Chamber
(b)
Figure 5.6 Bessemer converter (a) and Open-hearth furnace (b)
This entire process takes 8 to 10 hours to complete and the quality of the steel is much
more easily controlled. A calculated amount of various elements can be added to the
steel to form steel alloys with desired properties
iii. Basic Oxygen Process: This newer procedure has largely replaced the open
hearth, because of its high speed. It involves forcing a mixture of powdered
calcium oxide, CaO, and oxygen gas directly into the surface of the molten pig
iron. The oxygen reacts exothermically with carbon, sulphur, silicon, phosphorus and
impurity metals. Carbon and sulphur are oxidized to CO2 and SO₂, respectively,
and are released as exhaust gases. The oxides of silicon (SiO₂), phosphorus,
(P₄O₁₀) and impurity metals combine with lime (CaO), forming slag. The charge
in the converter is maintained in the molten state by the energy released in these
oxidation reactions. The converter is tilted to remove the slag. After a second blow
of oxygen, the converter is tilted once again and the molten steel is poured out.
This process takes only about 20 to 25 minutes.
Molten iron (70 -75% +
steel scrapes (25 - 30%) +
lime dolmite
Refractory lining
Oxygen
lance
Tap hole
Pure O2
Slag
Steel
Steel
Slag
Figure 5.7 The basic oxygen converter
212
Metals and Nonmetals
Tempering of steel: is a process by which steel is conditioned to a desired hardness
by heating and controlled rate of cooling. Some of the carbon, in steel is present as a
compound called cementite (FeC₃). It reduces the hardness of steel. Cementite can be
removed by tempering which is difficult to remove by the above methods.
?
1. Which form of iron is the purest: wrought iron, pig
iron, steel?
2. Prepare a list of materials which are made of steel
and describe their uses. Discuss in groups and give
Activity 5.6
a presentation to the class.
Physical Properties of Iron
Do you remember physical properties of iron? Can you mention some of them?
Iron is a gray lustrous, malleable and ductile metal. It is a good conductor of heat and
electricity. It has a high melting point (1580°C) and a high density (7.87 g/cm³). It is
a ferromagnetic metal, which means it can be permanently magnetized.
Chemical Properties of Iron
Have you ever noticed the formation of a reddish thin film on the surface of an iron
object? Do you know the chemical nature of this thin film? From your observations,
what do you conclude about the reactivity of iron?
Iron is a reactive metal. Its reactivity is very slow, compared to group IA and IIA metals.
Iron rusts in the presence of air and moisture to form hydrated iron (III) oxide.
Moisture
4Fe(s)
+
302(g)
2Fe₂O₃.xH₂O(s)(rust)
Iron reacts with dilute acids, like HCI and H2SO₄, forming iron (II) salts and liberating
hydrogen gas
Fe (s) + 2HCI (aq)
FeCl₂ (aq) + H2 (g)
Fe (s) + H2SO4 (aq)
FeSO₄ (aq) + H2 (g)
Like other transition metals, iron also exhibits different oxidation states. It commonly
exists as the ferrous (Fe²⁺) and ferric (Fe⁺³) ions. Iron (II) and iron (III) compounds are
coloured.
Aqueous solutions of iron (II) compounds are pale-green and solutions of iron (III)
compounds are yellowish brown.
Aqueous solutions of some iron (II) compounds are rapidly oxidized to the corresponding
iron (III) compounds. For example, iron (II) hydroxide, Fe(OH)₂, on exposure to air,
oxidizes to iron (III) hydroxide
213
Chemistry Grade 10
4Fe(OH)₂ (s) + O2 (g) + 2H2O (I)
4Fe(OH)3 (s)
Heated iron reacts with hydrogen chloride gas, forming iron (II) chloride and hydrogen
gas.
Fe (s) + 2HCI (g)
FeCl₂ (g) + H2 (g)
Heated iron reacts with chlorine and sulphur to form the chloride and sulphide,
respectively
2Fe (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2FeCI₃ (s)
Fe (s) + S (s)
FeS (s)
Iron has the ability to displace less active metals from solutions of their salts. For
example, when a piece of iron is placed in a solution of CuSO₄, it is oxidized to Fe²⁺
and a reddish brown deposit of copper metal forms on the surface of the iron.
Fe (s) + Cu²⁺ (aq)
Fe2⁺ (aq) + Cu (s)
Uses of Iron
Iron is the most widely used metal and takes first position in worldwide consumption.
It is used as a structural metal in the construction of buildings and bridges. In the
form of pig iron, it is used to make domestic boilers, hot-water radiators, railings,
water pipes, castings, and moldings. As wrought iron, it is used in making nails, sheets,
horseshoes, ornamental gates, door knockers, farm machinery etc. Iron is also used in
the manufacture of alloys such as carbon steels and alloy steels.
Table 5.1 Types and uses of carbon steels.
Type
% of carbon
Use
Mild steel
Up to 0.2
Making screws, motors, car batteries, railway
lines, ships, nuts and bolts
Medium steel
0.3 - 0.6
Making springs and chains
High carbon steel
0.6 - 1.5
Making drill bits, knives, hammers and chisels
Stainless steel
Fe = 73, C = =1,
For making knife blades, kitchen pots, pans,
Cr = 18, Ni = 8
food machinery, automobile parts, laundry
machines
Alloy Steel: contains iron and a relatively higher percentage of other metals. For
example, stainless steel contains chromium (14 -18%) and nickel (7 - 9%). Tool steels
include tungsten steel and manganese steel. These metals give the alloy hardness,
toughness and heat resistance. They are used in rock drills, cutting edges and parts of
machinery that are subjected to heavy wear.
214
Metals and Nonmetals
C. Copper
Discuss in a group the subsequent questions and
present your response to the class.
1. What common items are made of copper?
2. Copper is used in electrical appliances. Give
two reasons based on its physical properties
?
3. A solution of copper sulphate cannot be stored
in a vessel made of iron. Give a reason and
justify it by a balanced ionic equation.
4. Why is copper so important in our technological
Activity 5.7
society?
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, occurrence and extraction of Copper;
describe the the applications of Copper.
Copper is occasionally found as native copper. However, it is found mainly in compounds
such as sulphides, oxides and the carbonates. The most important sulphide ores are
chalcopyrite (CuFeS₂), chalcocite (Cu₂S), covellite (CuS) and bornite (Cu₅FeS₄). The
principal oxide ores are cuprite (Cu₂O) and tenorite (CuO). In the carbonate form, it
exists as malachite (CuCO₃.Cu(OH)₂).
Copper is principally extracted from chalcopyrite. Since the amount of copper in the
ore is very small, the crushed and ground sulphide ore is first concentrated by froth
flotation. This treatment changes the concentration of the ore from 2% copper to as
high as 30% copper. The concentrated ore is then roasted with a limited supply of air
(oxygen).
2CuFeS₂ (s) + 402 (g)
Cu2S (s) + 2FeO(s) + 3SO2 (g)
The roasted mixture is smelted by adding limestone and sand to form a molten slag
that removes many of the impurities. FeO present in the roasted mixture can also be
removed as slag in the form of iron silicate (FeSiO₃), and silica in the form of calcium
silicate (CaSiO₃).
CaCO3 (s) + SiO₂ (s)
CaSiO3 (I) + CO2 (g)
FeO (s) + SiO₂ (s)
FeSiO3 (I)
The Cu₂S obtained by roasting chalcopyrite is then reduced by heating it in a limited
supply of oxygen.
Cu2S (s) + O2 (g)
2Cu (I) + SO2 (g)
215
Chemistry Grade 10
The copper produced by the above process is called blister copper and it has 98.5
- 99.5 % purity. Blister copper contains iron, silver, gold and sometimes zinc as
impurities. So it is refined further by electrolysis as shown in Figure 5.8.
Electrolytic refining of copper
The main parts of the electrolytic cell are:
Anode: A thick block of impure copper
Cathode: A thin strip of pure copper
Electrolyte: An aqueous solution of copper sulphate, Small quantity of dilute sulphuric
acid is also added to the salt solution to prevent hydrolysis.
When electric current is passed, the copper of the anode is oxidized to Cu²⁺ ions. The
Cu²⁺ ions pass in to solution.
Cu (impure metal)
Cu²⁺(aq) + 2e
oxidation at anode
At the same time an equal number of Cu²⁺ ions of the solution move towards cathode
where they are reduced and deposited as metallic copper.
Cu²⁺(aq) + 2e
Cu ( metal)
reduction at cathode
The process of oxidation at anode and reduction at cathode continues as long as
current is passed. Thus, the cathode becomes thicker and the anode becomes thinner.
Pure copper deposited at cathode is removed and used. Copper obtained by
electrolytic refining is 99.99% pure.
Battrey
+
Anode
Cathode
(impure copper)
(pure copper)
Cu2+
CuSO
solution
Cu²⁺
Anode
mud
Cu
Cu²⁺+2e
Cu²⁺+2e
Cu
Figure 5.8 Electrolytic refining /purification/ of copper.
Physical Properties of Copper
Copper is a soft, ductile, malleable, reddish-brown metal with a density of 8.96 g/
cm³. It is second to silver in electrical conductivity. It melts at 1086°C and boils at
2310°C.
216
Metals and Nonmetals
Chemical Properties of Copper
Copper is less reactive metal that is why it is found in the native state. Although it is not
very reactive, it undergoes the following reactions:
Powdered copper, when heated in air forms a black powder of copper (II) oxide,
CuO.
2Cu (s) + O2 (g)
2CuO (s)
Copper does not react with dilute acids like HCI and H₂SO₄. It cannot displace
hydrogen from acids. However, it can be oxidized by oxidizing acids such as dilute
and concentrated nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid, H₂SO₄.
dilute
3Cu(s) + 8HNO3 (aq)
3Cu(NO)₃)₂ (aq) + 2NO (g) + 4H2O (I)
concentrated
Cu(s) + 8HNO3 (aq)
Cu(NO)₃)₂ (aq) + 2NO2 (g) + 2H2O (I)
Hot and concentrated
Cu(s) + 2H2SO₄ (aq)
CuSO₄(aq) + SO₂ (g) + 2H2O (I)
Copper corrodes in moist air over a long period of time as a result of oxidation
caused by a mixture of water, oxygen and carbon dioxide. It turns green, due to the
formation of verdigris: a basic copper carbonate (CuCO₃.Cu(OH)₂) or Cu2(OH)₂CO₃.
2Cu (s) + H2O (I) + O2 (g) + CO2 (g)
CuCO3.Cu(OH)2
Basic copper carbonate is responsible for the green layer that forms on the surface of
copper and bronze objects. This layer adheres to the surface and protects the metal
from further corrosion. Copper is a transition metal and exhibits different oxidation
states. It exists as cuprous (Cu+) and cupric (Cu²⁺) ions. Compounds containing copper
in the +2 oxidation state are stable. Cu¹⁺ is unstable and cannot exist in aqueous
solution since it reduces and oxidizes (disproportionates) itself as follows:
2Cu+ (aq)
Cu²⁺ (aq) + Cu (s)
Soluble compounds containing Cu+, such as CuCl, Cul and CuBr, are all colourless solids.
The most stable oxidation state of copper is +2. Aqueous solutions of many copper
(II) compounds are blue, thus copper forms coloured compounds in the oxidation state
of +2. For example, hydrated copper sulphate, CuSO .5H2O, consists of blue crystals,
and its aqueous solution is also blue.
Uses of Copper
Copper is used to manufacture alloys. For example, bronze is an alloy of copper and
tin, and it is used to make coins, medals, bells, machinery parts, etc. Brass is an alloy of
copper and zinc, and it is used for hardware tops, terminals and pipes. Copper is
widely used in the electrical industry in the form of electric wires, cables etc. Copper
217
Chemistry Grade 10
compounds, such as copper chloride, copper carbonate and copper hydroxide, are
used as pesticides
Exercise 5.2
1. Classify the following as naturally available and made by humans: water,
sunlight, land, minerals, statues, concrete, plastics, buildings, fossil fuels (crude
oil, coal, and natural gas)
2. Categorize the following as renewable and nonrenewable resources: rocks,
metal ores, soil, wood, air, water, crops, fossil fuels, biofuels
3. Describe the occurrence and extraction of the following metals; aluminium,
iron, and copper.
4. Which of the three metals, Al, Fe and Cu is produced by electrochemical
reduction?
5. Explain how Al, Fe and Cu behave in dry air, moisture and acidic solutions.
6. Why is limestone used in steel?
7. Discuss the main areas of applications of Al, Fe and Cu in home and industry.
8. The kitchen utensils used for cooking foods are made of metals like aluminum,
iron, copper or the alloys of some metals. Give a reason.
9. Why are wires employed in electrical appliances made of copper and (or)
aluminum?
5.3 Production of Some Important Nonmetals
5.3.1 General Properties of Nonmetals and Common Uses of Some
Nonmetallic Compounds
At the end of this section, students should be able to
mention the general properties of non-metals and their uses;
describe some common uses of compounds of nonmetals such as CO2, Na2CO₃,
NH3, HNO3, H3PO4, Ca₃(PO₄)₂, SO₂ & H2SO4 i
describe the occurrence, extraction and uses of nitrogen, phosphorous, oxygen,
sulphur and chlorine.
Nonmetals have opposite characteristics to that of metals.
A. Physical properties
Nonmetals are
Solids, liquids, gases
Non-lustrous
218
Metals and Nonmetals
Nonmalleable and non-ductile
Varying hardness and have low density
Low melting and boiling points
do not show any metallic luster.
are soft in comparison to metals
are non-sonorous
Poor conductors of heat and electricity
B. Chemical properties of non-metals
Nonmetals react with oxygen on heating or burning to form their oxides
Do not displace hydrogen on reaction with dilute acids
React with oxygen to form acidic or neutral oxides
Combine with hydrogen to form stable hydrides
Do not react with water
Electronegative i.e for negative ions by gaining electrons
Oxidizing agents
5.3.2 Production of Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Oxygen, Sulphur and
Chlorine
A. Nitrogen
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Nitrogen;
describe the the applications of Nitrogen.
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
1. Draw the structure of a nitrogen molecule. How
many bonds are present in it?
2. Why does nitrogen form triple bond?
3. Which form of nitrogen is absorbed by green
Activity 5.8
plants?
Occurrence and Production
Nitrogen occurs in nature in the elemental form. It also exists in the form of compounds.
In the elemental state, it exists as a diatomic molecule, N2, in atmospheric air. It
constitutes about 80% by volume of the atmosphere. In the form of compounds, it
exists as sodium nitrate (Chile salt peter, NaNO₃) and potassium nitrate (KNO₃) also
called saltpetre. It is also found in DNA molecules and proteins of all living things.
In the industrial production of nitrogen, the first step is to remove impurities like dust
and other particles from air. The air is then compressed under high pressure and
low temperature to remove carbon dioxide and water vapor since they solidify at a
219
Chemistry Grade 10
relatively high temperature compared to nitrogen and oxygen. As the temperature
continues to decrease, the air containing mainly nitrogen and oxygen condenses to
give a pale-blue liquid. Nitrogen is thus separated on an industrial scale by fractional
distillation of liquid air. When liquid air is fractionally distilled, nitrogen is collected
and stored in steel cylinders under pressure.
The second fraction consists of argon, which distills off the mixture at -186°C, leaving
behind a blue liquid of oxygen that boils at -183°C. In the laboratory, nitrogen is
prepared by warming an aqueous solution containing ammonium chloride and sodium
nitrite
NH₄CI (aq) + NaNO₂ (aq)
NaCl (aq) + N2 (g) + 2H2O (I)
Physical Properties of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is colorless, odorless and tasteless gas. It is inert under ordinary conditions,
and that is why it is found in atmospheric air as N2. The inertness of nitrogen at low
temperatures is directly related to the strength of the triple bond, which requires high
energy to break.
Chemical Properties of Nitrogen
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
?
1. Why nitrogen is the most abundant gas in the
atmosphere?
2. Why nitrogen exists mostly in the elemental state?
3. What is the purpose of running a reaction under
Activity 5.9
an inert atmosphere such as nitrogen gas?
Though nitrogen is inert at low temperatures, it reacts with metals of group IA and
IIA as well as oxygen at higher temperatures. When heated with reactive metals like
lithium, calcium and magnesium, it forms compounds, known as nitrides.
6Li (s) + N2 (g)
2Li3N (s)
3Ca (s) + N2 (g)
Ca3N2 (s)
3Mg (s) + N2 (g)
Mg3N₂ (s)
Nitrogen combines with oxygen at elevated temperatures or in an electric arc to form
oxides.
N2 (g) + O2 (g)
2NO (g)
N2 (g) + 202 (g)
2NO2 (g)
Nitric oxide, also called nitrogen monoxide, NO, is a colorless and reactive gas. It
forms nitrogen dioxide (NO₂), a reddish brown gas, when it comes into contact with
oxygen. This reddish brown gas dimerizes at low temperatures to give a colorless gas
of dinitrogen tetraoxide, N₂O₄.
220
Metals and Nonmetals
2NO2 (g)
N2O4 (g)
Nitrogen also forms oxides, like dinitrogen monoxide, N₂O, (commonly called laughing
gas), dinitrogen trioxide (N₂O₃) and dinitrogen pentoxide (N₂O₅). Nitrogen reacts
directly with hydrogen in the Haber process to form ammonia. In this process, a mixture
of N2 and H2 gas, at a pressure of 200 - 300 atm and a temperature of 400 - 600°C,
is passed over a catalyst of finely divided iron.
Fe/200 - 300atm
N₂(g) + 3H₂(g)
2NH₃(g)
400-600°C
The ammonia produced by this method is primarily used in the manufacture of
fertilizers. It is also used for the production of nitric acid (HNO₃).
Uses of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is used in food packaging to prevent oxidation, and to create an inert
atmosphere in the production of semiconductors. Liquid nitrogen is used as a refrigerant
to preserve bulls' semen and blood. Its major use is in the production of ammonia.
B. Phosphorus
?
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
Have you ever observed glowing worms? Why do they
glow? Anyone who has observed them should explain
to the class.
Activity 5.10
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Phosphorous;
describe the the applications of Phosphorous.
Does phosphorus exist in the pure form (elemental state) as does nitrogen? If not,
why? Phosphorus is a relatively abundant element, ranking 12th in the earth's crust.
It exists naturally only in the combined state, such as in rock phosphate, Ca₃(PO₄)₂,
fluoroapatite, Ca₁₀(PO₄)₆F₂ or 3Ca₃(PO₄),,CaF₂. It is also found in teeth, bones and
DNA.
What is allotropy? What are the two common allotropes of phosphorus?
Allotropes are different forms of the same element with the same physical state but
with different physical properties. This is due to the difference in the arrangement of
atoms. The two common allotropic forms of phosphorus are white phosphorus and red
phosphorus.
221
Chemistry Grade 10
Physical Properties of Phosphorus
White phosphorus is a very poisonous, white waxy-looking substance that melts at
44.1°C and boils at 287°C. Its density is 1.8 g/cm³. It consists of individual tetra-
atomic (P₄) molecules and is an unstable form of phosphorus
Red phosphorus is denser (2.16 g/cm³) and is much less reactive than white phosphorus
at normal temperatures. It consists of P₄ molecules linked together to form a polymer
(large molecule) as shown below.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
The white phosphorus molecule The arrangement of atoms in red phosphorus
Industrially, white phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of crushed rock
phosphate, Ca₃(PO₄),, silica, SiO₂, and coke in an electric furnace. The reaction in the
furnace is:
2Ca₃(PO₄)₂ (s) + 6SiO2 (s) + 10C (s)
6CaSiO 3 (I) + P₄(g) + 10CO (g)
The vaporized phosphorus (P₄) is condensed, collected and stored under water. Red
phosphorus is prepared by heating white phosphorus in sunlight for several days.
White phosphorus is stored under water because it spontaneously ignites (bursts into
flames) in the presence of oxygen. Red phosphorus is much less reactive than white
phosphorus and does not need to be stored under water. Although red phosphorous
is insoluble in water, it is very soluble in carbon disulphide. Solutions of P₄ in CS2 are
reasonably stable. As soon as CS2 evaporates, however, the phosphorous bursts in to
flame.
?
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
Use reference books available in your school library
and write down the main properties of white and red
phosphorus.
Activity 5.11
Chemical Properties of Phosphorus
Phosphorus exhibits the following common chemical reactions. Phosphorus reacts with
limited and excess supplies of oxygen to form tetraphosphorus hexoxide (P₄O₆) and
tetraphosphorus decoxide (P₄O₁₀) respectively
P4 (s) + 302 (g)
P₄O₆(s)
P4 (s) + 502 (g)
P₄O₁₀(s)
222
Metals and Nonmetals
P₄O₆ and P₄O₁₀ dissolve in water to form phosphorous acid, H3PO3, an orthophsophoric
acid, H3PO4 respectively.
P₄O₆ (s) + 6H2O (I)
4H3PO3 (aq)
P4O10 (s) + 6H2O (I)
4H3PO4 (aq)
Phosphorus also reacts with limited and excess supplies of chlorine to form phosphorus
(III) chloride (PCI₃) and phosphorus (V) chloride (PCI₅) respectively
P4 (s) + 6CI2 (g)
4PCI₃ (s)
P4 (s) + 10Cl2 (g)
4PCI₅ (s)
Uses of Phosphorus
Red phosphorous is used to make matches. Most of the white phosphorous produced
is used to make phosphoric acid or other phosphorous compounds. Phosphorous is also
used in making fireworks, smoke bombs, rat-poisons, and tracer bullets. Phosphorous is
essential for plant growth. Large quantities of phosphorous compounds are converted
into acids and salts to be used as fertilizers, in baking powder in the chemical industries.
C. Oxygen
Discuss the following questions in groups and give a
presentation to the class.
?
1. Write the chemical reactions for photosynthesis
and respiration. What are the products formed in
photosynthesis and respiration?
2. What are the uses of oxygen in hospitals?
Activity 5.12
3. How do astronauts breathe while in space?
Occurrence and Production
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Oxygen;
describe the the applications of Oxygen.
Oxygen is the most abundant element on earth. It constitutes about 46.6% by weight
of the earth's crust in the form of compounds such as oxides, silicates, carbonates,
phosphates etc. It exists in nature in the elemental state in atmospheric air constituting
about 20% by volume. Oxygen is manufactured industrially by the fractional
distillation of liquid air in a way similar to that of nitrogen. Oxygen has two allotropic
forms, diatomic (O₂) and triatomic (O₃), ozone.
223
Chemistry Grade 10
+
+
Ö
:O:
Structure of O2 molecule
Resonance structures of O₃ molecule
Ozone is naturally produced in the stratosphere by a two- step reactive process. In
the first step, solar ultraviolet radiation (sunlight) breaks apart an oxygen molecule
to form two separate oxygen atoms. In the overall process, three oxygen molecules
plus sunlight react to form two ozone molecules according to the equation:
30₂ UV - light 203
Occurrence of this process in the upper atmosphere removes radiation that would be
harmful to life on the surface of the Earth.
Physical Properties
Oxygen is a colorless, odorless, tasteless gas. It changes from a gas to a liquid at a
temperature of -182.96°C. The liquid formed has a slightly bluish color to it. Liquid
oxygen can then be solidified or frozen at a temperature of -218.4°C. The density of
oxygen is 1.429 grams per liter. By comparison, It is denser than air. The density of
air is about 1.29 grams per liter
Chemical Properties of Oxygen
Oxygen is relatively reactive and combines directly with most elements to form oxides.
Oxygen combines with metal to form metal oxides (basic oxides). For example,
2Mg (s) + O2 (g)
MgO (s)
2Ca (s) + O2 (s)
2CaO (s)
Oxygen combines with non-metals to form acidic oxides; for example:
S₈ (s) + 802 (g)
8SO2 (g)
P4 (s) + 502 (g)
P₄O₁₀ (g)
Oxygen supports combustion and is necessary for the burning of substances like
charcoal, hydrocarbon fuel, etc.
C (s) + O2 (g)
CO2 (g)
CH₄ (g) + 202 (g)
CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g)
224
Metals and Nonmetals
D. Sulphur
?
Discuss the following in groups and give a presentation
to the class.
Have you observed the color of sulphur? What is the
use of sulphur in your area?
Activity 5.13
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, occurrence and extraction of Sulphur;
describe the the applications of Sulphur.
Sulphur is found in nature and in the form of compounds such as galena (PbS), pyrites
(FeS₂) (fool's gold ), cinnabar (HgS), sphalerite (ZnS), gypsum (CaSO₄.2H₂O), barite
(BaSO₄), and as hydrogen sulphide (H₂S) in natural gas and crude oil.
Sulphur is extracted from underground deposits of elemental sulphur by the Frasch
process (Figure 5.9). In this process, three concentric pipes are sent down to the sulphur
deposit.
Compressed air
Aerated molten sulphur
Super - heated water
Crap rock
Hot water
Melted sulphur
Solid sulphur
Figure 5.9 Frasch process- extraction of sulphur.
Superheated water at about 170°C is pumped through the outermost pipes. Hot air
is compressed in the innermost tube. A froth of sulphur, air and water come out to
the surface of the earth forced by hot compressed air in the middle tube. The molten
sulphur is then cooled and solidified.
225
Chemistry Grade 10
Uses of Sulphur
Nearly one-half of the sulphur needed by chemical industries is obtained as a waste
product of other industrial processes. For example, sulphur can be obtained in the form
of hydrogen sulphide (H₂S) from natural gas and during the purification of crude oil. It
can also be obtained in the form of sulphur dioxide from the roasting of sulphide ores
during the manufacture of metals. The use of sulphur obtained from waste products of
other industries reduces the demand for the element from natural deposits. This also
reduces the pollution of atmospheric air and the formation of acid rain.
Allotropic Forms of Sulphur
Sulphur exhibits allotropy. The most important allotropes of sulphur are rhombic and
monoclinic sulphur. Rhombic sulphur is the most stable form of sulphur consisting of S₈
molecules.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Crown shape of S₈ molecules
Rhombic Sulphur (α-sulphur): rhombic sulphur is crystalline in nature and has
octahedral shape. On heating the solution of roll sulphur in CS2 we get rhombic sulphur.
It is yellow with a melting point of 385.8K and specific gravity 2.06. Rhombic sulphur
cannot be dissolved in water but can be dissolved in benzene, ether, alcohol etc.
Rhombic sulphur is the most stable form of sulphur consisting of S₈ molecules.
Monoclinic Sulphur (ß-sulphur): ß-Sulphur is a yellow solid with a monoclinic crystal
form and is less dense than α-sulphur. Like the α- form it contains puckered S₈ rings and
only differs from it in the way the rings are packed in the crystal. It is unusual because
it is only stable above 95.3 °C; below this temperature it converts to α-sulphur.
Physical Properties of Sulphur
Pure sulphur is a tasteless, odourless, brittle solid that is pale yellow in colour, a poor
conductor of electricity, and insoluble in water
Chemical Properties of Sulphur
Sulphur is relatively stable and unreactive at room temperature. However, it reacts
with metals and non-metals when heated.
Sulphur combines with metals when heated to form sulphides.
8Fe (s) + S₈ (s)
8FeS (s)
Sulphur burns in oxygen to form oxides.
S₈ (s) + 802 (g)
8SO2 (g)
Sulphur is the raw material for the production of sulphuric acid (H₂SO₄) by the Contact
Process. This process of sulphuric acid production involves the following steps
226
Metals and Nonmetals
Step 1: Sulphur is first oxidized to produce sulphur dioxide:
S₈ (s) + 802 (g)
8SO2 (g)
Step 2: Sulphur dioxide is converted to sulphur trioxide at high temperatures in the
presence of a catalyst:
2SO2 (g) + O2
2SO3 (g)
Step 3: Sulphur trioxide is absorbed into concentrated sulphuric acid to produce oleum
(H₂S₂O₇).
SO₃ (g) + H2SO4 (I)
H₂S₂O₇(I)
Step 4: The oleum is then diluted with water to produce the desired concentration of
sulphuric acid. Commercially used concentrated sulphuric acid is 98% H2SO ₄.
H2S2O7 (I) + H2O (I)
2H2SO₄ (aq)
E. Chlorine
Discuss the following in groups and give a presentation
to the class.
1. When we turn on the water tap, the water coming
out of the tap sometimes appears white and turns
?
normal after a few minutes. Many people say that
the white colour we see is due to chlorine. Do you
agree? Discuss in group and present your opinion
to the class.
2. What is the purpose of adding chlorine to drinking
Activity 5.14
water?
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, occurrence and extraction of Chlorine;
describe the the applications of Chlorine.
Chlorine belongs to group VIIA, known as the halogens. It is the most abundant element
among the halogens. It is found in nature in the form of compounds only. Chlorine is
found in nature chiefly in the form of chlorides of sodium, potassium, calcium and
magnesium. Sodium chloride is the chief source of chlorine, and it is obtained from
seawater or as deposits of rock salt. Commercially, chlorine is manufactured by the
electrolysis of a concentrated aqueous solution of sodium chloride. During electrolysis
of the concentrated solution, chlorine is formed at the anode and the reduction of
water occurs at the cathode, producing hydrogen gas and hydroxide ions (OH⁻). The
electrode and the overall cell reactions are as follows;
227
Chemistry Grade 10
Oxidation at anode:
2CI- (aq)
CI2 (g) + 2e⁻
Reduction at cathode:
2H2O (I) + 2e⁻
H2 (g) + 20H- (aq)
Cell reaction:
2NaCl (aq) + 2H2O (I)
2NaOH (aq) + Cl2 (g) + H2 (g)
Although NaOH forms at the cathode compartment and Cl₂ at the anode, the two
substances must be kept apart from one another. This is because, if they come into
contact with each other, they can react according to the following equation.
NaOH (aq) + Cl2 (g)
NaOCI (aq) + HCI (aq)
What is the oxidation number of chlorine in NaOCl?
Physical Properties of Chlorine
?
Discuss the following in groups and give a presentation
to the class.
In urban area, tap water possesses a peculiar smell,
which disappears after a few minutes. Many people
say that the smell is due to chlorine. Do you agree?
Activity 5.15
Some of its physical properties are the following:
Chlorine is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature.
It melts at -102°C and boils at -34°C.
It is fairly soluble in water.
It is extremely poisonous, causing inflammation of the lungs and mucous membranes
if inhaled, even in very small amounts. It is fatal if inhaled in higher amounts.
Chemical Properties of Chlorine
Chlorine is a highly reactive non-metal. It reacts directly with almost all elements
except the noble gases, carbon and nitrogen.
It is a powerful oxidizing agent and oxidizes most of the elements with which it reacts.
The following are the main reactions of chlorine.
Chlorine reacts with heated metals to form chloride salts
2Fe (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2FeCl₃ (s)
2AI (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2AICI₃ (s)
Chlorine reacts smoothly with hydrogen, in the presence of a charcoal as a catalyst,
at room temperature to form hydrogen chloride.
H2 (g) + CI2 (g)
2HCI (g)
Chlorine displaces less reactive halogens (Br₂ and I₂) from aqueous solutions of their
compounds.
228
Metals and Nonmetals
CI2 (g) + 2KBr (aq)
2KCI (aq) + Br₂ (I)
CI2 (g) + 2KI (aq)
2KCI (aq) + I2 (aq)
Can bromine displace chlorine in a chemical reaction?
Chlorine dissolves in water and reacts with it, forming an acidic solution containing
hydrochloric acid (HCI) and hypochlorous acid (HOCI).
CI2 (g) + H2O (I)
HCI (aq) + HOCI (aq)
This type of reaction is called a disproportionation reaction, where chlorine is itself
reduced and oxidized.
Uses of Chlorine
Chlorine is commercially used as a bleaching agent and disinfectant (kills germs). As
elemental chlorine or as chlorine water, it is strong enough to oxidize dyes and to
bleach coloured materials. For example, it can be used to remove yellow or brown
colors from wood pulp, paper and cotton.
Exercise 5.3
1. What are the main natural sources of N, P, O, S, and Cl?
2. Describe the main processes involved in the production (extraction) of N, P, O,
S and Cl.
3. How do N, P, and S behave when heated in air?
4. Write an equation for the reaction of chlorine with water.
5. Describe and discuss the common uses of CO2, Na2CO₃, NH3, HNO3, H3PO4,
Ca₃(PO₄), SO₂, H2SO4
A Checklist for Review
Allotrope
Contact process
Ore
Alloy
Electrolytic reduction
Open - hearth fumace
Basic - oxygen process
Fractional distillation
Red phosphorus
Bauxite
Flotation
Roasting
Bessmer converter
Fluoroapatite
Rock phosphate
Blast furnace
Frasch process
Sulphur
Blister coppe
Haber process
Slag
Cryolite
Hall process
Steel
Chlorine
Mineral
Thermite process
Cacination
Metallurgy
White phosphorus
Chemical reduction
Nitrogen
229
Chemistry Grade 10
Unit Summary
About 80% of the elements are metals. They have common physical and chemical
properties. Metals are ductile, malleable, sonorous, conductors of heat and
electricity. Metals are reducing agents and mostly form basic oxides. The specific
properties of metals vary widely from one metal to the other. Active metals always
occur in compounds in the form of minerals. The most active metals are extracted
from their compounds only by electrolysis because there is no stronger reducing
agent that can reduce them from their compounds. The reactivity series is a useful
guide to predict the relative reactivity of metals.
Aluminum is the most abundant metal in the earth's crust. It is manufactured by the
electrolysis of molten aluminum oxide mixed with cryolite using the Hall's process.
Aluminum is used to make light-weight alloys that can be used for aircraft and
similar constructions. Aluminum resists corrosion due to the formation of a thin film
of an oxide on its surface.
Iron is the second-most abundant metal in the earth's crust. Iron is extracted in a
blast furnace. The furnace is charged with iron ore, coke and limestone, and hot
air is blown up from the bottom. Limestone is used in the blast furnace to remove
impurities like sand (silica) in the form of slag. The type of iron obtained directly
from the blast furnace is called pig iron and it is impure. Wrought iron is the purest
form of iron obtained from pig-iron by removing most of the impurities. Steel
is an alloy of iron containing definite amounts of carbon and other metals like
chromium, nickel, tungsten, vanadium, manganese etc. Steel is manufactured from
the pig iron by the Bessemer converter, Open-Hearth Furnace and Basic Oxygen
Processes.
Copper is extracted by roasting chalcopyrites (CuFeS₂). Copper that is obtained
by roasting chalcopyrites is called blister copper. It is impure, and it is refined
further by electrolysis. Copper is malleable and ductile, a good conductor of heat
and electricity and is used to make electric wires and in the manufacture of alloys.
The properties of nonmetals are opposite to that of metals. Some examples of
nonmetals are nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorous and chlorine.
Nitrogen constitutes about 80% by volume of atmospheric air. Nitrogen is
manufactured by the fractional distillation of liquefied air. Nitrogen is relatively
inert. However, its reactivity increases when heated and combined with metals of
group IA and IIA to form nitrides and with oxygen to form oxides like NO and
NO₂.
Phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of rock phosphate, coke (carbon)
and silica in an electric furnace. Phosphorus has two common allotropes, white and
red phosphorus. White phosphorus is highly reactive, while red phosphorous is
230
Metals and Nonmetals
relatively stable. White phosphorus is stored under water. Phosphorus reacts with
oxygen and chlorine.
Oxygen makes up about 20% by volume of air. It is manufactured by the fractional
distillation of liquid air. Oxygen is the most abundant element in the earth's crust.
Sulphur exists in the elemental state in underground deposits from which it is
extracted by the Frasch process. Sulphur reacts with oxygen to form sulphur
dioxide and sulphur trioxide. Sulphur is used for the manufacture of sulphuric acid
by the Contact Process.
Chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of brine. Chlorine is a powerful
oxidizing agent and reacts with heated metals to form chlorides. Chlorine and
chlorine water are used to bleach colored materials and as disinfectant.
Review Exercises
Part I: Multiple choice questions. Choose the best answer from the given
alternatives
1.
Which one of the following metals is the most ductile?
a.
Aluminum
b. Copper
C.
Gold
d. Silver
2.
Which one of the following is the least dense?
a. Mercury
b. Gold
C. Sodium
d. Aluminum
3.
Which one of the following metals will not liberate hydrogen gas when treated
with dilute hydrochloric acid ?
a. Magnesium
b. Zinc
C. Copper
d. Iron
4.
Which one of the following metallic elements is most likely to be found as the
free metal in nature ?
a.
Ca
b. Au
C.
Al
d.
Fe
5.
What is the purpose of a converter in steel production?
a.
to reduce the iron in the ore to elemental iron
b.
to allow the addition of nitrogen for increased strength
C.
to allow slow solidification of the molten metal so it will purify as it
crystallizes
d.
to remove impurity elements by oxidation
6.
Which of the following is a non-renewable resource:
a.
soil
C.
petroleum
b.
water
d. plants
7.
Which of the following elements possess allotropes?
a. carbon
b. phosphorus
C. sulphur
d. all
8.
Which one is used as anode in the electrolytic refining of copper?
a.
Pure copper
C.
Impure copper
b.
Graphite rod
d.
Pure iron rod
231
Chemistry Grade 10
9.
Which of the following is not a use of nitrogen:
a.
making matches
C.
making fertilizers
b. production of ammonia
d.
as a refrigerant
10. The most abundant element in the earth's crust is:
a. Silicon
b. Iron
C. Oxygen
d. Aluminium
11. Which of the following elements is not found as a free element in nature:
a. Sulphur
b. Oxygen
C. Copper
d. Chlorine
12. Which of the statements about the extraction of iron in the blast furnace is true?
a.
limestone is added to combine with excess carbon dioxide
b.
a slag of iron oxide forms at the bottom of the furnace
C.
hot air is blown in at the top of the furnace
d.
carbon monoxide reduces iron (III) oxide to iron
13. Calcium oxide is added to a steel making furnace to:
a. oxidize basic oxides
b.
oxidize carbon to carbon dioxide
C.
react with acid impurities
d.
react with silicon to form silicon dioxide
Part II: Short answer questions.
Answer the following appropriately
14. You are given, a hammer, a battery, wires, bulb and a switch.
a.
How will you use them to distinguish between samples of metals and non-
metals
b.
Assess the usefulness of these tests to distinguish between metals and
nonmetals
15. In the electrolytic refining of a metal M what would you take as cathode, as the
anode and as the electrolyte ?
16. State two ways to prevent the rusting of iron.
17. Give reason for the following:
a.
Aluminum is a highly reactive metal, yet it is used for making cooking utensils
b.
You must have seen tarnished copper vessels being cleaned with lemon or
tarmarind juice
18. Explain why I₂ is solid, Br₂ is liquid, CI₂ and F2 are both gases at room temperature?
19. Which one of Cu, Ag and Au is most malleable?
20. Which one of Fe, Ag and Pb is the best conductor of heat?
21. Name a metal and a nonmetal existing in liquid state at room temperature
22. Why is limestone added to the blast furnace?
23. Compare and contrast the Bessemer and open hearth processes.
24. Describe the advantages of using steel alloys instead of pure iron.
232
Metals and Nonmetals
25. Write balanced chemical equations for the given reactions, which take place in
the blast furnace during the extraction of iron:
a.
The reaction of iron (III) oxide with carbon monoxide.
b.
The reaction of calcium oxide with silicon (IV) oxide
Part III: Fill in the blank spaces
26. Gold can be hammered in to sheets. Therefore, it is
. (malleable/
ductile)
27. Copper is used in electrical appliances because it is good conductor of electricity
and
. (ductile/brittle)
28. Copper can displace
from its salt solution. (Zinc/silver/iron)
29. The purest form of iron is known as
30. Aluminum metal is extracted by electrolysis from the mineral
233
UNIT
6
HYDROCARBONS AND THEIR NATURAL SOURCES
Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
discuss the historical development of organic chemistry;
classify organic compounds;
write the general formula of alkanes, alkenes and alkynes;
name simple alkanes, branched-chain alkanes, simple alkenes, branched-
chain alkenes and simple alkynes;
write the molecular and structural formula of simple alkanes, branched
chain alkanes, simple alkenes, branched chain alkenes and simple alkynes;
explain isomerism;
draw the possible isomers of alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes;
explain the physical and chemical properties; and the general methods
of the preparation of alkanes; alkenes, alkynes, and benzene;
list the major natural sources of hydrocarbons;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, classifying, communicating,
measuring, asking questions, interpreting data, drawing conclusions,
applying concepts, predicting and problem-solving.
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
6.1
Introduction
Start-up Activity
1. Consider the common say,-"The Kingdom of Heaven
Runs on Righteousness, but the Kingdom of Earth Runs
on Alkanes". Argue for and/or against this say!
2. What sort of materials do you use as a source of
energy to cook your food or for transport? Do you
know the chemical components of gasoline or diesel
oil ('naphtha') that people use for automobiles,
'bajaj' or a motorbike? How is it obtained?
3. Have you encountered a biogas plant in your area?
What is its use? How does it work?
4. Discuss the socio-economic impacts of plants as a
source of chemicals used in traditional medicine and
doping.
5. Can you define organic chemistry or organic
compounds? What about the hydrocarbons?
The hydrocarbons that you are going to study in this unit are a class of organic
compounds. But, what are organic compounds and organic chemistry? The answers to
these questions are all around you.
Most of the foodstuff that we consume every day such as fruits, vegetables, sugar,
fats, starch, and vinegar are basically organic compounds. Similarly, substances
such as pesticides, herbicides, fuels, dry cleaning chemicals, soaps and detergents,
pharmaceuticals, alcoholic beverages, etc. are also organic compounds. Every living
organism is made of organic compounds. A large number of organic compounds
have been isolated and identified from plants and animals. The organic compounds
that are synthesised by living organisms are called natural products. Although plants
have principally been used as a source of useful organic compounds such as those in
traditional medicine, they also provide some organic compounds that are considered
drugs of abuse because they lead to addiction and have negative socio-economic
effects. Psychotropic plant chemicals such as nicotine from tobacco plant, cathinone from
Chat (khat); from Catha edulis; opium (morphine) from poppy plant and cocaine from
coca leaf are some examples. Some of these drugs are also used in doping. Doping
is the misuse of certain substances and methods to enhance sporting performance and
stamina. Although these compounds are perceived as useful to boost zealous, increase
energy, and decrease fatigue, they have serious side effects such as personality
disorder, low productivity, increased accidents, reduction of competitiveness, inability
to cope with tasks that require higher-level judgment and fine motor skills.
235
Chemistry Grade 10
6.1.1 History of Organic Chemistry
At the end of this section, students will be able to narrate the historical development
of organic chemistry.
The science of organic chemistry began to flourish with the demise of a nineteenth-
century theory called Vitalism. According to Vitalism theory, organic compounds were
only those that came from living organisms, and only living things could synthesize
organic compounds through the intervention of a vital force. Inorganic compounds
were considered those compounds that came from non-living sources. The German
chemist Friedrich Wöhler, however, discovered in 1828 that an organic compound
called urea (a constituent of urine) could be synthesized in the laboratory by
evaporating an aqueous solution of the inorganic compound ammonium cyanate. With
this discovery, the synthesis of an organic compound began the evolution of organic
chemistry as a scientific discipline. Since Wohler's discovery, chemists have developed
a remarkably sophisticated ability to design and synthesize new organic compounds
in the laboratory-medicines, dyes, polymers, and a host of other substances that are
helpful to society.
Heat
NH4 OCN
H2N
NH2
Ammonium cyanate
Urea
To date, over 50 million organic compounds are known. The list included organic
compounds isolated from natural sources and also those which were synthesized in
the laboratories. All of the organic compounds whether of synthetic or natural origin
contain the element carbon. Therefore, organic chemistry, today, is defined as the study
of carbon compounds except the oxides of carbon, carbonates, hydrogen carbonates,
cyanides and cyanates. But why is carbon special? If you have a look at the periodic
table, you will see over a hundred elements listed there. The question that comes to
mind is this: why should an entire field of chemistry be based on the chemistry of
compounds that contain this specific element, carbon?
The reason is linked to the unique property of carbon called catenation. Catenation is
the ability of atoms of the same element to join together to form short or long chains
and rings. Carbon atoms can form strong covalent bonds to one another to form rings
and chains of carbon atoms. And also they can form strong bonds to elements such
as hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur. Because of these bond-forming properties,
carbon can be the basis for the huge diversity of compounds. A few other elements
like sulphur, silicon and boron show this behavior, but to a much lesser extent.
236
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Form a group, discuss on the answers for the questions
under this activity, and present your conclusions to the
class.
1. Despite the demise of vitalism in science, the word
'organic' is still used today by some people as
?
'organic vitamins', 'organic fertilizers', or 'organic
food.' What do you understand from these terms?
Is pure 'natural vitamin C from orange juice', for
example, healthier than pure 'synthetic vitamin C';
or both are important? Discuss!
Activity 6.1
6.1.2 Structural Representations of Organic Molecules
Before we proceed to the main topic of this unit-the hydrocarbons, we shall briefly
review the bonding concept. Recall from your Grade 9 that carbon has four valence
electrons and it can form four covalent bonds with other atoms. You also studied Lewis
structure- a representation of covalent bonding in which shared electron pairs of
covalent bonds are shown as pairs of dots or lines between two atoms and lone pairs
are shown as pairs of dots on individual atoms. However, as the size of the compound
increases, it becomes difficult to portray the structure of molecules with the use of
Lewis structure. This is why scientists have developed other structural representations
including structural formula, condensed structural formula, bond-line representation,
and polygon formula. Let US take a look at these structures.
a. Complete Structural Formula
Complete Structural formula is obtained by representing the two-electron covalent
bond by a single dash. A single dash represents a single bond, a double dash
represents a double bond and a triple dash represents a triple bond. Lone pairs of
electrons on heteroatoms such as oxygen, halogens and more, may or may not be
shown. Methane (CH₄), for instance, contains one carbon atom and four hydrogen
atoms. The carbon atom contributes its 4 valence electrons and the four hydrogen
atoms contribute four electrons (each H atom contributes one electron). Therefore, the
Lewis structures for a methane molecule having 4 + 4 = 8 electrons is drawn following
the rule (see your grade 9 lesson) as:
H
H
H : C: H
H-C-H
H
H
Methane
Methane
Lewis Formula
Structural Formula
237
Chemistry Grade 10
b. Condensed Structural Formula
The condensed structural formula is an abbreviated form of structural formula. It is
obtained by omitting some or all the dashes that represent covalent bonds. Hexane
(C₆H₁₄) can be represented by the structural formula or the condensed structural
formula as shown below.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₃
H
H
H
H
H
H
Structural Formula
Condesed Structural Formula
The condensed structural formula can further be condensed by putting identical
repetitive units in parenthesis and indicating their repetition using subscripts. For
example, we can further condense CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₃ to CH₃(CH₂)₄CH₃.
C. Bond-Line Structural Representation
In a bond-line structural representation, carbon and hydrogen atoms are not shown
but are understood to be there based on the fact that each carbon forms 4 covalent
bonds. The lines representing carbon-carbon bonds are drawn in a zig-zag fashion as
exemplified by the bond-line structure for hexane and hexyl bromide:
Br
C₆H₁₄, hexane
C₆H₁₃Br, hexyl bromide
Only heteroatoms need to be indicated in bond line representation. The terminals
in the bond-line structures denote methyl (CH₃) groups unless indicated otherwise
by a functional group, while the line junctions denote carbon atoms bonded to an
appropriate number of hydrogen atoms required to satisfy the valency of the carbon
atoms. Note that in hexyl bromide one of the hydrogens in the terminal CH₃ on one
side of the structure is replaced Br leaving a CH₂Br group.
d.
Polygon Formula
There are many organic compounds, in which carbon atoms are not joined in a chain,
but rather are joined in a ring. These cyclic compounds are usually represented by
polygon using bond-lines without showing carbon and hydrogen atoms. The corners
of a polygon represent a carbon atom and the sides of a polygon denote a carbon-
carbon bond. Similarly, if an atom or a group of atoms other than hydrogen is
attached to carbon, then that atom or a group of atoms manifest in this structure.
As example, cyclopentane (C₅H₁₀), cyclopentanol (C₅H₁₀), cyclohexane (C₆H₁₂), and
bromocyclohexane (C₆H₁,Br) are depicted below:
238
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Br
OH
cyclopentane
cyclopentanol
cyclohexane
bromocyclohexane
6.1.3 Classes of Organic Compounds
At the end of this section, students will be able to
classify organic compounds;
define the term functional group.
Form a group, discuss on the following activity and
present your responses to the class.
You are familiar with a classification in chemistry as
well as biology. For instance, you have studied that
the elements in periodic table are classified as metals,
?
non-metals, and metalloids. What is the purpose
of classification? Why don't we deal with individual
entities? What is the basis of classification? Why do
you think we should classify organic compounds and
Activity 6.2
how?
We have noted in section 6.1 about the unique properties of carbon giving rise to a
very vast number of organic compounds known. Indeed, more and more are being
added to the list each day. Each of these compounds has its own physical properties,
such as melting point and boiling point, and each has its own chemical reactivity.
Chemists have learned through years of experience that organic compounds can
be classified into families according to their structural features that are responsible
for their properties so that members of a given family often have similar chemical
behavior.
Thus, instead of having 50 millions of compounds with random reactivity, it is better
to have a few dozen families of organic compounds whose chemistry is reasonably
predictable. The structural features that make it possible to classify compounds into
families are called functional groups.
Functional Groups
A functional group is a group of atoms and/or bonds within a molecule that has
a characteristic chemical behavior. Chemically, a given functional group behaves in
nearly the same way in every molecule it's a part of. Table 6.1 lists the common
functional groups of hydrocarbons, name ending, and specific examples. It also gives
239
Chemistry Grade 10
simple examples of their occurrence. The functional group of an alkene, for example,
is its carbon-carbon double bond. The functional group of an alkyne is its carbon-
carbon triple bond. Alkanes do not have a functional group. Their molecules have
carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen single bonds only, but these bonds do present
in molecules of almost all organic compounds. In addition, C-C and C-H bonds are, in
general, much less reactive than common functional groups.
Table 6.1 Some classes of organic compounds, their functional groups, name ending,
and examples.
Organic compound
Functional group
Name ending
Example
Alkane
-
-ane
CH₃-CH₃
Ethane
Alkene
-ene
H2C=CH2
Ethene
C
C
Alkyne
-yne
+0
C
C
Ethyne
Aromatic
None
benzene
6.2 Saturated Hydrocarbons: Alkanes (CH2n+2)
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define hydrocarbon;
define saturated hydrocarbon;
define homologous series;
drive the general formula of alkanes from based on the number of hydrogen and
carbon;
write the first ten members of alkanes homologous series;
write the molecular formulas of alkanes from the given numbers of carbon atom.
240
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
In unit 2, you have classified a solution as saturated,
unsaturated, or supersaturated based on the amount
of solute it contains relative to the maximum dissolving
capacity of the solvent. In grade 9, you also studied
that the valence of carbon is 4; meaning the maximum
number of atoms that carbon can form bonds to is 4.
Based on this analysis, can you classify the following
?
compounds as saturated and unsaturated?
H
H
H
H
H
H-C-H
H-C-C-H
C=C
H-CEC-H
I
H
H
H
H H
Activity 6.3
I.
II.
III.
IV.
Compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen atoms are called hydrocarbons.
Hydrocarbons may be classified as aliphatic ("fat-like") or aromatic (Figure 6.1A).
Aliphatic hydrocarbons exhibit a "fat-like" behavior. This includes alkane, alkene,
alkyne, or their derivatives. Aromatic hydrocarbons are those hydrocarbons that
contain a low hydrogen-to-carbon ratio. Benzene (C₆H₆), for instance, is a typical
aromatic hydrocarbon having a ratio of number of hydrogen atoms to number of
carbon atoms only 1.
Hydrocarbons
B
Hydrocarbons
A
Aliphatic
Aromatic
Saturated
Unsaturated
Alkanes
Alkenes
Alkynes
Alkanes
Alkenes
Alkynes
Aromatic
Acyclic/
Alicyclic/
Acyclic/
Alicyclic/
Acyclic
Alicyclic/
Acyclic/
Alicyclic/
open
Cycloalkanes
open
cycloalkenes
/open
Cycloalkanes
open
cycloalkenes
chain
chain
chain
chain
Figure 6.1 Classification of hydrocarbons, A as aliphatic and aromatic and B as
saturated and unsuturated.
Hydrocarbons may also be classified as suturated and unsaturated. Generally
speaking, compounds such as alkanes (e.g. methane, CH₄), whose molecules contain
only single bonds are referred to as saturated compounds. Because they contain the
maximum number of hydrogen atoms per carbon atoms that the carbon compound
can possess. Remember from Grade 9 that the valency of carbon is 4. This means
C can form a maximum of 4 covalent bonds with 4 hydrogen atoms because each
hydrogen can form only one (valency of H is 1). Compounds with multiple bonds, such
as alkenes (e.g. ethylene), alkynes (e.g. acetylene), and aromatic hydrocarbons (e.g.
benzene), are called unsaturated compounds because they possess fewer than the
maximum number of hydrogen atoms per carbon, and they are capable of reacting
with hydrogen under proper conditions. Let's begin with saturated compounds!
241
Chemistry Grade 10
Alkanes
Structures I and Il in Activity 6.3 represent methane and ethane, respectively, the
typical alkanes. Alkanes are often described as saturated hydrocarbons: hydrocarbons
because they contain only carbon and hydrogen; saturated because they contain the
maximum possible number of hydrogens per carbon. Alkanes are also occasionally
called aliphatic compounds, a name derived from the Greek aleiphas, meaning "fat."
Alkanes can be unbranched (normal) or branched. Table 6.2 lists the common names
and formulae of some members of the unbranched alkane family.
Table 6.2 Some members of the unbranched alkane family.
Name
No
Structure
Molecular
Name
No
Molecular
of C
formula
of C
formula
atoms
atoms
Methane
1
CH₄
CH₄
Undecane
11
Ethane
2
CH₃CH₃
C2H₆
Dodecane
12
Propane
3
CH₃CH₂CH₃
C₃H₈
Tridecane
13
Butane
4
CH₃(CH₂)₂CH₃
C₄H₁₀
Tetradecane
14
Pentane
5
CH₃(CH₂)₃CH₃
C₅H₁₂
Pentadecane
15
Hexane
6
CH₃(CH₂)₄CH₃
C₆H₁₄
Hexadecane
16
Heptane
7
CH₃(CH₂)₅CH₃
C₇H₁₆
Heptadecane
17
Octane
8
CH₃(CH₂)₆CH₃
C₈H₁₈
Octadecane
18
Nonane
9
CH₃(CH₂)₇CH₃
C₉H₂₀
Nonadecane
19
Decane
10
CH₃(CH₂)₈CH₃
C₁₀H₂₂
Eicosane
20
1. Consider Table 6.2 and answer the following questions
i.
What trends do you observe from the Table?
ii.
What does family name and specific name for a
member hold in common?
iii. Based on the trend you have observed from the
Table, write the general formula for an alkane
having "n" carbon atoms.
iv. Using the general formula, complete the missing
molecular formula in the Table for the members
undecane through eicosane.
?
v.
Draw condensed structures and bond line
representations for the first ten alkanes.
vi. Discuss the analogy in the usage of the terms
"saturated" and "unsaturated" in this section and
Activity 6.4
in unit 2.
242
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
6.2.1 Alkane Homologous Series
If you examine the alkanes in Table 6.2, you can notice that each alkane differs from
the preceding alkane by one -CH₂⁻ - group. Butane, for example, is CH₃ (CH2)2 CH₃ and
pentane is CH₃(CH₂)₃ CH₃. A series of compounds like this, where each member differs
from the next member by a constant unit, is called a homologous series. A homologous
series has the following characteristics:
has a constant unit between two consecutive members;
has a general formula;
shows trends in physical properties and
exhibit the same reactivity (chemical property). Members of a homologous series
are called homologues.
Exercise 6.1
1. Define homologous series.
Describe characteristics of a homologous series.
2. Determine if each statement about alkane homologous series is true or false.
a. It has general formula and a name.
b. Consecutive members differ by a constant (-CH₂-) unit.
C. All members contain the same functional group.
d. Consecutive members differ by a constant molecular mass of 14.
6.2.2 Physical Properties of Alkanes
At the end of this section, students will be able to explain the physical properties of
alkanes.
Form a group, discuss on the following questions and
present your responses to the class.
You have learnt in unit 2, that particles in liquid and
solid state are hold together by intermolecular forces
while the gaseous state is characterized by absence
of such forces. You have also studied that among the
various intermolecular forces the dispersion forces are
the ones possessed by nonpolar molecules and increases
as molecular weight increases.
243
Chemistry Grade 10
You also learnt that polarity is the result of difference
in electronegativity of bonded atoms. Given the
fact that carbon and hydrogen atoms have similar
electronegativity, answer the following questions:
a. Are alkanes polar or nonpolar molecules?
b. What is the intermolecular forces that could exist
in alkanes that are liquids and solids at room
temperature
C. Which member of alkanes do you think are gases,
lower mass or higher mass? Why?
d. What happens to the boiling point and melting
point of alkanes as number of carbon atoms or
?
molecular masses increases? Can you explain your
reasoning?
e. Are alkanes soluble in water? Explain based on the
like dissolves like rule you learnt in unit 2.
Activity 6.5
At room temperature (25°C and 1 atm pressure), the first four members of the
homologous series of unbranched alkanes are gases (Table 6.3), the C₅-C₁₇ unbranched
alkanes (pentane to heptadecane) are liquids, and the unbranched alkanes with 18
and more carbon atoms are solids. As a class, the alkanes are the least dense of all
groups of organic compounds. All alkanes have densities considerably less than 1.00 g
mL⁻¹ (the density of water at 4 °C). As a result, petroleum (a mixture of hydrocarbons
rich in alkanes) floats on water.
Table 6.3 Physical properties and isomers of some members of alkane family.
Name
No of c
Physical state
M.P
B.P
Density
No of
atoms
(at room temp)
(°C)
(°C)
isomers
Methane
1
gas
-183
-162
0.717 g/L
0
Ethane
2
Gas
-172
-89
1.35 g/L
0
Propane
3
Gas
-187
-42
2.02 g/L
0
Butane
4
Gas
-135
-0.5
2.48 g/L
2
Pentane
5
Liquid
-130
36
0.63 g/mL
3
Hexane
6
Liquid
-94
68
0.66 g/mL
5
Heptane
7
Liquid
-91
98
0.68 g/mL
9
Octane
8
Liquid
-57
126
0.70 g/mL
18
Nonane
9
Liquid
-54
151
0.71 g/mL
35
Decane
10
Liquid
-30
174
0.73 g/mL
75
244
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Exercise 6.2
Explain each of the following facts about alkanes.
1. Alkanes show regular increase in boiling point as their molecular weight
increases.
2. Branching decreases the boiling point of alkanes.
3. Alkanes are insoluble in water.
6.2.3 Nomenclature of Alkanes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
apply IUPAC rules to name straight and branched chain alkanes;
write the structural formulas of the first ten alkanes.
Form a group, discuss on the following and present
your responses to the class.
1. There might be many students in your class. Each
student has his/her name? Can you explain the
purpose of naming? Is the way girls are named
different from boys? If yes, why do you think? Is
there any pattern of systemic doing on the way girls
and boys are named? Why do you think we have
such a systematic naming for girls and boys? Discuss!
How do your parents call you? Like you are called
?
in school or different? If you have a different name
commonly used by your parents, do you mind telling
it to your classmate as if it were your common name
"my common name is
?" How do you think parents
select a common name to their children? Any criteria?
Activity 6.6
As the science of organic chemistry slowly grew in the 19th century, so too did the
number of known compounds and the need for a systematic method of naming them
grow. Alkanes can be named in two ways, common names and IUPAC names.
Common Names of Alkanes
Lower members of the alkane homologous series have common names. The prefixes
used in the common names are n- (normal), 'iso-' and 'neo-'. The prefix n- is used when
all the carbon atoms form a continuous chain.
245
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 6.1 CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂ CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂
n-pentane
n-hexane
Iso- is used when all of the carbon atoms form a continuous chain, except for the one
next to the last carbon.
CH₃
CH₃
Example 6.2:
CH
CH₃
CH₃
CH₃
CH3~CH₂CH~CH3
CH₂
CH₃
isobutane
isopentane
Neo-is used when the central carbon is bonded to four other carbon atoms.
CH₃
CH₃
Example 6.3:
CH₃-ᶜ-CH₃
CH₃
CH₃
C
CH₃
CH₂
CH₃
neopentane
neohexane
The System of IUPAC Nomenclature
The system of nomenclature we'll use in here is the one that was devised by the
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC, usually read as eye-you-
pac). The IUPAC nomenclature can be applied to both branched and unbranched
alkanes.
IUPAC Rules to Name Unbranched Alkanes
Compounds like butane and pentane, whose carbons are all connected in a row, are
called straight-chain alkanes, or normal alkanes. Compounds like 2-methylpropane
(isobutane), 2-methylbutane, and 2, 2-dimethylpropane, whose carbon chains branch,
are called branched-chain alkanes. In unbranched alkanes, each carbon atom within
the chain is bonded to no more than two other carbon atoms and that unbranched
alkanes contain only primary and secondary carbon atoms. Primary (connect directly
to one carbon), secondary (connect directly to two carbons), and tertiary (connect
directly to three carbons) carbon atoms, quaternary (connected to four other carbons).
The names for several of the unbranched alkanes are listed in Table 6.2. The ending
(suffix) for all of the names of alkanes is -ane. The stems of the names of most of the
alkanes (above C₄) are of Greek and Latin origin. Thus the parent names for one, two,
three, four, and five become meth-, eth-, prop-, but-, and pent-.
IUPAC Rules to Name branched-chain Alkanes
A chemical name for branched alkanes typically has four parts in the IUPAC system of
nomenclature: locant, prefix, parent, and suffix.
246
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Locant - Prefix - Parent - Suffix
Where are the substituents
What are the
How many
What is primary
and functional groups?
substituents
carbons?
functional groups?
The prefix identifies the various substituent groups in the molecule, the parent selects
the main part (longest chain) of the molecule and tells how many carbon atoms are in
that part, the locants give the positions of the functional groups and substituents, and
the suffix identifies the primary functional group.
The examples below illustrate the basic components of the IUPAC nomenclature. The
methyl and ethyl groups in, for example, 2-methylbutane and 4-ethyl-2-heptene are
substituents and are called alkyl groups. What are alkyl groups?
4
2
2
6
2
4
4
6
3
1
1
3
5
7
1
3
5
7
2-methylbutane
4-methylheptane
4-ethyl-2-heptene
Locant
prefix
parent
Suffix
Locant
prefix
parent
Suffix
Locant
prefix
Locant
parent
Suffix
Alkyl Groups and the Symbol R
If we remove one hydrogen atom from an alkane, we obtain what is called an alkyl
group or alkyl radicals. These alkyl groups have names that end in -yl. When the
alkane is unbranched, and the hydrogen atom that is removed is a terminal hydrogen
atom, the names are straightforward as illustrated below:
Alkane
Alkyl Group
Abbreviation
CH₃-H
CH₃-
Me-
methane
Methyl
CH₃ - CH2-H
CH₃- CH₂-
Et-
ethane
Ethyl
CH₃ - CH₂ - CH₂ H -
CH₃- CH₂-CH₂-
Pr-
propane
Propyl
CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ H
CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ -
Bu-
butane
Butyl
While only one alkyl group can be derived from methane or ethane (the methyl and
ethyl groups, respectively), two groups can be derived from propane. Removal of a
hydrogen atom from one of the end carbon atoms gives a group that is called the
propyl group; removal of a hydrogen atom from the middle carbon atom gives a
group that is called the isopropyl group.
247
Chemistry Grade 10
I-O-I
-H
CH₃-CH₂-C-H
H
CH3-CH2-C-
Propane
Propyl
H
-H
CH₃-CH-CH₃
CH₃-CH-CH₃
Propane
Isopropyl
There are four C₄ alkyl groups.
Four-Carbon Alkyl Groups
CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₃
Butane
CH₃
CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂-
CH₃CH-CH₂-
CH₃CH₂CH-CH₃
(CH₃)₃C⁻
Butyl
Isobutyl
sec-Butyl
tert-Butyl (or t-Bu)
There is one five-carbon group with an IUPAC approved common name that you should
also know: the 2,2-dimethylpropyl group, commonly called the neopentyl group. Other
common names for five carbon alkyl groups include isopentyl and tert-pentyl groups.
CH₃
CH₃
CH₃
CH₃
CH₃
Isopentyl, also called
Neopentyl
tert-pentyl, also called
isoamyl (i-amyl)
tert-amyl (t-amyl)
5-Carbon alkyl groups
The common names isopropyl, isobutyl, sec-butyl, tert-butyl, isopentyl, neopentyl, and
tert-pentyl are approved by IUPAC for the unsubstituted groups, and they are still
very frequently used. You should learn these groups so well that you can recognize
them any way they are written.
The symbol R is used as a general symbol to represent any alkyl group. For example,
R might be a methyl group, an ethyl group, a propyl group, an isopropyl group, etc.
in the general formula for alkane R-H. Similarly, in R-COOH which is the general
formula for carboxylic acid, R can be any alkyl group (methyl, ethyl, isopentyl, etc.).
Branched-chain alkanes are named according to the following rules:
1. Locate the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms; this chain determines the
parent name for the alkane. The parent name for the following compound, for
example, is hexane because the longest continuous chain contains six carbon atoms:
248
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂CHCH₃
or
CH₃
Longest Chain
The longest continuous chain may not always be obvious from the way the formula is
written. Notice, for example, that parent name of the following alkane is designated
as a heptane because the longest chain contains seven carbon atoms:
CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂CHCH₃
or
longest chain
CH₂CH₃
longest chain
2. Number the longest chain beginning with the end of the chain nearer to the
substituent.
Applying this rule, we number the two alkanes that was illustrated previously in the
following way:
5
3
1
6
4
Substituent
6
4
2
7
5
3
2
1
Substituent
3. Use the numbers obtained by the application of rule 2 to designate the location
of the substituent group. The parent name is placed last, and the substituent
group, preceded by the number designating its location on the chain, is placed
first. Numbers are separated from words by a hyphen. Our two examples are
2-methylhexane and 3-methylheptane, respectively:
5
3
1
6
4
Methyl (substituent)
6
4
2
7
5
3
2
longest
Substituent
1
chain
Locant
2-Methylhexane
3-Methylheptane
4. When two or more substituents are present, give each substituent a number
corresponding to its location on the longest chain. For example, we designate the
following compound as 4-ethyl-2-methylhexane:
7
2
4
6
2
4
6
1
1
5
3
5
1
6
3
4
5
3
2
6
4
2
7
5
3
4-Ethyl-2-methylhexane
4-Ethyl-2, 2-dimethylheptane
Not 3-Ethyl-5-methylhexane
Not 4-Ethyl-6,6-dimethylheptane
249
Chemistry Grade 10
To check which direction of numbering is correct in this case; add the locants (numbers
assigned to the carbon atoms to which substituents are attached). The sum of the
locants in the first case is 2 + 4 = 6 and in the second case is, 3 + 5 = 8. So numbering
should be done from left to right in this case. Thus, the first option is correct. The
substituent groups should be listed alphabetically (i.e., ethyl before methyl). In deciding
on alphabetical order, disregard multiplying prefixes such as 'di', 'tri', and 'tetra'.
Ethyl comes first compared to methyl when 'di is ignored, as illustrated in 4-ethyl-2,2-
dimethylheptane. In addition, disregard structure-defining prefixes that are written in
italics and separated from the name by a hyphen. Thus tert-butyl precedes ethyl (tert
is ignored), but ethyl precedes isobutyl ('iso' not ignored.
5. When two substituents are present on the same carbon atom, use that number
twice:
3-Ethyl-3-methylhexane
6. When two or more substituents are identical, indicate this by the use of the prefixes
di-, tri-, tetra-, and so on. Then make certain that each substituent has a number.
Commas are used to separate numbers from each other:
2,3-Dimethylbutane
2,3,4-Trimethylpentane
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
The application of these six rules allows US to name most of the alkanes that we shall
encounter. Two other rules, however, may be required occasionally:
7. When two chains of equal length compete for selection as the parent chain, choose
the chain with the greater number of substituents:
7
5
3
1
7
6
5
4
2
6
3
2
1
2,3,5-trimethyl-4-propylheptane
Not 4-(1,2-dimethylpropyl)-5-methylheptane
8. When branching first occurs at an equal distance from either end of the longest
chain, choose the name that gives the lower number at the first point of difference:
250
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
6
4
2
5
3
1
2,3,5-trimethylhexane
Not 2,4,5-trimethylhexane
9. Name a complex substituent as though it were itself a compound. In some
particularly complex cases, a fifth step is necessary. It occasionally happens that a
substituent on the main chain has sub-branching. In the following case, for instance,
the substituent at C₆ is a three-carbon chain with a methyl sub-branch. To name the
compound fully, the complex substituent must first be named.
CH₃
CH₃
CH₃
1
2
3
4
5
6
CH₃CHCHCH₂CH₂CH-CH₂CHCH₃
CH₂CHCH₃
1
2
3
CH₃
CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₃
7 8 9 10
2,3-Dimethyl-6-(2-methylpropyl)decane A 2-methylpropyl group
or 2,3-Dimethyl-6-isobutyldecane (isobutyl group)
Note that, for alkyl group, numbering begins at the carbon directly connected to the
parent chain and continues to the longest direction. Further examples:
4321
CH₃
CH₃
CH₃CHCH₂CH₂-
CH3CHCH3H3
3
2
CH3CH2CCH3
CH₃CH₂CHCH₂
CH₃
4321
3-methylbutyl
1,2-dimethylpropyl
1,1-dimethylpropyl
2-methylbutyl
Example: Write IUPAC name for:
Strategy and solution: We find the longest chain (shown in blue) to be seven carbons;
therefore the parent name is heptane. There are two methyl substituents (shown in
red). We number the chain so as to give the first methyl group the lower number. The
correct name, therefore, is 3,4-dimethylheptane. Numbering the chain from the other
end to give 4,5-dimethylheptane would have been incorrect.
5
7
Two
4
Methyl
6
Longest
3
chain
Groups
1
2
251
Chemistry Grade 10
How to Classify Hydrogen Atoms
We have just seen how to classify carbon in alkanes as primary, secondary, tertiary,
and quaternary. The hydrogen atoms of an alkane are classified based on the
carbon atom to which they are attached. A hydrogen atom attached to a primary
carbon atom is a primary (1°) hydrogen atom, and so forth. The following compound,
2-methylbutane, has primary, secondary (2°), and tertiary (3°) hydrogen atoms:
1° Hydrogen atoms
CH₃
CH2 3 CH CH₂ CH₃
3° Hydrogen atom
2° Hydrogen atoms
Note that 2,2-dimethylpropane, a compound that is often called neopentane, has only
primary hydrogen atoms:
CH₃
CH₃
C
CH3
CH₃
Neopentane
Exercise 6.3
1. Which structure does not represent 2-methylpentane?
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
2. Write the structure and give the IUPAC name for an alkane with formula C₆H₁₄
that has only primary (-CH₃) and secondary (-CH₂-) carbon atoms.
6.2.4 Isomerism in Alkanes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define isomerism;
define structural isomerism;
draw the possible structural isomers for C₄H₁₀, C₅H₁₂ and C₆H₁₄·
252
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Among animals, it is very common to encounter some
dogs that appear pretty the same in terms of size,
and colour. How would you identify them apart if you
?
encounter two such dogs? Assume that one of the dogs
is your friendly neighbour. What about chemicals? Can
you name two different compounds that have the same
molecular formula and molecular weight? What do
Activity 6.7
you call them?
Unlike the first three members of the alkane homologous series, i.e. methane, ethane,
and propane,
H
HH
H H H
I
I
H-C-H
H-C-C-H
H-c-c-c-H
I
I
I
I
I
I
H
H H
H H H
Methane
Ethane
Propane
in molecules having four and above carbon atoms the carbons can be arranged in
two or more ways. A molecule having the formula C₄H₁₀ you know as butane can have
two structures.
H H H H
H H H
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
H-C- C- C- C- H
H-C-C-C-H
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
HHHH
H CH₃ H
Butane
Isobutane
The two structures are drawn using the possibilities of connecting the four carbon
atoms in two different ways. In the first case, all the four carbon atoms in butane are
connected in raw (linearly). In the second case, the four carbon atoms are connected in
a branched manner to give isobutane. Butane and isobutane have the same molecular
formula, C₄H₁₀, but have different structures and properties. Similarly, the 5 C atoms
in pentane (C₅H₁₂) can be arranged in three ways. Compounds like the two C₄H₁₀
molecules and the three C₅H₁₂ molecules, which have the same molecular formula
but different structures, are called structural isomers, from the Greek isos + meros,
meaning "made of the same parts." A formula to determine the number of isomers of
alkanes containing 4 - 7 carbon atoms is 2n-4 + 1.
Definition: Isomers are compounds that have the same numbers and kinds of atoms
but differ in the way the atoms are arranged.
Definition: Structural isomers are two or more different compounds that have the
same molecular formula but different connectivity or structures. As Table 6.3 shows, the
number of possible alkane isomers increases dramatically as the number of carbon
atoms increases.
253
Chemistry Grade 10
Note: Structural isomers have different physical properties. They are always found to
have different melting points, boiling points, densities, indexes of refraction, and so
forth.
Form a group, discuss on the answers for the questions
under this activity, and present your conclusions to the
class.
1. Consider two hypothetical compounds A and B
having the same molecular formula, C₄H₁₀. Both are
colorless and odorless gases at room temperature.
Compound A has a boiling point of - -1.0 °C whereas
B has a boiling point of -11.7 °C. Draw structure of
compound A and compound B. What is the relationship
between the two compounds? What conclusions can
?
you make about the physical properties of such pairs
of compounds?
2. Is the statement "two compounds that have the same
molecular formula have the same properties" true or
Activity 6.8
false? Explain your reasoning.
Exercise 6.4
1. Determine whether the pairs of structures in each of the following boxes are
isomers or simply different structural representation of the same compound.
Hint: If IUPAC names are different, the structures are also different.
(a)
&
(b)
&
CH₃
&
CH₂
CH
(c)
CH₃
CH₂
CH₃
(d)
&
254
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
6.2.5 Preparation of Alkanes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
describe the general methods for preparation of alkanes in a laboratory;
synthesize methane in a laboratory by decarboxylation method;
carry out a project work to produce biogas from cow dung.
Alkanes are the major constituents of petroleum and natural gas. They are mainly
obtained by fractional distillation of petroleum. Alkanes can also be prepared in the
laboratory. Some methods of their preparation are as follows:
1. Hydrogenation of alkenes with a metal catalyst.
H
H
H
H
+ H
Pt
General Reaction:
C=C
2
H-
C
C
H
heat
R
H
R
H
Alkene
Alkane
H
H
H
H
+ H
Pt
C=C
2
H
C
C
H
heat
H
H
Example 6.4:
H
H
Ethene
Ethane
2. Würtz Synthesis (reaction). This method involves the reaction of a halogenated
alkane with sodium and the reaction is somewhat exothermic.
General reaction:
2R-X
+
2Na
R-R
+
2NaX
Halogenated
Alkane
Sodium halide
alkane/
Alkyl halide
Example 6.5:
2CH3CI
+
2Na
CH3 - CH3
+
2NaCl
Methyl chloride
Ethane
Sodium chloride
This reaction is named as Würtz reaction after the French chemist Charles-Adolphe
Würtz (1817-1884).
3. Heating sodium salt of an organic acid with soda lime (mixture of sodium hydroxide
and calcium oxide); the reaction brings about the removal of the carboxylate
group from the sodium salt of the carboxylic acid. This type of reaction is called
decarboxylation.
CaO
General reaction:
RCOONa
+
NaOH
R-H
+
Na₂CO₃
heat
Sodium salt
Alkane
Sodium carbonate
of carboxylic acid
255
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 6.6: (Preparation of methane by decarboxylation reaction)
CaO
CH₂COONa + NaOH
heat
CH₃-H + Na2CO3
Sodium acetate
Methane Sodium Carbonate
Methane is the main constituent (about 90%) of natural gas. It is obtained during
fractional distillation of petroleum. Methane is also formed by the decay of animal
and plant remains in swampy or marshy lands.
Note: The materials that can be used to produce biogas include dung from cattle,
pigs, chickens, chopped green plants and plant wastes. The advantages of biogas
technology include saving on fuel such as kerosene, wood and charcoal, and decrease
in local deforestation. The residue obtained after preparing the biogas can be used
as fertilizer.
Experiment 6.1
Laboratory Preparation of Methane
Objective: To prepare methane and study its properties.
Materials required: Sodium acetate (CH₃COONa) and soda lime (CaO, NaOH),
test tubes, delivery tube, stopper, gas jar and gas jar lid, pneumatic trough, stand,
clamp, beehive shelf, Bunsen burner and balance.
Procedure:
Arrange the assembly as shown in Figure 6.2. Mix thoroughly 5 g powdered
sodium acetate with 10 g of soda lime. Place the mixture in the test tube and
heat it. Collect the gas by the downward displacement of water. Collect several
jars of the gas.
256
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Rubber
Delivery tube
Stopper
Gas jar
Sodium acetate
Methane
+
Soda lime
Boiling tube
Pneumatic
trough
Bunsen
Water
Beehive
burner
Shelf
Figure 6.2 Laboratory preparation of methane.
Carry out the following activities with the collected gas:
Insert a burning splint into the jar full of the gas. Observe what happens in the jar.
Add Ca(OH)₂ solution to the jar and observe.
Add a few drops of bromine water to any one of the gas jars filled with methane.
Cover the gas jar and shake well.
Observations and analysis:
a. What is the colour of the gas? Is it soluble in water?
b. Is the gas combustible? Write a balanced equation for the change.
c. What change did you observe upon the addition of Ca(OH)₂
d. Is there any change when bromine water is added?
Write a laboratory report of your observations, and submit to your teacher.
Exercise 6.5
1. Write the products when:
a. CH₂CH=CH₂ reacts with hydrogen in the presence of Pt as catalyst
b. Ethyl bromide reacts with sodium metal
C. Sodium propanoate (CH₃CH₂COONa) reacts with soda lime
2. The reaction of a halogenated alkane with sodium is named in honor
of
257
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 6.2
Production of Methane from Cow Dung
Objective: To prepare biogas from locally available materials.
Materials required: Conical flask, cow dung, water, delivery tube with tap and
stopper with one hole.
Procedure:
1. Mix some cow dung with water and pour it into a conical flask, Figure 6.3.
2. Fit the conical flask with a stopper in which a delivery tube with a tap is inserted.
3. Cover the conical flask with a ball of cotton wool and place it near a window,
and leave it there for 3 to 4 days.
4. Check the formation of methane after 4 days. (Bring a lighted splint closer to the
outlet of the delivery tube and open the tap). See what happens.
Cotton wool
Cow dung + water
Figure 6.3 Preparation of methane gas from cow dung.
Observations and analysis:
a. What is the importance of covering the conical flask with cotton wool and placing
it near the window?
b. What is your observation when you bring a burning splint close to the outlet of
the tube?
c. In your opinion, what change did occur in the conical flask that led to the
formation of methane?
d. Write a laboratory report in a group and present it to the class.
258
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Project 6.1
1. In consultation with your classmates or friends, identify a place (Kebele or
neighboring Kebeles) where a biogas plant is at work..
2. Prepare data collection instrument (e.g. questionnaire)
3. Make a trip to visit the biogas plant and collect the information you require
4. Describe the method involved and depict it graphically
5. Develop a similar set-up and produce your own biogas. Collect it using balloons and
bring it to class. Take photos of your set-up and videos while you are constructing
and doing, and show it to your teacher.
6. With your sample, in balloon, conduct tests to answer the following questions:
a. What is the colour of the gas?
b. Is the gas combustible? Write a balanced equation for the change.
C. Is there any change when bromine water is added?
6.2.6 Chemical Properties of Alkanes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
describe the general methods for preparation of alkanes in a laboratory;
synthesize methane in a laboratory by decarboxylation method;
carryout a project work to produce biogas from cow dung.
1. You have learnt in grade 9 that atoms achieve their
valency by forming bonds to other atoms. Now,
?
you have just learnt that alkanes are saturated
compounds. Do you think they have the affinity to
react with other atoms or molecules?
2. Based on your experiences from the startup activity
of this unit and unit 4, can you suggest the most
Activity 6.9
important reaction of alkanes?
Alkanes are sometimes referred to as paraffins, a word derived from the Latin parum
affinis, meaning 'little affinity.' This term aptly describes their behavior, for alkanes
show a little chemical affinity for other substances and are chemically inert to most
laboratory reagents like acids, bases, oxidizing and reducing agents. They are also
relatively inert biologically and are not often involved in the chemistry of living
organisms.
Alkanes do, however, react with oxygen, halogens, and a few other substances under
appropriate conditions.
259
Chemistry Grade 10
1. Combustion Reaction:
Combustion is the most important reaction of alkanes. Reaction with oxygen occurs
during combustion in an engine or furnace when the alkane is used as a fuel. Carbon
dioxide and water are formed as products, and a large amount of heat is released.
The general equation for the combustion reaction of alkanes is:
CₙH₂ₙ₊₂
+
where n is number of C atoms
For example, methane (natural gas) reacts with oxygen according to the equation:
Example 6.7:CH4 + 202
CO2 + 2H2O + 890 kJ/mol (213 kcal/mol)
2C₄H₁₀
+
130₂
8CO2
+
10H2O
The heat energy liberated is used to generate electricity, to move motor vehicles or
to cook our food.
2. Substitution Reaction: This is a reaction that involves the replacement of one atom
or a group of atoms by another atom or group of atoms. Halogenation of alkanes
is a very good example of substitution reaction. This reaction involves reacting
alkanes with chlorine and bromine in presence of heat or sunlight. This type of
reaction is called a photochemical reaction. The reaction of alkanes with chlorine
and bromine proceeds in a sequence of steps. For example, let US consider the
photochemical reaction of methane with chlorine (chlorination):
i. Chain Initiating Step: This step involves the absorption of energy by the halogen
molecule to generate reactive particles known as free radicals. A free radical is
an atom or a group of atoms possessing an unpaired electron. A free radical is
electrically neutral. A chlorine molecule absorbs light and decomposes into two
chlorine atoms:
C1-C1 light 2Cl·
ii. Chain Propagating Step: This is a step involves reaction of the free radical
from step i with the alkane and that consumes a reactive particle (free radical)
produced in the chain initiation step and generates another free radical.
Cl. + CH₄ light HCl + CH₃'
iii. Chain Terminating Step: In the chain-terminating step reactive particles (free
radicals) are consumed but not generated.
CH₃' + Cl. CH₃Cl
Such a detailed step by step description of a chemical reaction is called a reaction
mechanism.
260
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
3. Elimination reaction: This type of reaction involves the removal of smaller molecules
from a compound and leads to the formation of a compound containing a multiple
bond (unsaturated compound). It can also involve the removal of hydrogen atoms
from adjacent carbon atoms at relatively high temperatures.
H H
H
H
I
I
600-800 o C
+ H
H - C - C H
C=C
2
I
I
H
H
H H
Ethene
Ethane
Exercise 6.6
1. Alkanes are sometimes referred to as paraffins. Explain
2. Write the balanced equation for the combustion reaction of hexane
3. Write the major products of reaction of:
a. methane with bromine in the presence of light.
b. ethane is heated at 700 °C
4. Explain why alkanes do not undergo addition reaction
6.2.7 Cycloalkanes (Alicyclic Hydrocarbons)
Cycloalkanes are alkanes in which all or some of the carbon atoms are arranged in
a ring. Alkanes have the general formula CₙH₂ₙ₊₂ᵢ cycloalkanes containing a single
ring have two fewer hydrogen atoms than alkanes and thus have the general formula
CH₂ₙ, where n ≥ 3. Since cycloalkanes are alkanes themselves they have the same
properties as the alkanes we have described in the preceding sections. They are
also called alicyclic hydrocarbons ("ali" stands for aliphatic). Examples include
cyclopropane, cyclobutane, cyclopentane, cyclohexane, etc. Note that the simplest
alicyclic compound is cyclopropane. You will learn more about this in upper grades.
cyclopropane
cyclobutane
cyclopentane
cyclohexane
261
Chemistry Grade 10
6.2.8 Uses of Alkanes
Have a look at the icon to the left? What comes to your
mind is the gasoline or diesel supplied at fuel stations.
You will soon learn that the liquid you see is principally
a mixture of alkanes. You have also learnt that they are
?
nonpolar molecules that have very little affinity to react
with other substances. Based on this information, discuss
on the most important uses of alkanes and present your
conclusions to the class.
Activity 6.10
Alkanes are primarily used as fuels. They are also used as solvents and raw materials
for making alkenes, alcohols, soaps, detergents and plastics.
Exercise 6.7
1. Define each of the following terms:
a. Homologous series
d. combustion reaction
b. substitution reaction
e. Isomerism
C. Alkyl radical
f. functional groups
2. Write the balanced chemical equation for the combustion of octane
3. How many chain isomers are there for an alkane that contains 7 carbon atoms?
4. Write IUPAC names for the alkanes represented by the following bond-line
structures.
(b)
Br
(a)
(d)
(c)
6.3 Unsaturated Hydrocarbons: Alkenes, Alkynes, and
Aromatic Hydrocarbons
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define unsaturated hydrocarbons;
define alkenes;
write the general formula of alkenes;
write the molecular formula first nine homologous series of alkenes.
262
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Alkenes, alkynes, and arenes (aromatic compounds) all contain carbon-carbon multiple
bonds and are unsaturated hydrocarbons.
6.3.1 Alkenes or Olefins
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one carbon-carbon
double bond and have an -ene ending in their names. They are also known as olefins.
They form a homologous series represented by the general formula CₙH₂ₙ, where n =
2,3,4,...
A. Homologous series of Alkenes
Ethene is the simplest alkene. Ethene and propene are among the most important
industrial Chemicals. Ethene is used as a starting material for the synthesis of many
industrial compounds, including ethanol, ethylene oxide, ethanal, and the polymer
polyethylene. Propene is used in making the polymer polypropylene, and, in addition
to other uses, propene is the starting material for the synthesis of acetone and cumene.
Ethene also occurs in nature as a plant hormone. It is produced naturally by fruits such
as tomatoes and bananas and is involved in the ripening process of these fruits.
H
H
CH₃
H
H
H
H
H
Ethene
Propene
Table 6.4 The homologous series of alkenes and their physical constants.
IUPAC
Molecular
Condensed Formula
M.P
B.P
Density
Name
formula
Ethene
C2H₄
CH2=CH₂
-169
-102
0.61 g/L
Propene
C₃H₆
CH₂=CH₂CH₃
-185
-48
0.61 g/L
1-butene
C₄H₈
CH2=CH₂CH₂CH₃
-130
-6.5
0.63 g/L
1-pentene
C₅H₁₀
CH2=CH₂(CH₂)₂CH₃
-130.5
30
0.64 g/L
1-hexene
C₆H₁₂
CH₂=CH₂(CH₂)₃CH₃
-138
63
0.67 g/L
1-heptene
C₇H₁₄
CH₂=CH₂(CH₂),CH₃
-119
93
0.69 g/L
1-octene
C₈H₁₆
CH₂=CH₂(CH₂) SCH₃
-104
122
0.72 g/L
1-nonene
C₉H₁₈
CH₂=CH₂(CH₂) CH₃
-95
146
0.73 g/L
1-decene
C₁₀H₂₀
CH2=CH₂(CH₂),CH₃
-87
171
0.74 g/L
263
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 6.8
1. Define alkene and explain how it differs from alkanes
2. Describe the general characteristics of the homologous series of alkenes
3. The molecular formulae for the first three members of an alkene series are
C2H₄, C3H₆ and C₄H₈. Derive the general formula for alkenes and compare it
with that of alkanes. Is there a difference in the number of hydrogen atoms?
4. By referring to Table 6.4, what relationship do you observe between the
number of carbon atoms and the melting point, boiling point and density?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
5. Write the molecular formula of the first 10 members of the alkene homologous
series
6. Draw their condensed structures and bond line representations following the
examples provided hereunder.
CH₃
Condensed structures: CH₂=CH₂ CH₃-CH=CH₂
c=CH₂
CH₃
Line-bond formula:
IUPAC name:
Ethene
Propene
2-Methylpropene
Common name:
Ethylene
Propylene
Isobutylene
B. Nomenclature of Alkenes
At the end of this section, students will be able to use IUPAC rules to name straight and
branched chain alkenes.
Alkenes can have common names as well as IUPAC names. The common names of
alkenes are obtained by replacing the - ane of the corresponding alkane with -ylene'
as illustrated below:
CH₂=CH₂
CH₃CH=CH₂
Ethylene
Propylene
Parent
name
Suffix
The IUPAC rules for naming alkenes are similar in many respects to those for naming
alkanes:
264
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
1. Determine the parent name by selecting the longest chain that contains the double
bond and change the ending of the name of the alkane of identical length from
-ane to -ene. Thus, if the longest chain contains five carbon atoms, the parent
name for the alkene is pentene; if it contains six carbon atoms, the parent name
is hexene, and so on.
2. Number the chain so as to include both carbon atoms of the double bond, and
begin numbering at the end of the chain nearer the double bond. Designate the
location of the double bond by using the number of the first atom of the double
bond as a locant. The locant for the alkene suffix may precede the parent name
or be placed immediately before the suffix.
1
234
Example 6.8: CH2 = CHCH₂CH 3
3 H = CHCH₂CH₂CH₂
1-Butene
2-Hexene
(not 3-butene)
(not 4-hexene)
3. Indicate the locations of the substituent groups by the numbers of the carbon
atoms to which they are attached:
Structural
Bond-line
Structural
Bond-line
CH₃
1
CH₃
3
1
3
5
CH
CH
2
4
4
CH₃
2
4
6
6
2
2
4
c
1
3
CH₃
CH₂
CH₃
CH₃
CH
1
3
CH₃
2-methyl-2-butene 2-methyl-2-butene
2,5-dimethyl-2-hexene
2,5-dimethyl-2-hexene
CH₃
4
3
21
CH₂CH = CHCH₂CI
CH₃
5,5-Dimethyl-2-hexene
1-chloro-2-butene
or 5,5-dimethylhex-2-ene
or 1-chlorobut-2-ene
Many older names for alkenes are still in common use. Ethene is often called ethylene,
Propene is often called propylene, and 2-methylpropene is often called isobutylene.
265
Chemistry Grade 10
CH₃
Condensed structures: CH₂=CH₂ CH₃-CH=CH₂
c=CH₂
CH₃
Line-bond formula:
=
IUPAC name:
Ethene
Propene
2-Methylpropene
Common name:
Ethylene
Propylene
Isobutylene
4. Two frequently encountered alkenyl groups are the vinyl group and the allyl
group:
CH₂=CH-
CH₂=CH-CH₂-
vinyl
allyl
Using substitutive nomenclature, the vinyl and allyl groups are called ethenyl and
prop-2-en-1-yl, respectively. The following examples illustrate how these names are
employed:
Br
CI
Bromoethene
Ethenylcyclopropane
3-chloropropene
3-cyclohexylpropene
or
or
or
or
vinyl bromide
vinylcyclopropane
allyl chloride
allylcyclohexane
(common)
(common)
Exercise 6.9
Give IUPAC names for the following alkenes:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
266
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
C.
Physical Properties of Alkenes
At the end of this section, students will be able to use IUPAC rules to name straight and
branched chain alkenes
Discuss on the following questions in a group and
present your conclusions to the class.
1. Are alkenes polar or nonpolar molecules?
2. Do you think the physical properties of alkenes are
different from alkanes?
3. Are alkenes soluble in water? What about in carbon
tetrachloride?
?
4. Can you explain the trends in boiling points, melting
points, and density of alkenes as molecular weight
increases?
5. Which alkenes are gases, which liquids, and which
Activity 6.11
ones are solids?
D.
Isomerism in Alkenes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
write possible structural isomers for C₄H₈ and C₅H₁₀
define geometric (cis-trans) isomerism;
give examples of molecules that show geometric isomerism;
construct models that show cis-trans isomerism.
Alkenes containing two and three carbon atoms have only one possible structure.
Alkenes containing four or more carbon atoms exhibit isomerism. In the preceding
section, you learnt that alkanes exhibit chain isomerism. In addition to chain isomerism,
however, alkenes show two more types of isomerism:
Chain isomerism: This is due to the difference in the arrangement of the carbon
atoms in the longest continuous carbon chain.
For example, in the two compounds 1-pentene and 2-methyl-1-butene, the position
of the double bond is the same. However, in 1-pentene the carbon chain is linear
whereas in 2-methyl-1-butene it is branched. Thus, 1-pentene and 2-methyl-1-
butene are chain isomers (See structures below).
Position isomerism: This is due to the difference in the position of the double bond
in the carbon chain.
c
a
1-pentene
2-pentene
267
Chemistry Grade 10
b
d
2-methyl-1-butene
2-methyl-2-butene
Compounds (a) and (c) represent the position isomers of pentene, (b) and (d) are
position isomers of methylbutene, (a), and (b) or (a) and (d) are the chain isomers,
while all these compounds are the isomers of C₅H₁₂.
Geometrical isomerism. This results from the difference in the relative spatial
arrangement of atoms or groups about the double bond. This isomerism exists
because free rotation about the double bond is not possible. To differentiate
geometrical isomers, we use the prefix 'cis' if two similar groups are on the same
side of the double bond and 'trans' when the two similar groups are on opposite
sides of it; 'cis' means the same and 'trans' means across. The geometrical isomers
of 2-butene are:
CH₃
CH3
CH₃
H
H
H
H
CH₃
cis-2-butene or cis-but-2-ene
trans-2-butene or trans-but-2-ene
Note: Not all alkenes have geometrical (cis-trans) isomers; alkenes cannot have
geometrical isomers if two identical groups are attached to any one of the carbon
atoms linked by a double bond. E.g. 1-pentene cannot exhibit cis-trans isomerism.
Exercise 6.10
1. Explain the type of isomerism (chain or position) in:
a. 2-pentene and 2-methyl-2-butene
b. 1-hexene and 2-methyl-1-pentene
2. Explain why the boiling points and other physical properties of alkenes
increase with increasing molecular weight
3. Write three position isomers of hexene.
268
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
4. Write structural formulas for the following:
a. cis-3-Octene
b. 1-Bromo-2-methyl-1-(prop-2-en-1-y. cyclopentane
C. trans-2-Hexene
d. 3,4-Dimethylcyclopentene
e. 2,4-Dimethyl-2-pentene
f. Vinylcyclopentane
g. trans-1-Chlorobut-2-ene
h. 1,2-Dichlorocyclohexene
i. 4,5-Dibromo-1-pentene
i. trans-1,4-Dichloro-2-pentene
Project 6.2
Prepare a model from locally available materials, to show the cis-trans isomers of
2-butene.
E.
Preparation of Alkenes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
explain the general method for preparation of alkenes in a laboratory;
produce ethylene in a laboratory by dehydration of ethanol.
Alkenes are mainly obtained during fractional distillation of petroleum when the
process called cracking is carried out.
In the laboratory, alkenes can be prepared by:
Dehydration of alcohols with concentrated sulphuric acid or alumina (AI₂O₃).
Dehydration means removal of water.
General Reaction:
H
OH
water molecule removed,
R
H
H2SO4
R
H
+
hence dehydration
2
heat
H
H
H
H
Alcohol
Alkene
H
OH
H
H
H2SO4
H
H
+ H2O
Example 6.9:
heat
H
H
H
H
Ethanol
Ethene
269
Chemistry Grade 10
Dehydrohalogenation of alkyl halides with a base (KOH). Dehydrohalogenation
means the removal of hydrogen and a halogen atom. Alkyl halides are compounds
of an alkyl group and a halogen such as CH₃CI and CH₃ - CH₂ - Br.
General Reaction:
H X
R
H
+ KOH
R
H
+
KX
+
H2O
H
H
H
H
Alkyl halide
Alkene
H
Br
H
H
Example 6.10:
H
H + KOH
+ KBr + H2O
H
H
H
H
Ethyl bromide
Ethene
Exercise 6.11
1. In the above two methods of preparations of alkenes, (a) what difference do
you observe between the structures of the major reactant and the product?
2. Write the complete and balanced chemical equations for each of the following
reactions:
OH
H2SO₄
a) CH₃ - CH - CH₃ heat
Br
b) CH₃ - CH - CH₃ + KOH
OH
H2SO₄
heat
c)
270
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Experiment 6.3
10.0g
Laboratory Preparation of Ethene
Objective: To prepare ethene and study some of its properties
Materials required: Ethanol, concentrated H2SO4, water, bromine water, basic
KMnO₄. Round-bottomed flask, stopper, delivery tube, gas jar, pneumatic trough,
thermometer, tripod, Bunsen burner, stand and clamp, beehive shelf and wire
gauze.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the set-up as shown in Figure 6.4
2. Take ethanol in the flask and add concentrated H2SO4 through the thistle
funnel; heat carefully until the temperature reaches about 170°C. Discard the
initially formed gas as it might contain air; collect the ethene gas in three gas
jars by downward displacement of water; perform the following activities.
a. Insert a lighted splint into the jar containing the gas and see what happens.
b. Add two drops of bromine water to the other gas jar, cover the jar and shake
well.
c. Add a few drops of alkaline KMnO₄ solution to another jar containing the gas
and observe what happens.
Thistle
funnel
Ethene
Flask
Ethanol
Inverted
+
gas jar
Stand
Concentrated
sulphuric acid
Burner
800
Beehive shelf
Water
Figure 6.4 Preparation of Ethene.
Observations and analysis:
a. What is the colour and odour of the gas?
b. What is the substance left after combustion of the gas in the jar?
C. What change is observed when the gas is shaken with bromine water or alkaline
potassium permanganate? Write equations for the reactions?
271
Chemistry Grade 10
d. Name the dehydrating agent used in the experiment?
e. Which method of preparation of an alkene is used in this experiment?
Write a laboratory report about the experiment and submit to your teacher.
Write a laboratory report in a group and present it to the class.
F.
Chemical Properties of Alkenes
At the end of this section, students will be able to explain chemical properties of
alkenes.
?
Do you think alkenes are more or less reactive than
alkanes? Explain
Can alkenes undergo combustion reaction? What do
you think is the most important reaction of alkenes?
Activity 6.12
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing double bond (a strong bond and
a weak bond) between the two carbon atoms. They are more reactive than alkanes
because the weak bond can be used for further reaction. They undergo several types
of reactions.
Combustion reaction. Alkenes burn in oxygen with a luminous flame to form carbon
dioxide and water.
General reaction:
CH2n + (3n/2)O₂ nCO2 + nH2O + Heat
Example 6.11:
C₄H₈ + 602
4CO₂ + 4H₂O + Heat
Addition reaction. Alkenes undergo mainly addition reactions. The addition occurs
at the carbon-carbon double bond.
i. Addition of halogens (halogenation): When a halogen molecule, X₂, (where, X₂
= Cl₂ or Br₂) is added to alkenes, the product is a dihaloalkane.
272
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
General Reaction: RCH CH₂ + X2
RCH CH₂ ; (X₂ = CI₂, Br2)
X
X
Alkene
Halogen
Dihaloalkane
Example 6.12:
CH₃C= CH₂ + CI2
CH₃CH-CH₂
H
cl
CI
Propene
Chlorine
Dichloropropane
If bromine water (bromine in CCI₄) is added to alkenes, the reddish-brown colour
of Br₂ in CCI₄ will disappear. This is due to the addition of bromine (Br₂) across the
double bond. So, Br₂ in CCI₄ is used to detect unsaturation (presence of multiple
bonds) in a compound.
ii. Addition of hydrogen (Hydrogenation): The addition of hydrogen molecule to
alkenes in the presence of a nickel or platinum catalyst yields alkanes.
General Reaction:
H
H
H
H
+ H
Pt
C=C
H
2
C
C
H
heat
R
H
R
H
Alkene
Alkane
H
H
H
H
+ H
Pt
C=C
Example 6.13:
2
H-
c
C
H
heat
CH₃
H
CH₃ H
Propene
Propane
iii. Addition of hydrogen halides, Hx (hydrohalogenation): The addition of
hydrogen halide (HCI, HBr or HI) to alkenes leads to the formation of alkyl halides.
The product of the reaction can be predicted by Markovnikov's rule; which states
that "when an alkene reacts with a hydrogen halide to give an alkyl halide, the
hydrogen adds to the carbon atom of the double bond that has the greater
number of hydrogen atoms, and the halogen to the carbon that has the fewer
number of hydrogen atoms". "The Rich Get Richer!!"
The same is true when an alkene reacts with water in an addition reaction to form an
alcohol.
273
Chemistry Grade 10
General Reaction:
H
H
X H
+ HX
C=C
H
C
C
H
; HX = HCI, HBr
R
H
R
H
Alkene
Alkyl halide
H
H
Br H
+ HBr
C=C
H-
C
C
H
Example 6.14:
CH₃
H
CH₃ H
Propene
2-Bromopropane
Have you noticed the location where H and Br have formed bonds?
iv. Addition of water (hydration): When alkenes are hydrated in the presence of an
acid catalyst, they produce alcohols following Markovnikov's rule.
General reaction:
RCH=CH₂ + HOH H⁺ RCH-CH₂
OH H
Alkene
Alcohol
Example 6.15:
H₃PO₄(aq)
CH₂=CH₂
CH₃-CH₂OH
Ethene
Ethanol
H₃PO₄(aq)
CH₂=CHCH₃
CH₃-CH(OH)CH₃
Propene
2-propanol
Oxidation of alkenes: Oxidation of alkenes with cold alkaline potassium
permanganate solution (KMnO₄) forms diols (compounds containing two hydroxyl
groups).
General Reaction:
H
H
H
H
Alkaline
C=C
R-
c
C
H
R
H
KMnO₄
OH
OH
Alkene
Diol
H
H
H
H
Alkaline
C=C
H-
c
c
H
Example 6.16:
KMnO₄
H
H
OH
OH
Ethene
1,2-Ethanediol
274
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Alkaline KMnO₄ solution is also used as a qualitative test for the identification of
unsaturation in a compound. The solution is called Baeyer's reagent. In the presence of
unsaturated hydrocarbons, the purple colour of alkaline KMnO₄ solution fades and a
brown precipitate is formed.
V. Polymerization (self-addition) of alkenes: Polymerization is the union of small
molecules called monomers to form a large molecule called a polymer.
Example 6.17:
1000 atm, 473 K
CH2=CH₂
(-CH₂-CH₂-)n
(catalyst)
Ethene
Polyethene
Exercise 6.12
1. Write the balanced chemical equation for the combustion reaction of hexene.
2. Write the structures of the major products when CH3CH=CH-CH3 reacts with:
(a) Br₂ b) H2 c) HCI d) H2O (in presence of dilute H2SO 4) e) alkaline KMnO₄.
3. Alkenes are more reactive than alkanes. Why do you think?
4. Alkene reacts readily with Br₂ even in the dark but alkanes react only in the
presence of sunlight. Why? Are the reaction products the same? What about
the type of reaction? Discuss!
G.
Uses of Ethene (Ethylene)
At the end of this section, students will be able to explain the uses of ethylene.
Ethene is used as a starting material for the synthesis of many industrial compounds,
including ethanol, ethylene oxide, ethanal, and the polymers polyethylene and
polyvinylchloride, polystyrene and teflon. It is also used in the production of
1,2-ethanediol, which is used as an antifreeze material; and for the preservation as
well as artificial ripening of fruits.
Project 6.3
Put some green tomatoes in the first basket, and place a ripe banana in between
them. In the second basket, put only green tomatoes (but not a banana). Compare
the tomatoes in the two baskets. Have the tomatoes ripen at the same rate in both
baskets? If not, why? Share your opinion with your classmates.
H.
Cycloalkenes
Cycloalkenes are unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbons. The carbon atoms are linked in
such a manner as to form a closed chain or a ring structure. They contain a double
275
Chemistry Grade 10
bond between carbon atoms in the ring and are represented by the general formula
CₙH₂ₙ₋₂ᵢ where n should be equal to or greater than 3. They are isomeric with alkynes.
They are named by prefixing "cyclo" to the name of alkenes containing the same
number of carbon atoms. The given structures show some examples of cycloalkenes.
Unsubstituted cycloalkenes are named by adding the prefix "cyclo" to the name of the
parent alkene. The simplest cycloalkene is cyclopropene.
Example 6.18:
cyclopropene
cyclobutene
cyclopentene
cyclohexene
Substituted cycloalkenes are named similarly as alkenes, but because there is no chain
end to begin from, we number the cycloalkene so that the double bond is between C₁
and C2 and the first substituent has as low a number as possible. It's not necessary to
indicate the position of the double bond in the name because it's always between C₁
and C2. As with open-chain alkenes, newer but not yet widely accepted naming rules
place the locant immediately before the suffix in a diene.
6
6
1
CH₃
CH₃
5
5
1
5
4
1
4
2
4
2
CH₃
3
3
3
2
1-Methylcyclohexene
1,4-cyclohexadiene
1, 5-dimethylcyclopentene
(or cyclohexa-1,4-diene)
Exercise 6.13
Complete each of the following equations and name the products:
H+
a. CH₂CH₂CH=CH₂ + HCI
c. CH2CH2CH=CH2 + H2O
d.
Alkaline
b. CH₂CH₂CH=CH₂ + Br₂
CH2H2CH=CH2
KMnO₄
6.3.2 Alkynes and Their Physical Properties
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define alkynes;
write the general formula of alkynes;
write the molecular formula first nine homologous series of alkynes;
write the molecular formulas of alkynes from the given number of carbon atoms;
describe the physical properties of alkynes.
276
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Alkynes are unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one carbon-carbon triple
bond as a functional group, and have a -yne ending in their names. The simplest alkyne
is ethyne (also called acetylene). Alkynes occur in nature and can be synthesized in
the laboratory.
The homologous series of alkynes is represented by the general formula CₙH₂ₙ₂, where
n≥2. The first member of the group is commonly known as acetylene. The homologous
series of alkynes is also called acetylene series.
Table 6.5 Homologous series of alkynes and their physical constants.
Formula of
Condensed Structure
IUPAC Name
Melting
Boiling
Alkyne
Point (°C)
Point (°C)
C2H₂
CH=CH
Ethyne
-82
-75
C₃H₄
CHEC-CH₃
Propyne
-105.5
-23
C₄H₆
CH=C-CH₂-CH₃
1-butyne
-122
9
C₅H₈
CH=C-(CH₂)₂-CH₃
1-pentyne
-98
40
C₆H₁₀
CH=C-(CH₂)₃-CH₃
1-hexyne
-124
72
C₇H₁₂
CH=C-(CH₂)₄-CH₃
1-heptyne
-80
100
C₈H₁₄
CH=C-(CH₂)₅-CH₃
1-octyne
-70
126
C₉H₁₆
CH=C-(CH₂)₆-CH₃
1-nonyne
-65
151
C₁₀H₁₈
CH=C-(CH₂)₇-CH₃
1-decyne
-36
182
Exercise 6.14
1. By looking at the trends for alkynes in Table 6.5, write the molecular formula
and the structures of the alkynes containing 11 and 12 carbon atoms.
2. Describe the general characteristics of the alkyne homologous series
3. Compare the physical state, melting points and boiling points of alkynes,
alkenes and alkanes as the number of carbon atoms increases. Discuss with
your group and present to the class.
A.
Nomenclature of Alkynes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
use IUPAC rules to name straight and branched chain alkynes;
write the structural formulas alkynes up to nine carbon atoms;
alkynes are commonly named as a derivative of acetylene.
277
Chemistry Grade 10
CHECH
CHEC-CH₃
CH=C-CH₂CH₃
acetylene
methyl acetylene
ethyl acetylene
Substituted Alkynes are named in much the same way as alkenes using the IUPAC
system. Unbranched alkynes, for example, are named by replacing the -ane of the
name of the corresponding alkane with the ending -yne. The chain is numbered to give
the carbon atoms of the triple bond the lower possible numbers.
The lower number of the two carbon atoms of the triple bond is used to designate the
location of the triple bond. When double and triple bonds are present, the direction
of numbering is chosen so as to give the lowest overall set of locants. In the face of
equivalent options, then preference is given to assigning the lowest numbers to the
double bonds. The IUPAC names of three unbranched alkynes are shown here:
CH₃
c
CH
C
CH₃
CH
c
CH₂
CH₂
CH₂
H-C=C-H
or
or
Ethyne or
acetylene (common name)
2-pentyne
1-pentene-4-yne
The locations of substituent groups of branched alkynes and substituted alkynes are
also indicated with numbers.
CH₃
CH₂
C
CH₃
CH₂
CH
c
CH
C
c
CH₃
CH₂
c
CH₂
CH₃
C
CH₃
CH₃
CH₂
CH₃
CH₃
1-pentyne
2-pentyne
4-ethyl-4,5-dimethyl-2-heptyne
Exercise 6.15
Give the structures and IUPAC names for all the alkynes with the formula C₆H₁₀,
and identify those that are position and chain isomers.
B.
Isomerism in Alkynes
At the end of this section, students will be able to write the structural formulas of
alkynes up to nine carbon atoms.
278
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Alkynes show both chain and position isomerism, but not geometrical or cis-
trans isomerism Consider:
CH=C-CH₂CH₃
CH₃-C=C-CH₃
1-butyne or but-1-yne
2-butyne or but-2-yne
CH₃
CH=C-CH-CH₃
CH=C-CH₂CH₂CH₃
3-methyl-1-butyne or 3-methylbut-1-yne
1-pentyne or pent-1-yne
1-Butyne and 2-butyne are position isomers whereas 3-methyl-1-butyne and
1-pentyne are chain isomers.
?
Write the structural formula for pentane, 1-pentene,
and 1-pentyne. Why are not these three hydrocarbons
considered as isomers? Tell your idea to the class.
Activity 6.13
Exercise 6.16
1. Write the structures of all isomers of 1-pentyne (C₅H₈) and
(a) name them
b) identify chain isomers?
c) identify position isomers?
C.
Preparation of Alkynes
At the end of this section, students will be able to
describe the general method for preparation of alkynes in a laboratory;
prepare acetylene in a laboratory by the reaction of CaC2 with water.
Alkynes can be prepared by several methods. Some of the general methods of
preparation of alkynes are:
Dehydrohalogenation of vicinal (adjacent) dihalides with a base NaOH or
KOH or NaNH₂.
H₂C-CH₂ + 2NaOH
HC=CH + 2NaX + 2H₂O
X X
Vicinal dihalide
Ethyne
Example 6.19:
H₂C-CH₂
+
2NaOH
HC=CH + 2NaBr + 2H₂O
Br Br
1,2-dibromoethane
Ethyne
279
Chemistry Grade 10
Alkylation of sodium acetylide (dicarbide) with a primary alkyl halide.
General reaction:
HC=CNa+ + R-X
HC=C-R + NaX
Sodium
Primary
carbide
Alkyl halide
Alkyne
Example 6.20
HC=CNa+ + CH₂CH₂Br
HC=CCH₂CH₃
Sodium
Ethyl bromide
But-1-yne
carbide
(1-butyne)
Reaction of calcium carbide with water:
CaC₂(s) + 2H₂O(I)
Ca(OH)₂(aq)
+
C₂H₂(g)
Calcium
Water
Calcium
Acetylene/
Carbide
hydroxide
ethyne
Exercise 6.17
Write the major product of the following reactions:
HH
I
a. CH₂-C-C-H + + + 2KOH
b. H - CE C-Na+ + CH₃Br
Br Br
Experiment 6.4
Laboratory Preparation of Ethyne
Objective: To prepare ethyne from calcium carbide and water.
Materials required: CaC2, H2O, bromine water, round-bottomed flask, separating
funnel, delivery tube, trough, beehive shelf and gas jar.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the set up as shown in Figure 6.5. Put a layer of sand in a conical
flask and place calcium carbide on the sand.
280
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
2. Add water drop by drop from the separating funnel onto the calcium carbide.
Watch carefully and record your observation. Touch the flask with the tip of
your finger.
3. Collect several jars of the gas over water and carry out the following tests:
a. Burn the gas as you did with methane and ethene.
b. Add a few drops of bromine water to another jar filled with ethyne and note
the changes.
Rubber
stopper
Separating funnel
Water
Clamp
Delivery
Gas jar
tube
Round
Ethyne
Stand
bottom
flask
:.
Calcium
APO
Water
carbide
Figure 6.5 Laboratory preparation of Ethyne.
Observations and analysis:
a. What do you feel when you touch the flask? Is the reaction exothermic or
endothermic?
b. How do you compare the colour of the flame produced with that of methane
and ethene?
Write a complete laboratory report and submit to your teacher. Write a laboratory
report about the experiment and submit to your teacher.
Write a laboratory report in a group and present it to the class.
D.
Chemical Properties of Alkynes
At the end of this section, students will be able to explain chemical properties of
alkynes.
Alkynes are more unsaturated than alkanes and alkenes due to the presence of a
carbon-carbon triple bond. They can undergo combustion and addition reactions.
Some of the common reactions of alkynes are:
i.
Combustion reaction: Alkynes burn with a smoky luminous flame, forming CO2
and water. Smoky luminous flames result from the combustion of alkynes due to
their relatively high carbon content.
281
Chemistry Grade 10
nCO2 + (n 1)H2O + Heat
Example 6.21:
C₃H₄(g) + 402 3CO2 + 2H2O + Heat
Addition reaction: Alkynes undergo an addition reaction at the carbon-carbon triple
bond. Some of the addition reactions of alkynes are the following: (a) Addition of
hydrogen (hydrogenation): In the presence of nickel or palladium catalyst, alkynes
produce alkanes.
General equation:
CₙH₂ₙ₋₂ + H₂ Ni heat CₙH₂ₙ heat Ni CₙH₂ₙ₊₂
Alkyne
Alkene
Alkane
Example 6.22:
Ethyne
Ethene
Ethane
Partial hydrogenation of alkynes in the presence of Lindlar's catalyst gives alkenes.
Lindlar's catalyst is powdered palladium partially deactivated with lead acetate that
reduce its activity such that it can only reduce alkynes, not alkenes. It always gives the
cis-alkene.
General reaction:
CₙH₂ₙ₋₂ + H₂ Catalyst Lindlar's
CₙH₂ₙ
Alkyne
Alkene
Example 6.23:
Lindlar's
CH₃-C=C-CH₃ + H₂
CH₃-CH=CH-CH₃
Catalyst
2-butyne
cis-2-butene
(b) Addition of halogens: When a molecule of an alkyne reacts with one and two
molecules of halogens, it gives a dihaloalkene and a tetrahaloalkane, respectively.
R-C=CH + X₂
R-C=CH
X X
Alkyne
Dihaloalkene
X X
R-CECH + 2X2
R-C-CH
X X
282
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Alkyne
Tetrahaloalkane
Example 6.24:
CH₃ H + Cl₂
CH₃C=C-H
CI CI
Propyne
1,2-dichloropropene
CI CI
CH₃ H + 2Cl₂
CH₃C-C-H
CI CI
Propyne
1,1,2,2-tetrachloropropane
Discuss on the following questions in a group and
?
present your responses to the class.
Do you expect alkynes to decolorize bromine water?
If so, why?
Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction
between C2H2 and Br₂.
Activity 6.14
(c) Addition of Hydrogen Halides: Alkynes react with hydrogen halides to form
a monohaloalkene and a dihaloalkane. The addition reaction occurs according to
Markovnikov's rule.
General reaction:
X
HX
HX
R-C=CH
R-C=CH2
R-C-CH₃
X
X
Alkyne
Monohaloalkene
Dihaloalkane
Example 6.25:
Br
CH₃-C=CH HBr CH₃-C=CH₂ HX CH₃-C-CH₃
Br
Br
Propyne
2-Bromopropene
2,2-Dibromopropane
(d) Trimerization of Acetylene: Acetylene, on prolonged heating at 600 - 700 °C,
yields benzene.
283
Chemistry Grade 10
600 °C - 700 °C
CH ≡ CH
Acetylene
benzene
Discuss on the following questions in a group and
present your responses to the class.
1. Is Markonikov's rule applied in the reaction
?
between propyne and hydrobromic acid? How?
2. The addition reaction of alkynes proceeds in two
steps. Explain what changes occur during the first
and the second steps.
3. Compare the reaction products when 1-butyne
Activity 6.15
and 2-butyne react with HBr.
E.
Properties and uses of Acetylene or Ethyne
At the end of this section, students will be able to
explain the uses of ethylene and acetylene;
compare and contrast the properties of ethane, ethene and ethyne;
test for unsaturation of ethylene and ethyne.
Acetylene is a colourless, sweet-smelling gas in pure form and is insoluble in water. It
is usually stored as a solution of acetone in steel cylinders. Combustion of acetylene
with oxygen produces an intensely hot flame of about 3000 °C. Thus, a large quantity
of acetylene is used as a fuel in oxy-acetylene torches for cutting and welding metals.
It is a two-stage reaction where the primary chemical reaction involves the acetylene
disassociating in the presence of oxygen to produce heat, carbon monoxide, and
hydrogen gas: C2H₂ + 2CO + H2
The second reaction is oxidation of carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide while the
hydrogen formed in the above reaction forms water:
CO + H₂ + O₂
CO2+H₂O
Acetylene is also used to prepare acrylonitrile which is a starting material for
producing polyacrylonitrile, a raw material for textile fiber. It is also used for making
vinyl chloride which polymerizes to give polyvinyl chloride (PVC) commonly used for
making floor tiles, electrical insulators, shoe soles, water pipes etc. Acetylene is used
to produce 1,2,2-tetrachloroethane that serves as a solvent for wax, grease, rubber
etc. See Table 6.6.
284
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Table 6.6 Comparison of Some Properties of Ethane, Ethene and Ethyne
Property
Ethane
Ethene
Ethyne
Nature of flame
Non-luminous
Luminous
Smoky luminous
Effect on colour of Br₂ in CCI₄
No effect
Decolorizes
Decolorize
Effect on colour of alkaline KMnO₄
No effect
Decolorizes
Decolorizes
6.4 Aromatic Hydrocarbons: Benzene
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define aromatic hydrocarbons;
distinguish aromatic compounds from other hydrocarbons;
draw and explain the structure of benzene;
describe the main physical properties and chemical reactions of benzene;
perform simple chemical tests to identify alkanes, alkenes/alkynes, and aromatic
compounds.
Discuss the following in your group and present your
responses to the whole class:
1. What comes to your mind when you hear the word
'benzene'?
?
2. What does the word "aroma" mean? Which
substances have an aroma smell?
3. Are aromatic hydrocarbons saturated or
unsaturated?
Activity 6.16
4. What are the main sources of aromatic compounds?
The term aromatic is derived from the word 'aroma' meaning pleasant smell, which
was originally used to describe naturally occurring compounds with pleasant smells. At
present, the term is used without its original significance. Aromatic hydrocarbons are
generally obtained from petroleum and coal tar. They are a group of hydrocarbons
characterized by the presence of a benzene ring or related structures. Figure 6.6
gives some examples of aromatic hydrocarbon structures.
H
CH₃
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
c
C
H
C
C
H
C
C
c
c
C
C
C
H
C
C
c
c
c
C
H
H
C
H
H
c
c
H
H
H
H
H
Benzene
Methyl benzene (Toluene)
Naphthalene
Figure 6.6 Structures of some Aromatic Hydrocarbons.
285
Chemistry Grade 10
6.4.1 Benzene
Benzene is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon. Its molecular formula is C6H6. The first
structure for benzene was proposed by August Kekulé in 1872. It consisted of a six-
membered ring with alternating single and double bonds and with one hydrogen
bonded to each carbon. He assumed that the ring contains three double bonds that
shift back and forth so rapidly that the two forms (Figure 6.7) cannot be separated.
Later on, Kekulé assumption was found to be incorrect. Each structure has become
known as Kekulé structure.
H
C
H
H
C
C
C
C
H
C
H
H
I
II
A Kekulé structure
A Kekulé structure
showing all atoms
as line-bond formulas
Figure 6.7 A Kekulé structure of benzene.
Today, we represent benzene as a hybrid of two equivalent contributing Kekulé
structures. Each Kekulé structure makes an equal contribution to the hybrid:
I
II
Benzene as a hybrid of two equivalent
Resonance hybrid
contributing structures
The bonds in benzene are neither single nor double, but have an intermediate
character between those of single and double bonds. All the carbon-carbon bonds
in the molecule are the same in length and nature. Since structures I or Il given above
are not the true structures of the benzene molecule, the benzene ring is written in
its resonance hybrid form. However, chemists continue to use a single contributing
structure to represent benzene.
From structures I and Il in Figure 6.7, one may think that benzene has three double
bonds and has the same chemistry as that of alkenes. But, this is not true. Benzene
and other aromatic hydrocarbons contain high degrees of unsaturation, yet fail to
undergo characteristic alkene addition and oxidation-reduction reactions. They are
more stable than alkenes.
286
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
6.4.2 Nomenclature of Substituted Benzenes
i.
Monosubstituted Benzenes
Generally, mono-substituted benzenes are named in a similar manner as hydrocarbons
with -benzene as the parent name:
CH₃
CH₂CH₃
Br
NO2
OH
NH2
Methylbenzene
Ethylbenzene
Bromobenzene
Nitrobenzene
Hydroxybenzene
Aminobenzene
(Toluene)
(Phenol)
(Aniline)
The IUPAC system retains certain common names for several of the simpler mono-
substituted benzenes. Examples are toluene (rather than methylbenzene) and phenol
(rather than hydroxybenzene).
ii. Disubstituted Benzenes
When two substituents occur on a benzene ring, three constitutional isomers are
possible. We locate substituents either by numbering the atoms of the ring or by using
the locators 1,2- or ortho (o), 1,3- or meta (m), and 1,4- or para (p).
CH3
NH2
CH3
CH2CH3
CI
CI
CH
3
Br
4-Bromotoluene
3-chloroaniline
1,3-dimethylbenzene
1-Chloro-2-ethylbenzene
(p-Bromotoluene)
(m-chloroaniline)
(m-xylene)
(o-Choloroethylbenzene)
6.4.3 Physical Properties of Benzene
In general, benzene resembles other hydrocarbons in its physical properties. Benzene
is a flammable, colourless, and volatile liquid with a characteristic smell. It is less dense
than water, non-polar and insoluble in water, but soluble in non-polar solvents like
ether and carbon tetrachloride. At one time, benzene was widely used as a solvent,
but exposure to it causes leukemia, a blood cancer. That is benzene is a carcinogenic
(cancer-causing) substance.
6.4.4 Chemical Properties of Benzene
Benzene and other aromatic hydrocarbons are more stable than alkenes and alkynes
due to the stability of the aromatic ring. It neither decolorizes bromine water (Br₂
in CCI₄) nor is reactive towards cold potassium permanganate solution. However,
benzene undergoes the following reactions:
287
Chemistry Grade 10
1. Combustion reaction: Benzene is highly inflammable. It burns with a smoky
luminous flame to form CO2 and H2O
2C₆H₆
+
150₂
12CO₂
+
6H2O
+
Heat
2. Substitution reaction: This is a characteristic reaction of benzene and other
aromatic compounds. In this reaction, the hydrogen atom from the benzene ring is
replaced by another atom or group.
(a). Halogenation: Benzene reacts with bromine and chlorine in the presence of iron
(III) chloride or aluminium chloride catalyst to form substitution products.
Example 6.26:
C₆H₆ + Br₂ FeBr₃
C₆H₅Br
+
HBr
or
Br
FeBr₃
+ Br₂
+ HBr
Benzene
Bromobenzene
(b). Nitration: A mixture of concentrated nitric acid and concentrated sulphuric acid
reacts with benzene at moderate temperatures to form nitrobenzene.
H2SO4
C₆H₆
+
HNO₃
C₆H₅NO₂
+
H2O
50 °C
or
NO2
H2SO4
+ HNO3
+ H2O
50 °C
Benzene
Nitrobenzene
(c). Sulphonation: Benzene reacts with concentrated sulphuric acid, H₂SO₄, at room
temperature to form benzenesulphonic acid.
C₆H₆
+
H2SO4
C₆H₅SO₂OH + H2O
or
SO₃H
+ H2SO4
+ H2O
Benzene
Benzenesulphonic acid
288
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Experiment 6.5
10.0g
Chemical Reaction of Toluene
Objective: To distinguish aromatic hydrocarbons from other unsaturated
hydrocarbons
Materials required: Toluene, Br₂ in CCI₄, KMnO₄, concentrated H2SO4, test tubes,
test tube rack, test tube holder, measuring cylinder, Bunsen burner and dropper.
Procedure:
1. Take three test tubes and place them in the test tube rack.
2. Add 5 mL of toluene (methylbenzene) to each of the three test tubes.
3. Add one or two drops of Br₂ in CCI₄ in the first test tube and add the same
amount of cold KMnO₄ solution in the second test tube and observe the changes.
4. Add a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid to the third test tube and, if
necessary, heat it gently, holding it with a test tube holder.
Observations and analysis:
In which test tube did a reaction occur?
Write a complete report of your observations and submit it to your teacher.
3. Addition reaction: Under normal conditions, aromatic compounds do not undergo
addition reaction. Benzene undergoes addition reactions under special conditions.
Example 6.27:
When a mixture of benzene vapour and hydrogen is passed over a finely divided
nickel catalyst at 200 °C, cyclohexane is formed.
Ni
C₆H₆
+
3H₂
C₆H₁₂
200 °C
or
Ni
+ 3H₂
200 °C
Benzene
Cyclohexane
289
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 6.18
1. What is an aromatic hydrocarbon?
2. What is the name of the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon?
3. Describe the main reactions of benzene?
4. Benzene does not change the colour of Br₂ in CCI₄ or that of KMnO₄ solution;
why?
5. How do you prepare the following compounds from benzene?
a. Chlorobenzene
b. Nitrobenzene
C. Benzenesulphonic acid.
6.5 Natural Sources of Hydrocarbons
At the end of this section, students will be able to
list the major natural sources of hydrocarbons;
describe natural gas;
define crude oil;
dxplain fractional distillation of crude oil;
dention products of fractional distillation of crude oil;
discuss the uses of petroleum products.
What do you think is the composition of the fuels
people use for vehicles and motorbike? What about
bottled gases for cooking? Does Ethiopia have an oil
(crude oil) deposit? What are the natural resources
Ethiopia is gifted with? Discuss whether they are
renewable or nonrenewable and their environmental
impact. If you were a leader of the country, would
you invest more on fossil fuel extraction or in the
development of renewable energy sources such as
Activity 6.17
hydroelectric dams?
By far, the major sources of alkanes are the world's natural gas and petroleum
deposits followed by coal. Laid down eons ago, these deposits are thought to be
derived primarily from the decomposition of tiny single-celled marine organisms
called foraminifera.
290
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
A. Natural Gas
Natural gas is a mixture of gases that consists chiefly of methane (more than 90%) but
also contains ethane, propane, and butane. Other gases such as, CO2, N2, O2 and H2S,
may also be present in natural gas. Natural gas is found in association with petroleum
or alone. It is found in underground deposits several hundreds or thousands of meters
below the earth's surface, where it originated from the decay and decomposition
of animal and plant remains millions of years ago. The composition of natural gas
varies, depending on its place of origin. Natural gas is widely used as a fuel. It is
advantageous over liquid and solid fuels and also other gases, except H2, due to its
very high heat of combustion.
B. Petroleum (crude oil)
The word petroleum is derived from two Latin words, 'petra' meaning rock, and
'oleum' meaning oil. Thus, petroleum means rock oil. Petroleum (also called crude oil)
is a complex mixture of fossil hydrocarbons that must be separated into fractions and
then further refined before it can be used. It is generally found along with natural
gas in the form of a dark-coloured viscous liquid, which is a complex mixture of
hydrocarbons. Its composition varies according to its place of origin. However, crude
oil mainly contains alkanes, cycloalkanes and aromatic hydrocarbons. It also contains
organic compounds consisting of nitrogen, sulphur and oxygen in small amounts.
Refining of Crude Oil
Petroleum refining begins by fractional distillation of crude oil into three principal cuts
according to boiling point (bp): straight-run gasoline (bp 30-200 °C), kerosene (bp
175-300 °C), and heating oil, or diesel fuel (bp 275-400 °C). Further distillation under
reduced pressure then yields lubricating oils and waxes and leaves a tarry residue
of asphalt. The distillation of crude oil is only the first step in gasoline production,
however. Figure 6.8 shows the fractional distillation set up for separating crude oil into
its component fractions.
The major products (fractions) obtained from the fractional distillation of petroleum
and their uses are given in Table 6.7.
291
Chemistry Grade 10
Table 6.7 Typical fractions obtained by fractional distillation of petroleum
Fractions
Number of
Boiling
point
Uses
carbon atoms
range (°C) of
per molecule
fractions
Natural Gases
C₁
C₄
Below 20
As fuel in the form of bottled
gas.
Petroleum ether
C₅
C₇
20
60
As solvent in dry cleaning
Gasoline
C₅
C
° °
40
200
Petrol
fuel
for
internal
10
(Petrol)
combustion engines
Kerosene
~~
C
8
175
275
12
18
Jet engine fuel, household fuel
Fuel oil (diesel
S
C
8
250
400
Furnace fuel, diesel engine
15
18
oil)
fuel
Lubricating oil
>C
Non-volatile
- Lubrication, grease
19
Petroleum jelly
liquids
Paraffin
wax
>C2₀
Non-volatile
- Candles, polishes
Residue
solids
- bitumen for roof sealing and
road surfaces
Note that as the later fractions obtained at higher temperatures are more coloured,
more viscous, and less inflammable.
Straight-run gasoline turns out to be a poor fuel in automobiles because of engine
knock, an uncontrolled combustion that can occur in a hot engine.
Under 40°C
Bottled as gas for heating
for cooking
Fractionating
column
20 - 60°C
Petroleum ether
40 200°C
Petrol (gasoline)
175 275°C
Kerosene-fuel for jet aircraft
250- 350°C
Petroleum
Diesel oil (fuel oil)-fuel for lorries
and tractors
Lubricating oil-lubricants,
Residue
Waxes and polishes
Bitumen or asphalt-
making road surface
and sealing roofs
Figure 6.8 Fractional Distillation of Petroleum.
The octane number of a fuel is the measure by which its antiknock properties are judged.
Straight-chain hydrocarbons are far more prone to induce engine knock than are
292
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
highly branched compounds. The highly branched compound 2,2,4-trimethylpentane
(called isooctane in the petroleum industry) burns very smoothly (without knocking) in
internal combustion engines and is used as one of the standards by which the octane
rating of gasolines is established. According to this scale, 2,2,4-trimethylpentane
has an octane rating of 100. Heptane, CH₃(CH₂)₅CH₃,, a compound that produces
much knocking when it is burned in an internal combustion engine, is given an octane
rating of O. Mixtures of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane and heptane are used as standards
for octane ratings between 0 and 100. A gasoline, for example, that has the same
characteristics in an engine as a mixture of 87% 2,2,4-trimethylpentane and 13%
heptane would be rated as 87-octane gasoline.
CH₃
CH₃
CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₂
CH₃C-CH₂CHCH₃
CH₃
Heptane
(octane number = 0)
2,2,4-trimethylpentane
(octane number = 100)
Because straight-run gasoline burns so poorly in engines, petroleum chemists have
devised numerous methods for producing higher-quality fuels. One of these methods,
catalytic cracking, involves taking the high-boiling kerosene cut (C₁₁- C₁₄) and
'cracking' it into smaller branched molecules suitable for use in gasoline. What does
cracking mean? Cracking is the decomposition of large hydrocarbon molecules into
smaller ones by the application of heat (thermal cracking or pyrolysis)
heat
C₁₆H₃₄
C₈H₁₈ + C₈H₁₆
Hexadecane
Octane Octene
or in the presence of catalysts (catalytic cracking). Hydrogen gas can be added
during cracking to saturate the alkenes formed in the process.
Another process, called reforming, is used to convert C₆⁻ C₈ alkanes to aromatic
compounds such as benzene and toluene, which have substantially higher octane
numbers than alkanes. The final product that goes into the tank has an approximate
composition of 15% C₄- C₈ straight-chain alkanes, 25% to 40% C₄- C₁₀ branched-
chain alkanes, 10% cyclic alkanes, 10% straight chain and cyclic alkenes, and 25%
arenes (aromatics).
C. Coal
At the end of this section, students will be able to
identify the composition of coal;
describe destructive distillation of coal.
Coal is formed naturally by the decomposition of plant matter over several million of
years. It is not a pure form of carbon. It is an important source of aromatic hydrocarbons.
293
Chemistry Grade 10
Heating mineral coal in the absence of air, or oxygen is called destructive distillation
of coal or coking of coal. When coal is heated in the absence of air it gives volatile
products and coke. The volatile products that are separated into coal gas and a liquid
are called coal tar when cooled. Aromatic hydrocarbons and many other substances
are isolated from coal tar by fractional distillation. Coke, which is a solid and relatively
pure form of carbon, is used as a fuel in the blast furnace during the extraction of iron.
It is also used to produce gaseous fuels, such as water gas (mixture of H2 and CO) and
producer gas (mixture of N2 and CO).
Exercise 6.19
1. Discuss the importance of natural gas for a country's economic development.
2. What are the major natural sources of hydrocarbons?
3. Which hydrocarbons are the main constituents of petroleum?
4. What is destructive distillation?
5. Describe how we can obtain aromatic hydrocarbons from coal.
6. Which fraction of petroleum is in very high demand?
7. What process should be carried out during fractional distillation of crude oil
to maximize the output of petrol or gasoline?
8. Describe the main uses of a) petroleum ether; b) kerosene; c) gasoline; d)
diesel oil; e refinery gases.
Key Terms
addition reaction
geometrical isomerism
alkane
halogenation
alkene
hydrohalogenation
alkyl halide
homologous series
alkyl radicals
hydrogenation
alkynes
inorganic compound
benzene
isomers
biogas
ketone
carboxylic acid
life force (vitalism) theory
chain isomerism
Markovnikov's rule
cracking
natural gas
crude oil
organic compound
cycloalkanes
petroleum
cycloalkene
polymerization
decarboxylation
position isomerism
dehydrohalogenation
saturated hydrocarbons
destructive distillation
substitution reaction
elimination reaction
unsaturated hydrocarbons
functional group
Wurtz reaction
294
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
Unit Summary
The 'vitalism' theory states that living organisms (plants and animals) have a
special life force which helps them to synthesize organic compounds and that
organic compounds cannot be synthesized artificially by man in the laboratory.
Organic chemistry is the study of carbon compounds including natural and synthetic
ones.
Organic compounds are classified based on the functional group they contain in
their molecules.
The functional group is a part of a molecule that determines the chemical and
physical properties of a compound.
Hydrocarbons are compounds composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms only.
Saturated hydrocarbons contain only single bonds between carbon atoms
Unsaturated hydrocarbons are those containing one or more double or triple
bonds between carbon atoms.
A homologous series is a group of compounds in which each member of the group
differs from the next member by -CH₂- group.
Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons represented by the general formula CₙH₂ₙ₊₂·
Alkanes are named by using prefixes that indicate the number of carbon atoms
and the suffix '-ane'.
Isomerism is the existence of two or more compounds with the same molecular
formula but different structures. These compounds are called isomers.
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon-carbon double bond
as their functional group. Their general formula is CₙH₂ₙ. The suffix '-ene' in their
names indicates the presence of a carbon-carbon double bond.
Alkynes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon-carbon triple bond as
their functional group. They are represented by the general formula CₙH₂ₙ₋₂· The
suffix '-yne' indicates the carbon-carbon triple bond.
Alkenes and alkynes undergo mainly addition reactions while alkanes undergo
substitution reactions.
Aromatic hydrocarbons are compounds containing benzene rings. Benzene is the
simplest aromatic hydrocarbon.
The natural sources of hydrocarbons are crude oil, natural gas and coal.
Crude oil is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons, mainly alkanes, and also contains
cycloalkanes and aromatics.
Crude oil is separated into several useful fractions by fractional distillation.
Organic chemicals are also used as fuels and solvents for dry cleaning.
Review Exercise
Part I: Multiple Choice Questions
1. The first organic compound that is artificially synthesized from inorganic starting
materials is
.
a. benzene
b. methane
C. urea
d. hydrocarbons
295
Chemistry Grade 10
2. Which of the following hydrocarbons does not belong to the homologous series
of alkanes?
a. C₃H₈
b. C₈H₁₈
C. C₆H₁₀
d. C₁₀H₂₂
3. Which of the following alkanes is a liquid at room temperature?
a. CH₄
b. C₁₀H₂₂
C. C₄H₁₀
d. C₃H₈
4. The hydrocarbon used as a fuel in an oxyacetylene torch is:
a. C2H₂
b. C2H₄
C. C₄H₁₀
d. CH₄
5. The general formula that represents the olefin homologous series is:
a. CₙH₂ₙ₊₁
b. CₙH₂ₙ₊₂
C. CₙH₂ₙ₋₂
d. CₙH₂ₙ
6. The most common reaction that alkenes undergo is:
a. elimination
b. substitution
C. addition
d. decomposition
7. A compound having molecular formula C₇H₈ that does not decolorize Br₂ in CCI₄
or KMnO₄ solution most likely belongs to a class of hydrocarbons called
a. Alkynes
C. Alkenes
b. Alkanes
d. Aromatic hydrocarbons
8. Which hydrocarbon is the main constituent of natural gas and biogas?
a. C₄H₁₀
b. CH₄
C. C2H₆
d. C₆H₁₄
9. During the fractional distillation of crude oil, the process of cracking is carried out
to:
a. separate the crude oil into different fractions
b. vaporize the liquid components
C. maximize the output of petrol or gasoline
d. separate alkanes from alkenes
10. Ethyne decolorizes Br₂ in CCI₄. This is due to the formation of:
a. 1,1-dibromoethane
b. 1,1,2,2-dibromoethene
C. 1,2-dibromoethane
d. 1,1,2,2-tetrabromoethane
11. The following reaction can be classified as:
CH4 + Br₂
CH3Br + HBr
C. a substitution reaction
a. an addition reaction
d. a saponification reaction
b. an elimination reaction
12. Which one of the following substances is not used in dry cleaning?
a. CCI₄
b. C₆H₆
C. CI2C=CCI₂
d. CH₂COOH
13. The first organic compound was synthesized in the laboratory by:
a. Friedrich Wohler
C. John Dalton
b. A. Kekule
d. Wurtz
14. Which reagent is used to test for unsaturation of hydrocarbons?
a. Wurtz reagent
C. Alkaline KMnO₄
b. Bromine in CCI₄
d. B & C
296
Hydrocarbons and their Natural Sources
15. Which alkene doesn't exhibit cis-trans isomerism?
a. 2-butene
C. 2,3-dimethylbut-2-ene
b. 2-pentene
d. All
16. Which one of the following compounds does not decolorize bromine water?
a. C3H₄ b. C2H₂
C. C₆H₁₄
d. All
Part II: Supply Type Questions
17. Complete the following reaction equations:
a. CH₂ = CH₂ + H2 Heat Ni
f. CH3CH2CH₂CI + KOH Heat
CaO, heat
g. CH ≡ CNa + CH₃CH₂Br
b. CH₂COONa + NaOH
h. CH₃-CH= CH₂ + HBr
C. CH₃ - CH₂Br + 2Na
i.
d. CH₃ - CH-CH₂ + NaOH
H+
||
j.
Br Br
H2SO4
k. CH₂CH₂-CH = CH2 + H₂O Alkaline, KMnO₄
e. CH3CH2CH2OH
Heat
Part III. Workout Type Questions
18. Draw structures for the following:
a. 2-Methylheptane
b. 4-Ethyl-2,2-dimethylhexane
C. 4-Ethyl-3,4-dimethyloctane
d. 2,4,4-Trimethylheptane
e. 3,3-Diethyl-2,5-dimethylnonane
f. 4-lsopropyl-3-methylheptane
g. 4-ethyl-2,2,3-trimethylhexane
h. 3-bromo-2-chlorohex-1-ene
19. Name the five isomers of C₆H₁₄·
20. Explain why each of the following names is incorrect:
a. 2,2-Dimethyl-6-ethylheptane
b. 4-Ethyl-5,5-dimethylhexane
C. 3-Ethyl-4,4-dimethylhexane
d. 5,5,6-Trimethyloctane
(e) 2-Isopropyl-4-methylheptane
21. Propene, CH₂CH=CH₂, is an alkene. Write the structure of a structural isomer of
propene that is not an alkene. (Hint: It does not have a double bond.)
22. Propose structures for two structural isomers of cyclopentene that do not contain
a ring.
297
Chemistry Grade 10
23. Give IUPAC names for the following compounds:
(a)
CH₃
(b)
CH₃
(c) H3C CH₃
CH₃CHCH₂CH₂CH₃
CH₃CH₂CCH₃
CH₃CHCCH₂CH₂CH₃
CH₃
CH₃
(d)
CH₂CH₃
CH₃
(e)
CH₃ CH₂CH₃
(f) H3C CH₃
CH₃CH₂CHCH₂CH₂CHCH₃
CH₃CH₂CH₂CHCH₂CCH₃
CH₃C-CCH₂CH₂CH₃
CH₃
H3C CH₃
Br H
(g) CH₃ CH₂CH₂CH-CH₃ (j) CH₃-C=C-CH₂CH₂CH-CH₃
H
CH₃
CH₂
H
CH₃
CH₂
CH₃
CH₃
Br
CH3~CHCH₃
(h)
CH₃-CC-CH₂CH-CH₃
H
CH₂
H
CH₂
CH₃
CH₃
Br
CH₃
Br
CH₃
(i)
CH₃-C-CH=CH-CH-CH-CH₃
(1)
CH₃-C-CH-CH₂CH-C-CH₃
H
CH₂
H CH₃
CH
CH₃
CH₃
298