Unit 3
Elasticity and Static Equilibrium
of Rigid Body
Introduction
In grade 9 physics, you studied the effect of force on a body to produce
Brainstormi
displacement. The force applied on an object may also change its shape
question
or size. Some objects regain their original shape and size whereas others
What do you thin
do not. Such a behavior of objects depends on the microscopic structure
are the impor-
of the material called elasticity and plasticity. In this unit, you will learn
tant elastic and
about the topics related to elasticity, plasticity, and static equilibrium of a
plastic properties
rigid body.
of bridges and
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
ladders?
understand the differences between elasticity and plasticity for an
object;
describe density and specific gravity;
comprehend the concept of stress and strain;
know that Young modulus is the ratio of the stress to the strain of an
object;
understand the physical conditions of static equilibrium;
apply the conditions of equilibrium for a body in static equilibrium
in everyday activity.
60
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
3.1 Elasticity and plasticity
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define elasticity and plasticity;
explain the deformation of an object.
A rigid body generally means a hard solid object having a definite shape
and size. However, in reality, all bodies can be stretched, compressed
and bent. Even the appreciably rigid steel bar can be deformed when a
sufficiently large external force is applied on it. You may have seen iron
rods at construction sites. This means that all practical solid bodies are
never perfectly rigid. A solid has a definite shape and size. In order to
Figure 3.1 Helical spring
change (or deform) the shape or size of a body, a force is required. Such
a force is called a deforming force. If you stretch a helical spring shown
in Figure 3.1 by gently pulling its ends, the length of the spring increases
slightly. When you leave the ends of the spring, it regains its original size
and shape.
You might have experienced the use of such a spring in some materials
like the one shown in Figure 3.2. Pressing the pen cap allow the writing
point to come out of the pen casing (with a click sound). On pressing it
Figure 3.2 Spring pen.
again the writing point goes back inside the pen casing. Two points are to
be noted here are:
The spring inside the pen gets deformed on pushing the pen cap.
It regains the original shape once the deforming force is removed.
If a body regains its original shape and size after the removal of deforming
force, it is said to be elastic and the property is called elasticity. The defor-
mation caused is known as elastic deformation. Examples: rubber, metals
Figure 3.3 The hammer force
applied on the nail which bent,
and steel ropes. However, if you apply force to a lump of putty, or potters
showing permanent deforma-
clay, they have no gross tendency to regain their previous shape; they tend
tion of the nail.
to get permanently deformed. If a body does not regain its original shape
and size after removal of the deforming force, it is said to be plastic body
3.1 Elasticity and plasticity
61
and the property is called plasticity.
Plastic deformation is defined as the persistent deformation or change in
the shape of a solid body caused by a sustained force. This happens when
a great amount of tension is applied to a material. Plastic deformation
is permanent and irreversible. Plasticity is the ability to be permanently
formed or molded.
Activity 3.1
A rubber band shown in Figure 3.4 gets stretched when you apply
force on it. However, it (almost) regains the original shape once the
force is removed. But does it always come back to its original shape
and size irrespective of the magnitude of force? Discuss in group.
Students, have you observed that elastic bodies show the property of elas-
ticity up to a certain value of deforming force? If you go on increasing the
deforming force, then a stage is reached when on removing the force, the
body will not return to its original state. The maximum deforming force
up to which a body retains its property of elasticity is called elastic limit of
Figure 3.4 Stretched rubber
the material of the body. Beyond the elastic limit, the solid does not regain
band.
its original shape and size.
Key Concept
It Elastic limit is the property of a body whereas elasticity is the
property of material of the body. All materials are elastic up to
a certain deformation; then they turn plastic. Springs lose their
springiness if subjected to large external force and tend to become
plastic.
The elastic limit of ductile material is the beginning point of plastic defor-
mation. The elastic limit of a solid is the utmost amount to which it may
be stretched without permanently changing size or form. If the tension is
placed beyond the elastic limit, the substance will deform plastically. Plas-
62
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
tic deformation occurs in ductile materials such as metals (for example,
copper) when the distortion surpasses the elastic limit. Plastic deforma-
tion is vital in the manufacture of new goods utilizing heat or pressure
treatments as well as molding.
Activity 3.2
Elastic behavior of materials plays an important role in our day to day life.
The following are some of the practical applications of elasticity.
A slingshot used
to shoot a body
1. The metallic parts of machinery are never subjected to a stress be-
involves the uses
yond elastic limit; otherwise they will get permanently deformed.
of rubber bands.
The body, placed
2. The thickness of the metallic rope used in the crane in order to lift
at the centre
a given load is decided from the knowledge of elastic limit of the
of the band, is
material of the rope and the factor of safety.
drawn back as far
3. The bridges are declared unsafe after long use because during its
as possible and
released, thus
long use, a bridge undergoes quick alternating strains continuously.
striking the tar-
It results in the loss of elastic strength.
get with a great
4. Maximum height of a mountain on earth can be estimated from the
impact. If you
elastic behavior of earth.
replace the rubber
used with a cotton
Section summary
cord, would it still
work in the same
External forces applied on an object cause deformation.
way?
An object or material is elastic if it comes back to its original
shape and size when the external force is removed.
Review questions
1. Define elasticity and plasticity.
2. List some plastic materials in your locality.
3. The body will regain its previous shape and size only when the
deformation caused by the external forces is within a certain
3.2 Density and specific gravity
63
limit. What is that limit?
3.2 Density and specific gravity
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define the density and the specific gravity of an object;
Exercise 3.1
determine the density of an object;
Do you know the
compare the density of an unknown object with a standard value.
reason why oil
floats on water or
Density
why iron needles
Density is defined as the mass of an object per unit of its volume. You
sink while giant
can also state it as the ratio between mass and volume. Thus density is
iron ships float on
the measure of the fact that how much mass of the object is contained
water?
in the unit volume of the substance. It also helps us in determining the
compactness of the substance.
Activity 3.3
Suppose that
Density is represented using the symbol, "p". The density of a substance
you are given an
can thus be calculated using the formula:
iron and copper
block. Determine
p=m
(3.1)
the density of
the two blocks
where m is the mass of the substance and V is the volume of the substance.
by first measur-
The SI unit of density is kg/m³. Sometimes densities are given in g/cm³.
ing the masses
The relation between them is given by: 1kg/m³ = 10⁻³g/cm³.
and the volumes.
Compare your
Temperature and pressure are the two common factors affecting the den-
result with the
sity of the substance. Other general factors such as size, mass as well as
standard for
arrangement of atoms in the substance also widely affect the density of
iron 7.86g/cm³
the material.
and for copper
8.92g/cm³.
Here are a few everyday examples of density.
64
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Key Concept
Rock sinks in the water, while wood, being less dense than the water,
Density is a
floats on the surface.
characteristic
property of any
Oil is less dense than water. It rises to the surface in cases of an oil
pure substance. It
spill in the ocean creating an oil slick on the surface of the water.
is used in deter-
mining whether
Specific gravity
an object sinks or
Specific gravity is defined as the ratio of the density of the given substance
floats in a fluid.
to that of a standard substance (generally this standard substance is water
at 4 °C but not for all). While considering water at 4°C as a reference or
standard parameter for comparison, a question arises why water is taken
at 4 °C only, and not at 0 °C or 100 °C which is its freezing and boiling
points, respectively. This is because at 4 °C, water has the highest density
and not at 0 °C or 100 °C. That is the reason why it is common to use the
density of water at 4 °C as a reference point.
The specific gravity (SG) of a substance can thus be calculated using the
expression:
SG Psubstance Pwater
=
(3.2)
Since specific gravity is the ratio of two like terms, i.e., density of two
Key Concept
substances, it is a unitless quantity. As discussed earlier, with change in
temperature and pressure, the density of an object is affected and hence
Specific Grav-
affecting the specific gravity of the given substance.
ity is a unitless
quantity as it is
the ratio of two
The following are some of the applications of specific gravity.
densities.
Geologists and mineralogists use the concept of specific gravity in
determining the mineral content of the rock.
You apply the concept of specific gravity in comparing the purity of
the newly found gem with the standard one.
Specific gravity helps us in urinalysis and extracting the contents
information of the urine.
3.2 Density and specific gravity
65
Table 3.1 Density and specific gravity of substance at 0 °C and 1 atm.
Material type
Material name
Density (Kg/m³)
Relative density
Helium
0.179
1.79 X 10⁻⁴
Gas
Air
1.29
1.29 X 10⁻³
Carbon dioxide
1.98
1.98 X 10⁻³
Liquid
Alcohol
7.9 X 10²
0.79
Gasoline
8.6 X 10²
0.86
Water (4°C)
1 X 10³
1
Mercury
13.6 X 10³
13.6
Glass (common)
(2.4 - 2.8) X 10³
2.5
Aluminum
2.7 X 10³
2.7
Iron
7.86 X 10³
7.86
Solid
Copper
8.92 X 10³
8.92
Silver
10.5 X 10³
10.5
Uranium
19.07 X 10³
19.07
Activity 3.4
Gold
19.3 X 10³
19.3
Suppose that a
block of brass and
a block of wood
An object made of a particular pure substance such as pure gold, can have
have exactly the
any size or mass, but the density will be the same for each.
same mass. If
both blocks are
Example 3.1
dropped in a tank
of water, which
A mining worker gets an unknown mineral with a volume of 20 cm³ and a
one floats and
mass of 54 g. Determine the density and the specific gravity of the mineral.
which one sinks?
Solution:
why?
In this example, you are given with m = 60 g and V = 20cm³.
The required quantities are density and specific gravity.
The density can be calculated using the formula
p=m V
Substitution gives
p = 54 20 10-3 10⁻⁶ kg = 10³ kg/m³
66
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
The specific gravity can be calculated by
From table 3.1 above, this unknown rock is aluminium.
Example 3.2
What is the mass of a solid iron ball of radius 18 cm?
Solution:
You are given with r = 18 cm. Moreover, from table 3.1 above, the density
of iron is p = 7860 kg/m³.
You want to find the mass m.
From equation 3.1, you get m = (p)(V). To use this formula, you first have
to find the volume of the sphere. The volume of the sphere is given by 4πʳ³.
Hence, the volume of iron ball (V) is thus:
V = 4 3 m)³ = 0.024 m³
So the mass becomes:
m = (7860 kg/m³)(0.024 m³)
m = 188.64 kg
Section summary
The density of a material is defined as the mass per unit vol-
ume.
Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of the material to the
density of a substance that is taken as a standard.
3.3 Stress and Strain
67
Review questions
1. What is the approximate mass of air in a living room of 5.6 m X
3.6 m X 2.4 m?
2. You have a sample of granite with density 2.8 g/cm³. The
density of water is 1.0 g/cm³. What is the specific gravity of
your granite?
3. Calculate the average density and specific gravity of the Earth
given that the mass and radius of the Earth are mE = 5.98 X 10²⁴
kg and RE = 6.37 X 10⁶ m, respectively.
Exercise 3.2
3.3 Stress and Strain
If you apply equal
forces on a copper
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
and silver wire
define stress and strain;
of equal length
and thickness,
apply the formula of stress and strain to solve problems;
can they stretch
equally? Explain.
apply physical concept of stress and strain on your daily life activity.
From the previous discussion, you observed that a change in shape due to
the application of a force is known as a deformation. Even very small forces
are known to cause some deformation. Deformation is experienced by
objects or physical media under the action of external force, for example;
this may be squashing, squeezing, ripping, twisting, shearing, or pulling
the objects apart. In the language of physics, two terms describe the forces
on objects undergoing deformation: stress and strain.
Stress
Stress is a quantity that describes the magnitude of forces that cause de-
formation. If the magnitude of deforming force is F and it acts on area A,
stress is generally defined as force per unit area.
68
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Key Concept
JET Stress is a quan-
Stress
tity that is pro-
Stress = Arce = Area A
(3.3)
portional to the
The SI unit of stress is N/m².
force causing de-
formation; more
When forces pull on an object and cause its elongation, like the stretching
specifically, stress
of an elastic band, you call such stress a tensile stress. When forces cause
is the external
a compression of an object, you call it a compressive stress. When an
force acting on
object is being squeezed from all sides, like a submarine in the depths of
an object per unit
cross-sectional
an ocean, you call this kind of stress a bulk stress (or volume stress). In
area.
other situations, the acting forces may be neither tensile nor compressive,
and still produce a noticeable deformation. For example, suppose you
hold a book tightly between the palms of your hands, then with one hand
you press and-pull on the front cover away from you, while with the other
Exercise 3.3
hand you press-and-pull on the back cover toward you. In such a case, the
What is meant
deforming forces act tangentially to the object's surface and you call them
by tensile stress
'shear' forces and the stress they cause is called shear stress.
and compressive
stress?
Strain
An object or medium under stress becomes deformed. The quantity that
Key Concept
describes this deformation is called strain. Strain is given as a fractional
change in either length (under tensile stress) or volume (under bulk stress)
It Strain is a
or geometry (under shear stress).
dimensionless
quantity that
gives the amount
Therefore, strain is a dimensionless number. Strain under a tensile stress
of deformation
is called tensile strain, strain under bulk stress is called bulk strain (or
of an object or
volume strain), and that caused by shear stress is called shear strain. Their
medium under
equations are given as follows.
stress.
3.3 Stress and Strain
69
Tensile/Linear strain: If on application of a longitudinal deforming
F
force, the length L₀ of a body changes by L as in Figure 3.5, then
F
L
A
L
Tensile (or compressive) strain =
(3.4)
L₀
L
Volumetric strain: If on application of the deforming force, the
Lo
L₀
volume V₀ of the body changes by V without change of shape of
the body as in Figure 3.6, then
V
Volumetric strain =
(3.5)
V₀
F
F
Shearing strain: When the deforming forces are tangential, the
(a)
(b)
shearing strain is given by the angle through which a line perpendic-
Figure 3.5 An object under (a)
ular to the fixed plane is turned due to deformation. This is shown
tensile stress (b) compressive
stress.
in Figure 3.7. Then, you can write
F
A
Volume V₀
51%
Volume
Shearing strain =
(3.6)
L₀
F
V₀ V
In 1678, Robert Hooke obtained the stress-strain curve experimentally for
F
F
a number of solid substances and established a law of elasticity known as
F
Hooke's law. According to this law, within elastic limit, stress is directly
proportional to corresponding strain.
F
Stress α Strain
Figure 3.6 An object under
volume strain.
Stress = k X Strain
(3.7)
Ax
A
F
This constant of proportionality K is a measure of elasticity of the sub-
stance and is called modulus of elasticity. As strain is a dimensionless
Lo
quantity, the modulus of elasticity has the same dimensions (or units) as
stress. Its value is independent of the stress and strain but depends on the
F
nature of the material.
Figure 3.7 An object under
You can also see from the above equation that when an object is charac-
shear stress.
terized by a large value of elastic modulus, the effect of stress is small. On
70
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
the other hand, a small elastic modulus means that stress produces large
strain and noticeable deformation. For example, a stress on a rubber band
produces larger strain (deformation) than the same stress on a steel band
of the same dimensions because the elastic modulus for rubber is two
orders of magnitude smaller than the elastic modulus for steel. The elastic
modulus for tensile stress is called the Young modulus; that for the bulk
stress is called the bulk modulus; and that for shear stress is called the
shear modulus.
Example 3.3
Find the tensile stress when a force of 9.8 N acts over a cross-sectional area
of 2 X 10⁻³ m².
Solution:
You are given with F = 9.8 N and A = 2 X 10⁻³ m².
You want to find the tensile stress.
Substituting the given values into the formula of tensile stress, you obtain:
Tensile stress = F A = 2 X 9.8N 10⁻³
= 4.9 X 10³ N1m²
Example 3.4
When a weight of 98 N is suspended from wire of length 3 m and diameter
0.4 mm, its length increases by 2.4 cm. Calculate tensile stress and tensile
strain.
Solution:
You are given with F = W = 98 N, L₀ = 3 m, D = 2r = 0.4 mm. The area of
the wire can be calculated by
3.3 Stress and Strain
71
L = 2.4 cm = 2.4 X 10² m
You want to find the tensile stress and tensile strain.
The tensile stress is thus obtained by:
Tensile stress = F = A = 98 N = 1.56 X 10⁸ N/m²
On the other hand, the tensile strain can be obtained by:
Tensile strain = = 2.4 X 3m 10⁻² = 0.008
The amount of elongation of the wire due to the suspended load is 0.008.
Section summary
Activity 3.5
The force per unit area acting on an object is the stress, and
What type of
the resulting fractional change in length is the strain.
stress are you ap-
plying when you
Tensile (or compressive) stress causes elongation (or shorten-
press on the ends
ing) of the object and is due to an external forces acting along
of a wooden rod?
only one direction perpendicular to the cross-section.
When you pull on
its ends?
Tensile (or compressive) strain is the response of an object to
tensile (or compressive) stress.
Review questions
1. Review the relationship between stress and strain. Can you
find any similarities between the two quantities?
2. Can compressive stress be applied to a rubber band?
3. A nylon string that has a diameter of 2 mm is pulled by a force
of 100 N. Calculate the tensile stress.
4. A load of 2.0 kg is applied to the ends of a wire 4.0 m long,
72
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
and produces an extension of 0.24 mm. If the diameter of the
wire is 2.0 mm, find the stress on the wire and the strain it
produces.
3.4 The Young Modulus
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define the Young modulus;
Exercise 3.4
apply the formula of the Young modulus to solve problems;
What did you
know about the
demonstrate the tensile strain and stress using the Young modulus
Young modulus of
from local materials.
a material?
In the previous section, you have learnt that there are three kinds of elastic
modulus. The elastic modulus for tensile stress is called the Young modu-
Activity 3.6
lus; that for the bulk stress is called the bulk modulus; and that for shear
stress is called the shear modulus. In this section, you will study about the
Suppose you have
the Young modulus.
a copper wire
and you stretch
it and there is an
The Young modulus is the elastic modulus when deformation is caused by
increase in its
either tensile or compressive stress. Experimental observation show that
length. On remov-
for a given material, the magnitude of the strain produced is same whether
ing the stretching
the stress is tensile or compressive. The ratio of tensile (or compressive)
force, the wire
stress to the longitudinal strain is known as the the Young modulus of the
does not regain
material; it is denoted by the symbol Y.
its original length.
Tensile stress
Can you calcu-
Young modulus(Y) =
Tensile strain
late the Young
modulus in this
Since strain is a dimensionless quantity, the unit of the Young modulus is
situation?
the same as that of stress i.e., Nm² or Pascal (Pa).
The relation between the tensile stress and the tensile strain is linear when
3.4 The Young Modulus
73
Stress (N/m²)
F1
4x109
A
Breaking
3x109
Elastic
point
limit
L₀
Lo + LL
2x109
Elastic
1x109
behavior
2x10⁻³
4x10-3
6x10-3
8x10⁻³
Strain
F1
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8 (a). A rod of length L₀ can be stretched by an amount L after appli-
cation of a tensile stress F₁. (b) The stress versus strain diagram for a ductile
material.
the rod is in its elastic range.
Consider a metallic rod of original length L₀ and cross sectional area A.
When an external force F₁ is applied perpendicularly to the cross sectional
area A of a rod, its length increases to a new length L₀ + L as shown in the
Key Concept
Figure 3.8 (a). The Young modulus is thus
The Young
Y (A) =
(FA)
modulus is a
(3.8)
( AL )
property of the
material that tells
If the wire of radius r is suspended vertically with a rigid support and a
us how easily it
mass m hangs at its lower end, then A = π X r² and F = mg.
can stretch and
deform and is de-
Y
(3.9)
fined as the ratio
of tensile stress to
Figure 3.8 (b) shows a typical stress-strain curve for a ductile metal under a
tensile strain.
load, the relation between the tensile stress and the tensile strain is linear
74
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
when the rod is in its elastic range (elastic behavior). When the stress
exceeds its elastic limit, the rod is permanently deformed and it does not
return to its original shape after the stress is removed. As the stress is
increased even further, the rod reaches its breaking point.
Table 3.2 below shows the Young modulus of different substances.
Table 3.2 The Young modulus of different substance in N/m²
Substance
Young modulus (N/m²)
Tungsten
35 X 10¹⁰
Steel
20 X 10¹⁰
Copper
11 X 10¹⁰
Brass
9.1 X 10¹⁰
Aluminum
7.0 X 10¹⁰
Glass
6.5 - 7.8 X 10¹⁰
Quartz
5.6 X 10¹⁰
Water
-
Mercury
-
You can notice that for metals the Young moduli are large. Therefore, these
materials require a large force to produce a small change in their length.
Exercise 3.5
The value of Young modulus is maximum for steel and thus steel is more
A copper wire is
elastic in comparison to other materials mentioned in the table. For the
1.0 m long and
same change in length, steel requires a large amount of force. To increase
its diameter is 1.0
the length of a thin steel wire of 0.1cm² cross-sectional area by 0.1 percent,
mm. If the wire
a force of 2000 I is required. The force required to produce the same strain
hangs vertically,
in Aluminium, brass and copper wires, having the same cross-sectional
how much weight
area, are 690 N, 900 N and 1100 N, respectively. It means that steel is more
must be added
elastic than copper, brass and aluminium. It is for this reason that steel is
to its free end in
preferred in heavy-duty machines and in structural designs. Wood, bone,
order to stretch it
concrete and glass have rather small values for their Young moduli.
3.0 mm?
The Young modulus is relevant only for solids since only solids can have
well defined lengths and shapes.
3.4 The Young Modulus
75
Example 3.5
A 1.60 m long steel piano wire has a diameter of 0.20 cT. How great is the
tension in the wire if it stretches 0.25 cm when tightened?
Solution:
In this example, you are given with L₀ = 1.6 m, Y = 2 X 10¹¹ N/m² and D =
0.2 X 10⁻².
The required quantity is the tension or force on the wire.
From the formula of Young modulus, you can derive the expression for F
as
where
A = πr² = (3.14)(0.0010 m)² = 3.14 10⁻⁶ m²
Thus,
F =
F = 980 N
The large tension in all the wires in a piano must be supported by a strong
frame.
Example 3.6
A pendulum consists of a big sphere of mass m = 30 kg hung from the end
of a steel wire that has a length of 15 m, a cross-sectional area of 9 X 10⁻⁶ m²,
and the Young modulus of 200 X 10⁹ N/m². Find the tensile stress on the
Do you know?
wire and the increase in its length.
Thomas Young
(1773 - 1829, English) was English
physician and physicist who described
Solution:
the elastic properties of a solid undergo-
You are given with m = 30 kg, L₀ = 15 m, A = 9 X 10⁻⁶ m², and Y =
ing tension or compression in only one
200 X 10⁹ N/m².
direction.
You need to find the tensile stress and L.
76
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
The tensile stress can be calculated by
stress F
Substitution gives
Tensile stress = 30 X 9.8 = 3.27 X 10⁷ N1m²
9 X 10⁻⁶
In the above equation, the applied force on a wire must be equal to the
weight of the sphere, i.e., F = mg.
On the other hand, from the expression of the Young modulus, Y (A)
you can derive the expression for L as
L Y A
Substitution gives
L 1
:. AL= 2.45 mm
Note that this large stress produces a relatively small change in length.
Section summary
The relation between the tensile stress and the tensile strain
is linear when the rod is in its elastic range.
The ratio of the tensile stress and the tensile strain is called
the Young Modulus.
The Young Modulus measures the resistance of a solid to a
change in its length.
3.5 Static equilibrium
77
Review questions
1. In the Young experiment, if the length of the wire and the
radius are both doubled, what will happen to the value of the
Young modulus?
2. A wire increases by 10⁻³ of its length when a stress of 1 X
10⁸ Nm⁻² is applied to it. Calculate the Young modulus of
material of the wire.
3. A wire is stretched by 0.01 m by a certain force F. Another wire
of same material whose diameter and length are double to the
original wire is stretched by the same force. What will be its
elongation?
4. A 200 kg load is hung on a wire having a length of 4.0 T,
cross-sectional area 0.20 X 10⁻⁵ m², and the Young modulus
8.00 X 10¹⁰ N/m². What is its increase in length?
3.5 Static equilibrium
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define static equilibrium of rigid body;
state the first and second conditions of equilibrium;
apply the first and second conditions for equilibrium to solve prob-
lems.
Exercise 3.6
List examples of
A massive frame hung on a wall using two cables is in static equilibrium.
bodies that are
A horizontal beam supported by a strut is also in static equilibrium. So,
in static equilib-
what is the definition of static equilibrium, and when do objects fall under
rium from your
this category?
surroundings.
Static equilibrium occurs when an object or a system remains at rest and
78
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Exercise 3.7
When is a sys-
does not tilt nor rotate. The word "static" means that the body is not in
tem or an object
motion, while the term "equilibrium" indicates that all opposing forces
considered to be
are balanced. Thus, a system is in static equilibrium if it is at rest and all
in static equilib-
forces and other factors influencing the object are balanced.
rium?
Two conditions need to be satisfied for a system to be in static equilibrium:
the first condition of equilibrium and the second condition of equilibrium.
Firstly, the net force acting upon the object must be zero. Secondly, the
net torque acting upon the object must also be zero. In other words, both
Key Concept
static translational and static rotational equilibrium conditions must be
satisfied. You will now look at each of the two conditions one by one.
It
Static equi-
librium is a type
of equilibrium
3.5.1 First condition of equilibrium
that occurs when
The first condition of equilibrium states that for an object to remain in
a body is at rest
equilibrium, the net force acting upon it in all directions must be zero.
and there is no
Simply put, the above statement means that the body must not be experi-
net force or net
encing acceleration. Remember that Newton's second law states that an
torque acting on
object will not accelerate if the sum of all the forces acting on it is equal
it.
to zero. In the form of an equation, the first condition of equilibrium is
denoted as follows:
Key Concept
(3.10)
JET The first con-
Since force is a vector, both the magnitude and the direction of its com-
dition of equilib-
ponents should also be considered. For example, a negative sign should
rium states that
be used if an object moves in the opposite direction. Therefore, for static
the sum of the
equilibrium to be reached, the condition of static equilibrium should be
forces acting on a
body must add up
fulfilled such that the component of the forces in all dimensions should
to zero.
be equal to zero. Thus,
For one dimensional forces applied on an object (for instance, if the
forces are along the x-axis), the first condition of equilibrium is given
by:
Fx=0
3.5 Static equilibrium
79
For two dimensional forces applied on an object, the first condition
of equilibrium is given by:
Fₙₑₜ = 0, so that and ΣFγ=0
(3.11)
The above condition is true for both static equilibrium, where the object's
velocity is zero, and dynamic equilibrium, where the object moves at a
constant velocity.
3.5.2 Second condition of equilibrium
If the body does not achieve equilibrium even though the first condition
Key Concept
for equilibrium is satisfied, it is because it tends to rotate. This situation de-
The second
mands another condition in addition to the first condition for equilibrium.
condition neces-
A body satisfies the second condition for equilibrium when the resultant
sary to achieve
torque acting on it is zero.
equilibrium is
that the net exter-
Torque is the twisting force or the amount of force that causes an object to
nal torque on a
rotate when it is applied to a certain distance from the axis of rotation. The
system must be
axis of rotation or pivot point can be arbitrarily assigned, which means
zero.
that any axis can be used to calculate torque as long as proper conventions
are used. A door, for example, experiences torque when a force is applied
to a certain distance from the hinge. It is influenced by two factors: the
force applied and the location of the force relative to the pivot point. The
magnitude of torque is thus given by the equation:
τ = Frsin Θ
Θ
where T is the symbol for torque in Nm, È is the magnitude of the force in
F
N and r the distance from the pivot point to the point where the force is
Figure 3.9 A force applied on
applied in m and Θ is the angle between the force and the vector directed
one side of a nut at an angle
from the point of application to the pivot point.
makes it to rotate.
If r is perpendicular to F like in Figure 3.10, the magnitude of the torque
80
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
can be obtained by:
T = Fr
F
pivot point
Rotational equilibrium, the second condition for static equilibrium, en-
sures that either there is no torque acting on the body or that the torques
Figure 3.10 A force applied
present are balanced and sum up to zero. Mathematically it is represented
perpendicularly on one side of
as:
a nut makes it to rotate.
(3.12)
It means that the clockwise torque acting on the object is also equal to
the counter clockwise torque. This is rotational equilibrium, which is the
second condition for static equilibrium.
Static Equilibrium Examples
Static equilibrium can be commonly observed in everyday life. Objects
at rest are considered systems in static equilibrium, where both net force
and net torque are zero. The following are examples that are used to
demonstrate objects in static equilibrium.
1. A book placed on top of a table
A book placed on top of a table is considered to be in static equilibrium.
N
A free-body diagram, or a diagram showing all the forces acting on the
object, can be used to check whether or not the object satisfies the two
conditions of equilibrium.
As shown in Figure 3.11, the only forces acting on the book are gravity and
mg
normal force. Gravity acts downward, while normal force acts upward,
perpendicular to the surface. Since the book is at rest, these two forces are
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. Thus, the net force acting
Figure 3.11 A book at rest on
the top of a table.
on the book is zero. Taking a pivot at any point, you will get the vector sum
of the torque due to these forces to be zero satisfying both the first and
second conditions of static equilibrium.
3.5 Static equilibrium
81
2. A seesaw balanced by two children
A seesaw (shown in Figure 3.12) balanced by two children sitting on oppo-
site sides is considered to be in static equilibrium. Consider a 6 m seesaw
with negligible mass and a pivot point exactly at its center. If the girl has a
mass of 30 kg and sits 2.5 m away from the pivot point, 25 kg boy has to
sit 3.0 m away from the pivot point of the seesaw for a seesaw to become
Girl
Boy
in static equilibrium. Thus, to determine whether the seesaw is in static
equilibrium or not, the two conditions for equilibrium should be satisfied.
Point P
Figure 3.12 A balanced seesaw
Activity 3.7
in static equilibrium.
A uniform meter stick supported at the 25 cm mark is in equilibrium
when a 1 kg rock is suspended at the 0 cm end as shown in the Figure
below. Is the mass of the meter stick greater than, equal to, or less
than the mass of the rock? Explain your reasoning.
25
50
The following general procedure is recommended for solv-
ing problems that involve objects in equilibrium.
1. Choose one object at a time for consideration. Make a careful free-
body diagram by showing all the forces acting on that object, includ-
ing gravity and the points at which these forces act. If you aren't sure
of the direction of a force, choose a direction; if the actual direction
of the force (or component of a force) is opposite, your eventual
calculation will give a result with a minus sign.
2. Choose a convenient coordinate system, and resolve the forces into
82
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
their components using:
Fₓ=FcosΘ
(3.13)
Fy=FsinΘ
(3.14)
where Θ is given in an anticlockwise direction from the positive X-
axis.
3. Using letters to represent unknowns, write down the equilibrium
equations for the forces: and assuming all the forces act in a plane.
Fx=0
(3.15)
Fy=0
(3.16)
4. For the torque equation,
Στ=0
(3.17)
Choose any axis perpendicular to the xy-plane that might make the
calculation easier. (For example, you can reduce the number of
unknowns in the resulting equation by choosing the axis so that one
of the unknown forces acts through that axis; then this force will
have zero lever arm and produce zero torque, and so won't appear
in the torque equation.) Pay careful attention to determining the
lever arm for each force correctly. Give each torque a + or - sign to
indicate torque direction. For example, if torques tending to rotate
the object counterclockwise are positive, then those tending to rotate
it clockwise are negative.
5. Solve these equations for the unknowns. Three equations allow a
maximum of three unknowns to be solved for. They can be forces,
distances, or even angles.
3.5 Static equilibrium
83
Example 3.7
An object shown in Figure below is in static equilibrium. The horizontal
cord has a force of 30 N. Find the force F of the cord and weight Fw of the
object.
30°
F
Fₕ=30 N
P
Weight (Fw)
Solution:
You are given Fw = Fx = 30 N.
What you want to find is F and Fw.
a) Drawing free body diagram: all forces acting on the given mass are
indicated on the free body diagram shown in the Figure below.
y
F
Fy = F sin 30°
30°
Fₕ = 30 N
X
Fx = F cos 30°
Fw
b) Resolving vectors in to their components: the only force that have
components is F. Hence,
Fx = F cos 30⁰ = 0.86F
84
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
and
Fy = F sin 30⁰ = 0.5F
c) By applying the first condition of equilibrium,
Σ Fₓ = 0 yields 30 N - F cos 30° = 0
0.86 F = 30 N
F = 30 0.86 N = 34.9 N
ΣFy = 0 yields F sin 30° - Fw = 0
0.5 F = Fw
Substituting the value of F into the above expression gives
Fw = 0.5 X 34.9 N = 17.5 N
Example 3.8
A uniform board of mass 'M' serves as a seesaw for two children as shown in
Figure below. Child A has a mass of 30 kg and sits 2.5 m from the pivot point,
P. At what distance x from the pivot must child B, of mass 25 kg, place herself
mA = 30 kg
ᵐв = 25 kg
y
A
B
2.5 m
x
+ Torque
- Torque
P
to balance the seesaw?
Solution:
You are given mA = 30 kg, mB = 25 kg, and XA = 2.5 m.
The required quantity is the value of XB = x.
You can easily solve this problem using the above stated steps.
(a) Draw free body diagram. The forces acting on the board are the
forces exerted downward on it by each child, and the upward force
3.5 Static equilibrium
85
exerted by the pivot and the force of gravity on the board which acts
at the center of the uniform board. This is indicated in the Figure
shown below.
FN
2.5 m
x
P
FA=mAg
FB=mBg =
(b) Coordinate system. You choose y to be vertical, with positive upward,
and x horizontal to the right, with origin at the pivot.
(c) Force equation. All the forces are in the y-(vertical) direction. So,
ΣFₓ=0
ΣFᵥ=0
(d) Torque equation. Let us calculate the torque about an axis through
the board at the pivot point, P. Then, the lever arms for the weight of
the board are zero, and they will contribute zero torque about point
P. Thus, the torque equation will involve only the forces FA and FB
which are equal to the weights of the children. The torque exerted
by each child will be mg times the appropriate lever arm, which is
the distance of each child from the pivot point. FA tends to rotate
the board counterclockwise (+) and FB clockwise (-) so the torque
equation is
Σ=0
mA (2.5 m) - mB g (x) = 0
(e) Solve. You solve the torque equation for x and find
x
Thus, to balance the seesaw, child B must sit 3.0 m from the pivot
point.
86
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Section summary
Static equilibrium occurs when an object or a system remains
at rest and does not tilt nor rotate.
Two conditions need to be satisfied before a system is in static
equilibrium: the first and second conditions of equilibrium.
In the first condition of equilibrium, all external forces acting
on the body balance out and their vector sum is zero.
In second condition of equilibrium, the sum of all the torques
(calculated about any arbitrary axis) must also be zero.
Torque is the product of the distance from the support or pivot
(r) and the component of force perpendicular to the object.
Review questions
1. What does static equilibrium mean?
2. What conditions are necessary for static equilibrium?
3. Mention some examples of a rigid body that is in static equi-
librium in your surroundings.
4. Four beams of the same length each have three
forces acting on them. Which beam has both zero
resultant force and zero resultant torque acting?
30N
50N
36N
70N
A)
C)
50 cm
30 cm
50 cm
30 cm
90N
106N
28N
35N
42N
70N
B)
D)
50 cm
30 cm
50 cm
30 cm
63N
112N
3.5 Static equilibrium
87
5. The two children shown in the Figure below are balanced on
a seesaw of negligible mass. The first child has a mass of 26.0
kg and sits 1.60 m from the pivot.
(a) If the second child has a mass of 32.0 kg, how far is he from
the pivot?
(b) What is Fₚ, the supporting force exerted by the pivot?
m₂=32.0kg
m₁=26.0kg
Fₚ
"2
"1
(1.60 m)
W₂
W₁
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on elasticity and static equilibrium of a
rigid body unit under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Density PhET Experiment.
2. Balancing Act PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
Solids tend to regain their original shape and size once exter-
nal deforming force is removed.
The property of solids by virtue of which they regain their
original shape and size even when the deforming forces are
removed is called elasticity.
The property of solids by virtue of which they do not regain
88
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
their original shape and size, even when the deforming forces
are removed, is called plasticity.
Beyond a limit, called elastic limit, the solid does not regain
its original shape and size.
Stress is a quantity that is proportional to the force causing
a deformation; more specifically, stress is the external force
acting on an object per unit cross-sectional area. The result of
a stress is strain, which is a measure of the degree of deforma-
tion.
Hooke's law states that within the elastic limit, the stress de-
veloped in a body is directly proportional to the strain.
The Young modulus (Y) = Tensile stress /Tensile strain.
A body is in equilibrium when it remains either in uniform
motion or at rest.
Conditions for equilibrium require that the sum of all external
forces acting on the body is zero (first condition of equilib-
rium), and the sum of all external torques from external forces
is zero (second condition of equilibrium).
End of unit questions and problems
1. Define the term elasticity. Give examples of elastic and plastic
objects.
2. You have a rock with a volume of 15 cm³ and a mass of 45 g.
What is its density?
3. A bar measures 12 mm X 20 mm x 1 m. It has a specific gravity
of 2.78. Determine its mass.
4. A golden-colored cube is handed to you. The person wants
you to buy it for 5000 birr, saying that is a gold nugget. From
3.5 Static equilibrium
89
a book you read that the density of gold is 19.3g/cm³. You
measure the cube and find that it is 2 cm on each side, and
weighs 40 g. What is its density? Is it gold? Should you buy it?
5. Explain the terms stress, strain and Hooke's Law.
6. A wire is stretched 3 mm by a force of 150 N. Assuming the elas-
tic limit is not exceeded, calculate the force that will stretch
the wire 5 mm.
7. A circular rod of cross-sectional area 100mm² has a tensile
force of 100 kN applied to it. Calculate the value for the stress
in the rod.
8. A steel wire of length 6 m and diameter 0.6 mm is extended by
a force of 60 N. The wire extends by 3 mm. Calculate:
a) the applied stress.
b) the strain on the wire.
c) the Young Modulus of the steel.
9. A wire increases by 10⁻³ of its length when a stress of
1x10⁸ Nm⁻² is applied to it. Calculate the Young modulus
of the wire.
10. Two wires are made of the same metal. The length of the first
wire is half that of the second and its diameter is double that
of the second wire. If equal loads are applied on both wires,
find the ratio of the increase in their lengths?
11. Find the tension in the two cords shown in the Figure below.
Neglect the mass of the cords, and assume that the angle is
33 0 and the mass m is 190 kg.
90
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Θ
m
12. A beam pivoted at one end has a force of 5.0 N acting vertically
upwards on it as shown in the Figure below. What is the weight
of the beam?
5.0 N
2.0 cm
3.0 cm
Pivot
Weight of the beam
13. A force of 20 N at angle of 30 0 to the horizontal and a force
F₂ at an angle of 60 o to the horizontal are applied on an
object as shown in the Figure below so as to make the object
in equilibrium. Calculate the magnitude of the force F₂ and
weight of the object.
60°
30°
F2
F1 = 20 N
W
