Unit 2
Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Introduction
In your grade 9 Physics, you have learnt that uniform motion occurs when
Brain storm-
an object moves at a steady speed in a straight line. Most moving objects,
ing question
however, do not display uniform motion. Any change in an object's speed
In your everyday
or direction or both causes the motion of an object to become non uni-
life, you come
form. This non uniform motion, or changing velocity, is called accelerated
across a range of
motion. A car ride in a city at rush hour during which the car must speed
constant accel-
up, slow down, and turn corners is an obvious example of accelerated
eration motions.
motion. In this unit, you will learn about uniformly accelerated motion.
Can you give two
examples for such
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
type of motion?
know terms that are used to describe uniformly accelerated motion;
understand the different types of motions used to describe physical
phenomena;
know the equation of motions that describe the motion of an object
under uniform acceleration;
solve motion problems using uniformly accelerated formulas;
understand relative velocity in one dimension.
21
22
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2.1 Position and Displacement
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define terms such as position, displacement, and distance;
determine the distance and displacement traveled by an object;
describe the difference between distance and displacement.
Position
Exercise 2.1
To describe the motion of an object, you must first be able to describe its
Can two objects
position, or where it is at any particular time. The word position describes
be at the same
your location (where you are). However, saying that you are here is mean-
distance from a
ingless, and you have to specify your position relative to a known reference
single point while
point. So, you need to specify its position relative to a convenient frame of
being in different
reference. A frame of reference is an arbitrary set of axes from which the
positions? Why or
position and motion of an object are described.
why not?
To visualize position for objects moving in a straight line, you can imagine
the object is on a number line. The object may be placed at any point on
the number line in the positive numbers or the negative numbers. It is
common to choose the original position of the object to be on the zero
Key Concept
mark as shown in Figure 2.1. In making the zero mark the reference point,
The location
you have chosen a frame of reference. The exact position of an object is
of an object in a
the separation between the object and the reference point.
frame of reference
is called position.
Position is thus the location of an object with reference to an origin. It can
be negative or positive. It has units of length: centimeter (cm), meter (m)
or kilometer (km). For example, depending on that reference point you
choose, you can say that the new constructed school is 300 m from Kemal's
house (with Kemal's house as the reference point or origin).
2.1 Position and Displacement
23
Displacement
From your grade 9 Physics, you know that distance is the total length of the
Finish
path taken in going from the initial position to the final position. Distance
Distance
is a scalar. But the difference between the initial and final position vectors
of a body is called its displacement. Basically, displacement is the shortest
distance between the two positions and has a certain direction. Thus,
displacement is a vector quantity. In Figure 2.1, distance is the length of
Department
the dashed line, while displacement is the straight-line distance from the
starting point to the endpoint.
Start
Activity 2.1
Figure 2.1 The possible dis-
On a piece of graph paper, draw a scale map of your home and
tance and displacement of an
school area. Determine your displacement and estimate the dis-
object in motion between two
points.
tance you travel:
a) from home to school.
b) from school to home.
If the initial position (s₀) from which an object moves to a second position
(s) in a particular frame of reference, then the displacement s can be
written as:
Exercise 2.2
= s - S₀
(2.1)
What is the dif-
In order to answer exercise 2.2, consider the motion of an object moving
ference between
along a straight path. The object starts its journey from O which is treated
distance and
as its reference point as shown in Figure 2.2. Let A, B, and C represent the
displacement?
position of the object at different instants.
o
C
B
A
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
km
Figure 2.2 Positions of an object on a straight line path.
24
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Exercise 2.3
For motion of the object from O to A, the distance covered is 60 km and
Can the mag-
the magnitude of displacement is also 60 km. During its motion from O to
nitude of the
A and back to B, the distance covered = 60 km + 25 km = 85 km while the
displacement of
magnitude of displacement = 60 km - 25 km = 35 km. Thus, the magnitude
an object from its
of displacement (35 km) is not equal to the path length (85 km). Further,
original position
you will notice that the magnitude of the displacement for a course of
ever exceed the
motion may be zero, but the corresponding distance covered is not zero.
total distance
If you consider the object to travel back to O, the final position coincides
moved? Explain.
with the initial position, and therefore, the displacement is zero. However,
the distance covered in this journey is OA + AO = 60 km + 60 km = 120 km.
Thus, the two different physical quantities (distance and displacement),
are used to describe the overall motion of an object and to locate its final
position with reference to its initial position at a given time.
yn
Example 2.1
70 m
A person walks 70 m East, and then 30 m West. Find the displacement.
40 m
30 m
Displacement
Solution:
The displacement of a person walking 70 m to the East and then turning
Figure 2.3 A person walking 70
around and walking back (West) a distance of 30 m as shown in Figure 2.3
m East and then 30 m West.
is: s = s - S₀ = 70 m - 30 m as both vectors are in an opposite direction
with one another. Thus,
Key Concepts
A = 40 m East
JET Distance is
the actual path
The displacement is only 40 m since the person is now only 40 m from the
that is travelled
starting point but the total distance traveled is 70 m + 30 m = 100 m.
by a moving
body, where as
displacement
is the change in
position (final
position minus
initial position).
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
25
Section summary
A description of motion depends on the reference frame from
which it is described.
Position is the location of an object compared to a reference
Activity 2.2
frame (point).
Walk from one
The distance an object moves is the length of the path along
corner of your
which it moves.
classroom to its
opposite corner
Displacement is the difference between the initial and final
along its sides.
positions of an object.
Measure the dis-
tance covered
Review questions
by you and mag-
nitude of the
1. Explain the difference between position and displacement.
displacement.
2. Give an example that clearly shows the difference among dis-
What difference
tance traveled, displacement, and magnitude of displacement.
would you notice
between the two
Identify each quantity in your example.
in this case?
3. A body travels a distance of 15 m from A to B and then moves
a distance of 20 m at right angles to AB. Calculate the total
distance traveled and the displacement.
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
Exercise 2.4
Can the average
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
speed ever equal
define instantaneous and average velocity of a body in motion;
the magnitude
of the average
describe the difference between average velocity and instantaneous
velocity? If "no,"
velocity;
why not? If "yes,"
solve problems related to the average velocity.
give an example.
26
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Average velocity
In grade 9, you learnt that the rate of change of distance with time is called
speed, while the rate of change of displacement is known as velocity. Un-
like speed, velocity is a vector quantity.
Key Concept
When an object travels a certain distance with different velocities, its
motion is specified by its average velocity. The average velocity of a body
Velocity is the
is defined as the body's displacement (s) divided by the time interval
physical quantity
(t) during which that displacement occurs. Let S₀ and S be its positions
that describes
how a moving
at instants t₀ and t, respectively. You can express average velocity (vₐv)
object's displace-
mathematically as:
ment changes.
(2.2)
Exercise 2.5
where t - t₀ is change in time, and t₀ is the starting time which is com-
Does the
monly zero.
speedometer
of a car measure
speed or velocity?
The SI unit for average velocity is meters per second (m/s or m s⁻¹). But
there are also many other units, such as kilometer per hour (km/h), miles
per hour (mi/h (also written as mph)) and centimeter per second (cm/s) in
Exercise 2.6
common use.
jer
Describe how
the instantaneos
The average speed of an object is obtained by dividing the total distance
velocity differs
traveled by the total time taken:
from the averag
velocity?
Vav total total distance time taken travelled
(2.3)
jer
In which sit-
uation will the
If the motion is in the same direction along a straight line, the average
instantaneous
speed is the same as the magnitude of the average velocity. However, this
velocity and av-
is always not the case.
erage velocity of
an object be the
same?
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
27
Instantaneous velocity
Suppose the magnitude of your car's average velocity for a long trip was 20
m/s. This value, being an average, does not convey any information about
Key Concept
how fast you were moving or the direction of the motion at any instant
Instantaneous
during the trip. Both can change from one instant to another. Surely, there
velocity is the ve-
were times when your car traveled faster than 20 m/s and times when it
locity at a specific
traveled more slowly.
instant in time (or
over an infinitesi-
The instantaneous velocity of the car indicates how fast the car moves and
mally small time
the direction of the motion at each instant of time. Thus, it is the rate of
interval).
change in displacement as change in time approaches zero. Mathemati-
cally, the instantaneous velocity (v) of a body is given by
v-st-so S₀ when t - to approaches 0
(2.4)
The magnitude of the instantaneous velocity of a moving car is the reading
of the speedometer.
Road traffic accidents are among the main causes of mortality in Ethiopia.
Speed is still the most common factor in fatal road accidents, accounting
Figure 2.4 A fatal car accident.
for more than half of all road deaths each year. Figure 2.4 shows one of
the fatal car crash where at least 5 people were died and 17 others injured
Exercise 2.7
after a minibus collided with a parked car somewhere in Ethiopia. It may
jer
Can you imag-
not seem like much, but driving even a few kilometers per hour above
ine the things that
the speed limit greatly increases the risk of an accident. Speed limits are
would happen if
used to set the legal maximum or minimum speed at which road vehicles
a driver does not
may travel on a given stretch of road. They are generally indicated on a
obey the speed
traffic sign reflecting the maximum or minimum speed permitted that is
limits set and
expressed usually in kilometers per hour (km/h). Speed limits are being
are moving in
started to be monitored by traffic officers in the various streets and roads
uniformly acceler-
of our country. Speed limits are used to regulate the speed of vehicles in
ated motion?
certain places and it also controls the flow of traffic. It is also observed to
minimize accidents from happening.
28
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Example 2.2
It takes you 10 minutes to walk with an average velocity of 1.2 m/s to the
North from the bus stop to the museum entrance. What is your displace-
ment?
Solution:
You are given with st = 10 minutes = 600 s and Vₐv = 1.2 m/s, s North.
You want to find s.
Since
di=vmxAr=12=x600s=720m,No th
This means the displacement has a magnitude of 720 m and a direction to
the North.
Example 2.3
A passenger in a bus took 8 s to move 4 m to a seat on provided place
forward. What is his average velocity?
Solution:
You are given = 4 m and t=8s.
What you want to find is Vₐᵥ.
The average velocity is thus
Example 2.4
A car travels at a constant speed of 50 km/h for 100 km. It then speeds up
to 100 km/h and is driven another 100 km. What is the car's average speed
for the 200 km trip?
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
29
Solution:
You are given S₁ = 100 km, v₁ = 50 km/h, S₂ = 100 km, v₂ = 100 km/h.
In order to find the average speed, you first need to find the total distance
traveled and total time taken.
Thus, the total distance traveled is 100 km + 100 km = 200 km. The total
time taken is t₁ + t₂ where
h
The car's average speed is thus
Exercise 2.8
Vav total total distance time taken travelled 200 km
Cheetahs, the
world's fastest
land animals, can
Note: Averaging the two speeds ( 50 km/l + 100 ) gives you a wrong
2
run up to about
answer which is 75 km/h. The average speed of an object is obtained by
125 km/h. A chee-
dividing the total distance traveled by the total time taken.
tah chasing an
impala runs 32 m
Section summary
north, then sud-
denly turns and
Average velocity is change in displacement divided by time
runs 46 m west
taken.
before lunging at
the impala. The
Instantaneous velocity is the velocity of an accelerating body
entire motion
at a specific instant in time.
takes only 2.7 S.
The magnitude of instantaneous velocity is its instantaneous
(a) Determine the
speed.
cheetah's average
speed for this
Review questions
motion.
(b) Determine the
1. How do you find the average velocity of an object in motion
cheetah's average
between two points?
velocity.
30
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2. Explain the difference between average speed and average
velocity?
3. There is a distinction between average speed and the magni-
tude of average velocity. Give an example that illustrates the
difference between these two quantities.
4. If an object has the instantaneous velocity of 20 m/s to East,
what is its instantaneous speed?
5. A car moves with an average velocity of 48.0 km/h to the East.
How long will it take him to drive 144 km on a straight high-
way?
6. An athlete runs 12 km to the North, then turns and runs 16
km to the East in three hours.
a) What is his/her displacement?
b) Calculate his/her average velocity.
c) Calculate average speed.
Exercise 2.9
1) If a body has
constant velocity
2.3 Acceleration
on straight level
surface, what is
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
the magnitude of
explain acceleration in one dimension;
its acceleration?
distinguish between instantaneous acceleration and average accel-
2) Does the di-
rection of ac-
eration;
celeration be in
calculate the average acceleration.
the direction of
velocity itself?
While traveling in a bus or a car, you might have noticed that sometimes its
speed increases and sometimes it slows down. That is, its velocity changes
with time. The quantity that describes the rate of change of velocity in a
given time interval is called acceleration. Any change in velocity whether
positive, negative, directional, or any combination of these is acceleration.
2.3 Acceleration
31
In everyday conversation, to accelerate means to speed up. Thus, the
greater the acceleration is, the greater the change in velocity over a given
time is.
Average acceleration
When you watch the first few seconds of a liftoff, a rocket barely seems to
move. With each passing second, however, you can see it move faster until
it reaches an enormous speed. How could you describe the change in the
rocket's motion? When an object changes its motion, it is accelerating.
The magnitude of the average acceleration is defined by the change in an
object's velocity divided by the time interval in which the change occurs.
That is,
Change in velocity
Average acceleration =
time taken
à
(2.5)
where v₀ is the initial velocity of an object and v is the final velocity of an
object at instants t₀ and t, respectively. In this equation, t - t₀ is the length
of time over which the motion changes. In SI units, acceleration has units
of meters per second squared (m/s²).
The direction of average acceleration is the direction of change in velocity.
Key Concept
If an object speeds up, the acceleration is in the direction that the object is
Acceleration
moving. You get on a bicycle and begin to pedal. The bike moves slowly at
occurs whenever
first, and then accelerates because its speed increases. When the speed
an object speeds
of an object increases, it is said to be accelerating. On the other hand, if
up, slows down, or
an object slows down, the acceleration is opposite to the direction that
changes direction.
the object is moving. This is commonly referred to as deceleration. In
Figure 2.5, a light train in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, decelerates as it comes
into a station. Thus, the train is accelerating in a direction opposite to its
direction of motion.
32
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Figure 2.5 A decelerating light train.
When you speed up, your final speed will always be greater than your
initial speed. So subtracting your initial speed from your final speed gives
Exercise 2.10
a positive number. As a result, your acceleration is positive when you
jer
What do you
are speeding up. When you slow down, the final speed is less than the
mean by an in-
initial speed. Because your final speed is less than your initial speed, your
stantaneous ac-
acceleration is negative when you slow down.
celeration for an
object in motion?
Instantaneous acceleration
The object moving in a straight line may undergo an increase, or decrease
Key Concept
in acceleration or it may move with a uniform acceleration or zero acceler-
JET
Instantaneous
ation. Thus, in such cases, the average acceleration does not describe the
acceleration is
motion of the object at every instant. The average acceleration only pro-
the average ac-
vides the mean value of the acceleration instead of the actual acceleration
celeration at a
of the object during the motion while the instantaneous acceleration gives
specific instant
the exact acceleration at every instant during the motion.
in time (or over
an infinitesimally
Instantaneous acceleration is a quantity that tells us the rate at which
small time inter-
val).
an object is changing its velocity at a specific instant in time anywhere
2.3 Acceleration
33
along its path. Hence, instantaneous acceleration a, or acceleration at a
specific instant in time, is obtained using the same process discussed for
instantaneous velocity. That is, you calculate the average velocity between
two points in time separated by t and let St approach zero. You see that
average acceleration a = At approaches instantaneous acceleration as St
approaches zero. The instantaneous acceleration is, thus mathematically
expressed as,
Exercise 2.11
For what type
as approaches 0.
(2.6)
of motion does
the average and
For uniformly accelerated motion, the instantaneous acceleration has the
instantaneous
same value as the average acceleration.
acceleration be
the same?
Example 2.5
A car accelerates on a straight road from rest to 75 km/h in 5 S. What is the
magnitude of its average acceleration?
Solution:
You are given with V₀ = 0, v = 75 km/h and t=5s.
You want to find the average acceleration.
Exercise 2.12
Think about
The average acceleration can be calculated by
the greatest ac-
a
celerations you
have experienced.
Where did they
This is read as "fifteen kilometers per hour per second" and means that,
occur? Did they
on average, the velocity changed by 15 km/h during each second. That
involve speeding
is, assuming the acceleration was constant, during the first second, the
up or slowing
car's velocity increased from zero to 15 km/h. During the next second, its
down? What ef-
velocity increased by another 15 km/h, reaching a velocity of 30 km/h at
fects did they
t = 2.0 s, and so on. This result contains two different time units: hours
have on you?
and seconds. You usually prefer to use only seconds. To do so, you can
change km/h to m/s:
34
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
a
5 s - Os
Note that acceleration tells us how quickly the velocity changes, whereas
velocity tells us how quickly the position changes.
Exercise 2.13
jer
Discuss the
Example 2.6
concept of de-
An automobile is moving to the right along a straight highway, which you
celeration and
choose to be the positive x-axis. Then the driver steps on the brakes. If the
negative accelera-
initial velocity (when the driver hits the brakes) is 15 m/s and it takes 5.0 s
tion.
to slow down to 5 m/s, what was the car's average acceleration?
Solution:
In this example, you are given with V₀ = 15 m/s, v=5m/s and t = 5.0 s.
The required quantity is average acceleration.
Average acceleration can thus be calculated using the formula time.
The negative sign appears because the final velocity is less than the initial
velocity. Thus, the direction of the acceleration is to the left (in the negative
x-direction) even though the velocity is always pointing to the right. You can
say that the acceleration is to the left. That is the automobile is decelerating.
But be careful: deceleration does not mean that acceleration is necessarily
negative. There is a deceleration whenever the magnitude of the velocity is
decreasing; thus, the velocity and acceleration point in opposite directions
when there is a deceleration.
2.3 Acceleration
35
Activity 2.3
jer
Estimate your maximum running velocity, and estimate the aver-
age acceleration you undergo from rest to reach that velocity.
jer
Design an experiment to check your estimates in (a). Include the
equations you would use.
jer Get your design approved by your teacher, and then carry it out.
Compare your results with your estimates.
Section summary
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity in a given time
interval.
Acceleration occurs whenever an object speeds up, slows
down, or changes direction.
Instantaneous acceleration is the acceleration of the object at
a specific instant during the motion.
Review questions
1. Describe the similarities and differences between average ac-
celeration and instantaneous acceleration.
2. A car moves along the x- axis. What is the sign of the car's
acceleration if it is moving in the positive X direction with (a)
increasing speed (b) decreasing speed?
3. A race horse coming out of the gate accelerates from rest to
a velocity of 15.0 m/s due west in 1.80 S. What is its average
acceleration?
4. A car is traveling at 14 m/s when the traffic light ahead turns
red. The car decelerates and comes to a stop in 5.0 S. Calculate
the acceleration of the car.
36
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2.4 Equations of motion with constant accelera-
tion
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
derive the equations of motion with constant acceleration;
use appropriate equations of motion to solve motion-related prob-
lems.
Exercise 2.14
If an object travels in a straight line and its velocity increases or decreases
How can you de-
by equal amounts at equal intervals of time, the acceleration of the ob-
rive the equations
ject is said to be uniform. Such type of motion is said to be a uniformly
of a uniformly ac-
accelerated motion. A bicycle that slowly decreases its speed to stop and
celerated motion?
a ball dropped from the top of a ladder are some examples of uniformly
accelerated motions.
When an object moves along a straight line with a uniform acceleration,
it is possible to relate its velocity, acceleration during motion and the
distance covered by it in a certain time interval by a set of equations known
as the equations of motion. If an object's average acceleration during a
time interval is known, the change in velocity during that time can be
calculated. For convenience, you let the starting time tf = t, where t is any
arbitrary time. Also, let v₀ be the initial velocity at time t₀ = 0 and v be the
velocity at any time t. With this notation, you can express
Since acceleration is constant in a uniformly accelerated motion, the aver-
age and instantaneous accelerations are the same. So, you can replace Ăₐᵥ
by à. Moreover, in one-dimensional motion, direction can be indicated
"_" or "+" signs. In this case, you can ignore the vector nature of symbols.
Finally, replacing the vector notations by ordinary symbols, setting t₀ = 0
and rearranging the result gives
v = v₀ + at
(2.7)
2.4 Equations of motion with constant acceleration
37
This linear relationship enables us to find the velocity at any time t. You
can make use of the fact that when the acceleration is constant (i.e., when
the velocity varies linearly with time), the average velocity is given as:
Vav= Vo+v
(2.8)
To find the displacement as a function of time, you first let S₀ be the initial
position at time t₀ = 0 and Sf = s be the position at any time t. If the initial
position is at the origin, S₀ = 0, and hence s = s. So from the expression
of average velocity, you can write s as
s = Vavt
(2.9)
Substituting equation 2.8 into 2.9 gives:
Key Concept
JV Equations of
uniformly accel-
Again substituting v₀ + at in place of v and making rearrangement gives:
erated motions
are used to solve
s
(2.10)
problems in-
volving constant
Sometimes, there are times when the time of motion is unknown. For
acceleration.
such cases, you need to derive an equation that is independent of time as
follows:
s
(2.11)
Rearranging gives:
v² = v₀² + 2as
(2.12)
Example 2.7
A car starts from rest and accelerates uniformly over a time of 5 s for a
distance of 100 m. Determine the acceleration of the car.
Solution:
You are given with v₀ = 0, t = 5 s, and s = 100 m.
38
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
The required quantity is acceleration, a.
From the expression for displacement, i.e.,
s
By making v₀ = 0, you can easily derive and solve for a as
= 2s = 2 x 100 m 25 s² = m/s²
Substitution gives
a = 2 x 100 m 25 s² = 8m/s²
Example 2.8
An airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70 m/s and then decelerates at
1.5 m/s² for 40 S. What is its final velocity?
Solution:
You are given with v₀ = 70 m/s, t = 40 s, and a = 1.5 m/s².
You want to find the final velocity, v.
You can find for the final velocity using the formula
v = v₀ + at = 70 m/s 1.5 X 40 s = 10 m/s
The final velocity is much less than the initial velocity, as desired when
slowing down, but is still positive.
Example 2.9
An automobile starts at rest and speeds up at 3.5 m/s² after the traffic light
turns green. How far did the automobile travel when it was traveling at 25
m/s?
2.4 Equations of motion with constant acceleration
39
Solution:
In this example, you are given with v₀ = 0, v = 25 m/s, and a = 3.5
You are asked to find the displacement, s.
You can find s using the equation
s 2
Free fall
It is well known that, in the absence of air resistance, all objects dropped
near the Earth's surface fall toward the Earth with the same constant accel-
eration under the influence of the Earth's gravity. A freely falling object is
any object moving freely under the influence of gravity alone, regardless
of its initial motion.
Figure 2.6 The freely falling of
An object that is released from rest falls freely once it is released. Any freely
an apple with uniform accelera-
falling object experiences an acceleration directed downward, regardless
tion due to gravity.
of its initial motion.
Activity 2.4
Suppose you hold
You shall denote the magnitude of the free-fall acceleration by the symbol
a book in one
g. The value of g is maximum on the Earth's surface and decreases with
hand and a flat
increasing altitude from the surface. Furthermore, slight variations in g
sheet of paper
occur with changes in latitude. At the Earth's surface, the value of g is
in another hand.
approximately 9.80 m/s².
You drop them
both and they
If you neglect air resistance and assume that the free-fall acceleration
fall to the ground.
does not vary with altitude over short vertical distances, then the motion
Explain why the
of a freely falling object moving vertically is equivalent to motion in one
falling book is a
dimension under constant acceleration. Therefore, the equations derived
good example of
above for objects moving with constant acceleration can be applied. The
free fall, but the
only modification that you need to make in these equations is to replace
paper is not.
the acceleration 'a' of the equations with 'g' and the distance 's' with the
40
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
height 'h' since the vertical distance of the freely falling bodies is known as
height'h'.
The equation of motion can thus be modified as:
v=v₀+gt
(2.13)
h=v₀t+¹₂₈ₜ²
(2.14)
v² = v₀² + 2gh
(2.15)
where V₀ is the initial velocity, h is the vertical height, g is acceleration due
Exercise 2.15
to gravity and t is the elapsed time.
As a freely falling
body speeds up,
Example 2.10
what is happening
A mango fruit has fallen from a tree. Find its velocity and vertical height
to acceleration
when it reached the ground if it took 1 s to reach the ground.
due to gravity?
Solution:
You are given with V₀ = 0, g = 9.8 m/s², and t = 1 s.
The required quantities are final velocity and height.
You can find the velocity using the equation
v = V₀ + = 0 + 9.8 ml = 9.8 m/s
On the other hand, the vertical height can be calculated using the equation
X
2.4 Equations of motion with constant acceleration
41
Section summary
Uniformly accelerated equations are equations that are used
to solve problems involving constant acceleration.
The five quantities or variables commonly encountered in the
uniformly accelerated motion equations are displacement,
time, initial velocity, final velocity, and constant acceleration.
Since the freely falling bodies with uniformly accelerated mo-
tion, the equations of motion derived for bodies under uni-
form acceleration can be applied to the motion of freely falling
bodies by substituting 'a' by 'g' and 's' by 'h'.
Review questions
1. What type of motion is experienced by a free-falling object?
2. A cyclist is traveling at 5.6 m/s when she starts to accelerate at
0.60 ml s² for a time interval of 4.0 S.
(a) How far did she travel during this time interval?
(b) What velocity did she attain?
3. A stone that is dropped from the top of a building is in free fall
for 8.0 S.
(a) Calculate the stone's velocity when it reaches the ground.
(b) What is the height of the building from which the stone
had been dropped?
42
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accel-
erated motion
Exercise 2.16
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Would you re-
draw position-time, velocity-time and acceleration-time graphs of
member the
uniformly accelerated motion;
graphs of a uni-
explain the concept of instantaneous velocity using position-time
form motion
graphs;
that you learnt in
grade 9?
distinguish between instantaneous acceleration and average accel-
eration using the graphical method;
draw a velocity-time graph for a motion using the concept of instan-
taneous acceleration.
In your grade 9 physics, you learnt about the graphs of uniform motion.
Figure 2.7 shows the summary of the graphs of a uniform motion.
Position,s (m)
Velocity ,V (m.s⁻¹)
Acceleration, a (m. .s⁻²)
Time, t (s)
Time, t (s)
Time, t (s)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.7 Graphs for motion at constant velocity (a) position-time
(b) velocity-time (c) acceleration-time.
In this section, you will discuss about the graphs of a uniformly accelerated
motion.
Position-time graph
A position-time graph is a graph that describes the motion of an object,
with the position s of a particle on the y-axis and the time on the x-axis.
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
43
This graph will tell you the exact change in position of a body.
The position-time equation for uniformly accelerated motion along a
Exercise 2.17
straight line is s = v₀ + 1/2at². Dependence of s on t² shows that it is a
How does uni-
quadratic equation or quadratic function of t. So, the position-time graph
form acceleration
for uniformly accelerated motion is a parabola, as shown in Figure 2.8 (a).
motion differ
from uniform
As you learnt in grade 9, position-time graph's slope represents the velocity
motion?
of the object. Because the line is curved, however, its slope keeps changing.
Thus, you must find the slope of the curved line. A tangent is a straight line
that touches a curve at a single point and has the same slope as the curve
at that point. Thus, choose a point on the curve and draw a tangent to the
curve at that point, as shown in Figure 2.8(b). The slope of the tangent line
is therefore an instantaneous velocity.
Position, S (m)
Position, S (m)
s
At
Time, t (s)
Time, t (s)
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8 (a) The position-time graph with constant acceleration,
(b) the slope of the tangent line at a particular point gives the instan-
taneous velocity.
You may recall from your mathematics studies that the slope of a line
describes its steepness. Slope is determined by comparing the magnitude
Key Concept
of the rise (the change between points on the y-axis) and the magnitude of
jo
The slope of
the run (the change between the same points on the x-axis).
the tangent to the
graph of position-
rise = instantaneous velocity
(2.16)
time is velocity.
44
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
The instantaneous velocity of an object at a specific point in time is thus
the slope of the tangent to the curve of the position-time graph of the
object's motion at that specific time. That means, the magnitude of the
velocity of an object at the point where the tangent line touches the graph
is the slope of the tangent line.
Example 2.11
A car starts from rest and accelerates at a 10 m/s² for 10 s on the straight,
level road. Draw a position-time graph and calculate the instantaneous
velocity at 4 S.
Solution:
In this example, you are given v₀ = 0 m/s, a = 10 m/s², and t = 10 s.
To draw the position-time graph, first solve for s using the equation s =
1 at² for the different values of t. Record and compare the result you ob-
2
tained with the following table.
180
Position (m)
0
5
20
45
80
125
180
160
140
Time (s)
0123456
Position, S (m)
120
100
Then plot the position on the y-axis and time on the x-axis. The graph is
80
As
shown as in the Figure 2.9.
60
40
At
20
On the other hand, to find the instantaneous velocity, draw the tangent line
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time, t(s)
at the given time. The slope of the tangent line drawn at 4 s of the x-axis
coordinate represents the instantaneous velocity at instant of 4 s. The slope
Figure 2.9 Position-time of the
given problem.
of tangent line becomes:
Slope = = 120 5s-3s m 40 m = 80 2 s m = 40 s
Thus, the instantaneous velocity is 40 m/s.
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
45
Activity 2.5
Suppose a truck accelerates with average accelerations of 20.0
m/s² starting from rest for 5.0 S.
a) How far does it travel in this time? Draw position-time graph?
b) Draw the tangent line at different point on the graph.
c) Find the slope of each tangent line that you draw.
Velocity, V (m/s)
B
Velocity-time graph
A graph plotted with time along the x-axis and the velocity along the y-axis
0
t
Time t (s)
is called the velocity-time graph. The velocity-time graph of the given
(a)
motion shows how its velocity changes as it travels over a given time. If
the particle starts from rest and experiences uniform acceleration, the
velocity-time graph will be a straight line passing through the origin and
Velocity, V (m/s)
B
having a positive slope (as shown in Figure 2.10 (a)).
A
If the particle has an initial velocity, the graph will be a straight line, but
D
will not pass through the origin as shown in Figure 2.10 (b). In Figure 2.10
0
t
(b)
Time, t (s)
(b), the ordinate OA gives the initial velocity and the ordinate BD gives the
final velocity.
Figure 2.10 The velocity-time
graph.
The velocity-time graph of a particle moving along a straight line with
uniform acceleration may be used to measure the displacement of the
particle and also the acceleration.
Velocity, V (m/s)
B
v
A) Area under velocity-time graph
A
Consider a particle moving along a straight line with uniform acceleration
v₀
C
D
a. Let v₀ be the velocity of the particle at the instant t = 0 and v at a later
0
Time, t (s)
instant t. The velocity-time graph of such a motion is shown in Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11 The area under
The area under the velocity-time graph during the interval 0 to t is ABDO.
velocity-time graph.
46
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Area, ABDO = Area of rectangle ACDO + Area of triangle, ABC.
Key Concept
Area, ABDO = AO AC X BC
It The area un-
1
der the curve
in a velocity-
time graph is
the change in
= displacement
position or dis-
placement.
Thus, area under the velocity-time graph gives the total displacement of
the particle in that given time interval.
B) Slope of a velocity-time graph
As discussed earlier, for a particle moving along a straight line with con-
stant acceleration, the velocity-time graph will be a straight line inclined
to the time axis, as shown in Figure 2.11. Let v₀ be the velocity at t₀ = 0
Velocity, V (m/s)
and v be the velocity after a time interval t.
A
The acceleration,
(2.17)
B
That is, the slope of the velocity-time graph gives the acceleration of the
particle.
0
Time, t (s)
Figure 2.12 Velocity-time graph
Let us now consider two special cases.
for uniform retardation.
Velocity, v(m/s)
1. Velocity-time graph for uniform retardation
For a particle moving with uniform retardation or deceleration, the velocity-
time graph will be a straight line with a negative slope, as shown in Figure
2.12. If the body is brought to rest, the graph will touch the time axis.
0
t₁
t2
t3
t₄ Time (t)
Figure 2.13 Velocity-time graph
2. Velocity-time graph for non-uniform motion
for non uniform motion.
In the case of a particle moving with variable velocity, the velocity-time
curve will be irregular in shape. For example, consider a car starting from
point O. Let it be moving along a straight line with uniform acceleration
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
47
a during the time interval t₁ to t₂ and then start moving with uniform
velocity during the interval of time t₂ to t₃. Thereafter, let the velocity of
the car decrease uniformly and the car come to a stop at the instant t₄.
The motion of the car can be represented by the velocity-time graph, as
shown in Figure 2.13. Then the area under the velocity-time graph gives
the total displacement of the car.
Example 2.12
The velocity-time graph of a certain motion is plotted in Figure 2.14 below.
Calculate the total distance and displacement of the truck after 15 S.
5
B
D
4
Velocity, (m.s⁻¹)
3
2
Exercise 2.18
1
C
E
F
H
It
What quantity
0
A
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
is represented by
-1
Time, t (s)
the area under
-2
G
the velocity-time
-3
graph?
Figure 2.14 Velocity-time graph.
Solution:
To calculate the total distance and total displacement, you have to find the
area under velocity-time graph.
S₁ = area of a triangle ACB
= 1/2 (base) X (height) = 1/2 (t) X (v) = 1/2 (4 s) X (4 m/s) = 8 m.
S₂ = area of rectangle CBDE
= (base) X (height) = (t) X (v) = (8 s m/s) X (4 m/s) = 32 m.
S₃ = area of a triangle EDF
= 1/2 (base) X (height) = 1/2 (t) X (v) = 1/2 (2 s) X (4 m/s) = 4 m.
S₄ = area of a triangle EHG
= 1/2 (base) X (height) = 1/2 (t) X (v) = 1/2 (1 s) X (2 m/s) = 1 m.
48
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Thus, the total distance is S₁ + S₂ + S₃ + S₄ = 45 m.
On the other hand, the total displacement is S₁ + S₂ + S3 - S₄ (since velocity
is negative) = 44 m in the positive direction.
Acceleration a (m. (m.s⁻²)
Acceleration-time graph
The acceleration-time graph shows the acceleration graph plotted against
time for a particle moving in a straight line. The acceleration-time plots
acceleration values on the y-axis and time values on the x-axis. For a
Time, t(s)
uniformly accelerated motion, acceleration is constant with time. Hence,
the acceleration-time graph will be a straight line parallel to the time axis.
Figure 2.15 Acceleration-time
graph.
For a straight line parallel to the time axis, slope equals zero.
An acceleration-time graph can be used to find the change in velocity
during various time intervals. This is accomplished by determining the
area under the line on the acceleration-time graph.
a (m/s²)
4
Example 2.13
3
For the acceleration-time graph shown in Figure 2.16, find the change in
2
velocity of an object.
Solution:
t (s)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
In this example, the change in velocity can be obtained by finding the area
Figure 2.16 Acceleration-time
under the acceleration-time graph. Thus,
graph of the given problem.
area = base X height = 9 s X 4 m/s² = 36 m/s
Hence, the change in velocity of the moving object is 36 m/s.
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
49
Activity 2.6
The table below shows a set of position-time data for uniformly
accelerated motion.
Position (m)
0
8
32
72
128
Time (s)
02468
1. By plotting the position-time graph, find the slopes of tan-
gents at appropriate times.
2. By plotting the velocity-time graph, determine the area under
the graph. State what this area represent.
3. Also plot the acceleration-time graph and determine the area
under the graph. State what this area represent.
Position, S (m)
Section summary
In a uniformly accelerated motion:
(a)
Time, t (s)
The position-time equation is quadratic, and hence the graph
is parabolic as shown in Figure 2.17 (a).
The slope of the tangent line (at a point) of the position-time
velocity (m.s⁻¹)
graph is equal to the instantaneous velocity at that time.
The velocity-time equation is linear and hence the graph is a
(h)
Time, t (s)
straight line as shown in Figure 2.17 (b).
The slope of velocity-time graph is equal to the acceleration
while the area under the graph is the displacement.
The acceleration-time graph is a straight line parallel to the
Acceleration (m.s²²)
time axis as shown in Figure 2.17 (c).
(c)
The area under acceleration-time graph is the change in ve-
Time, t (s)
locity of an object.
Figure 2.17 Graphs of motion
in uniform acceleration.
50
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Review questions
1. In a uniformly accelerated motion, state what each of the
following represents:
(a) the slope of a tangent on a position-time graph.
(b) the slope of a line on a velocity-time graph.
(c) the area under the line on an acceleration-time graph.
Exercise 2.19
jer
How long does
2. The velocity-time graph below shows the motion of an air
it take a car to
plane. Find the displacement of the airplane at St = 1.0 S and
cross a 25.0 m
at At = 2.0 S.
wide intersection
after the light
30
turns green, if
the car acceler-
Velocity, V (m.s⁻¹)
25
ates from rest at
20
a constant ac-
celeration of 2.0
15
m/s²? Draw the
acceleration-time
10
graph.
5
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time, t (s)
Figure 2.18 Velocity-time graph.
Exercise 2.20
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
What is meant by
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
relative velocity
in one dimension.
explain relative velocity in one-dimension using a frame of reference;
Give an example?
calculate the relative velocity.
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
51
Any measurement of distance, speed, velocity, and so on; must be made
with respect to a reference frame, or frame of reference. When you say an
object has a certain velocity, you must state its velocity with respect to a
given reference frame. In everyday life, when you measure the velocity of
an object, the reference frame is taken to be the ground or the earth. For
example, if you are traveling in a train and the train, is moving at a speed
of 100 km/h, then your speed according to another passenger sitting on
that train is zero. According to him, you are not moving. But if someone
observes you from outside the train, standing on the ground, according to
him, you are moving at 100 km/h as you are on the train and the train is
moving at 100 km/h. Hence, the motion observed by the observer depends
on the location (frame) of the observer. This type of motion is called rela-
tive motion.
The relative velocity of object A with respect to object B is the rate of
Key Concept
change of position of the object A with respect to the object B. If VA and
jer
Relative veloc-
VB be the velocities of objects A and B with respect to the ground, then
ity is the velocity
The relative velocity of A with respect to B is VAB = VA - VB.
of an object with
respect to an-
The relative velocity of B with respect to A is VBA = VB - VA.
other object or
In one-dimensional motion, objects move in a straight line. So there are
observer.
only two possible cases: objects are moving in the same direction or in
opposite directions. Thus, while using the above expressions, the signs of
velocities needs to be the same (say, positive) for bodies that are moving in
the same direction. But if they are moving in opposite directions, one of the
velocities (say to the right) should be positive while the other one becomes
negative. Thus, if the two objects are moving in the same direction, the
magnitude of the relative velocity of one object with respect to another
is equal to the difference in magnitude of two velocities. But if the two
objects are moving in opposite directions, the above expression becomes
VAB = VA vB) =
VBA = - VB - VA = - (vA if object A is moving to the right and
object B is moving to the left.
52
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Thus, for objects that are moving in opposite directions, the magnitude of
relative velocity of one object with respect to other is equal to the sum of
magnitude of their velocities.
Example 2.14
Two cars, A and B are traveling with the same speed of 100 km/h in opposite
directions, as in the Figure 2.19 (a). Find the relative velocity of car A with
respect to car B and the relative velocity of car B with respect to car A.
VA
Solution:
VB
In this example, suppose that right is positive and left is negative. So you
are given VA = 100 km/h and VB = - 100 km/h.
(a)
The relative velocity of A with respect to B is VAB = VA - VB
VA
= [100 - 100)] km/h = 100 + 100 km/h = 200 km/h.
VB
The relative velocity of B with respect to A is VBA = VB - VA
= [(-100) - 100] km/h = -200 km/h.
(b)
Figure 2.19 Two cars moving
Thus, when objects are moving in the opposite directions, the magnitude of
(a) in opposite directions (b) in
the relative velocity between them is the sum of the velocities of the objects.
same direction.
In the same question, if both bodies are moving in the same direction (say
to the right) as in the Figure 2.19 (b) with the same speed, then
The relative velocity of A with respect to B is VAB = VA - VB
= [100 - 100] km/h = 0km/h.
The relative velocity of B with respect to A is UBA = VB - VA
= [100 - 100] km/h = 0 km/h.
That means A is at rest with respect to B, and B is at rest with respect to A;
but both are moving at 100 km/h with respect to the ground. This shows
that, when objects are moving in the same direction, the magnitude of
the relative velocity between them is equal to the difference between the
magnitude of their velocities.
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
53
Section summary
Exercise 2.21
When you say that an object has certain velocity, you must
Why do a car
state its velocity with respect to a given frame of reference.
coming in the
opposite direction
If two objects are moving in the same direction, the magnitude
while travelling
of relative velocity of one object with respect to another is
in a car seems to
equal to the difference in magnitude of two velocities. On
come at a very
the other hand, if they are moving in opposite directions, the
large speed?
magnitude of relative velocity of one object with respect to
other is equal to the sum of magnitude of their velocities.
Review questions
1. A motorcycle traveling on the highway at a velocity of 120
km/h passes a car traveling at a velocity of 90 km/h. From the
point of view of a passenger on the car, what is the velocity of
the motorcycle?
2. An automobile is moving at 80 km/h, and a truck is moving
at 60 km/h, approaching an automobile. What is the relative
velocity of an automobile with respect to a truck when the
observer on the automobile measures it?
3. A thief is running away on a straight road on a jeep moving
with a speed of 9 m/s. A police man chases him on a motor
cycle moving at a speed of 10 m/s. If the instantaneous
separation of jeep from the motor cycle is 100 T, how long
does it take for the policemen to catch the thief?
54
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on uniformly accelerated motion unit
under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Forces and Motion: Basics PhET Experiment.
2. Moving-man PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
An object is in motion if it changes position relative to a refer-
ence point.
Distance is the length of the path taken by an object whereas
displacement is simply the distance between where the object
started and where it ended up.
Average velocity is defined as the change in position (or dis-
placement) over the time of travel while instantaneous veloc-
ity is the velocity of an object at a single point in time and is
calculated by the slope of the tangent line.
Average acceleration is the change in velocity divided by the
elapsed time; instantaneous acceleration is acceleration at a
given point in time.
For uniformly accelerated motion, the position-time graph is
a parabola. On the other hand, the velocity-time graph is an
inclined line while the acceleration-time graph is a straight
line parallel to the time axis.
The summary of the equations of motion at uniform accelera-
v = v₀ + at
tion are:
s=(v₀+v)t
s=v₀t+1/2at²
v²=v₀²+2as
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
55
Relative velocity is the velocity of an object in relation to an-
other object. It is a measure of how fast two objects are moving
with respect to each other.
End of unit questions and problems
1. A runner travels around rectangular track with length 50 m
and width 20 T. After traveling around the rectangular track
twice, the runner back to its starting point. Determine the
distance and displacement of the runner.
2. How do intervals of constant acceleration appear on a velocity-
time graph?
3. A truck on a straight road starts from rest, accelerating at
2 m/s² until it reaches a speed of 20 m/s. Then the truck
travels for 20 s at constant speed until the brakes applied, are
stopping the truck in a uniform manner in an additional 5 S.
(a) how long is the truck in motion? (b) What is the average
speed of the truck for the motion described?
4. If a student rides her bicycle in a straight line for 15 minutes
with an average velocity of 12.5 km/h South, how far has she
ridden?
5. A race car travels on a racetrack at 44 m/s and slows at a con-
stant rate to a velocity of 22 m/s over 11 S. How far does it move
during this time?
6. A truck is traveling at 22 m/s when the driver notices a speed
limit sign for the town ahead. He slows down to a speed of 14
m/s. He travels a distance of 125 m while he is slowing down.
(a) Calculate the acceleration of the truck. (b) How long did it
take the truck driver to change his speed?
56
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
7. A rock is dropped from a bridge. What happens to the magni-
tude of the acceleration and the speed of the rock as it falls?
[neglect friction]
8. A brick is dropped from rest from a height of 4.9 m. How long
does it take the brick to reach the ground?
9. The velocity of a car changes over an 8 s time period as shown
in the following table.
(a) Plot the velocity-time graph of the motion.
(b) What is the displacement of the car during the entire 8 s?
(c) Find the slope of the line between t = 0 s and t = 4 s? What
does this slope represent?
(d) Find the slope of the line between t = 5 s and t = 7 S. What
does this slope represent?
Position (m) 0 4 8 12 16 20 20 20 20
Time (s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10. For the motion described by the velocity-time graph below,
A) What is the acceleration between 0 and 2 s?
B) During what time period does the object have a constant
speed?
C) What is the displacement of the motion?
Velocity, V (m/s)
12
B
10
8
C
6
A
4
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time, t (s)
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
57
11. Given the position-time graph below, find the velocity-time
graph.
0.6
0.5
Position, S (m)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time, t (s)
12. A jet cruising at a speed of 1000 km/h ejects hot air in the
opposite direction. If the speed of the hot air with respect
to the jet is 800 km/h, then find its speed with respect to the
ground.
13. Copy and complete the following concept map on motion.
Motion
can be described by
velocity
which is a
which
which equals
change in
includes
position
change in
velocity
which equals
time
distance
time
