Unit 5
Magnetism
Introduction
Magnetism is an interaction that allows certain kinds of objects, which
are called magnets, that exert forces on each other without physically
touching. Humans have known about magnetism for thousands of years.
For example, lodestone is a magnetized form of the iron oxide mineral
magnetite. It has the property of attracting iron objects. Today magnetism
plays many important roles in our lives. In this unit, you will learn about
Brain storm-
some of the fundamental concepts related to a magnet, magnetic field and
ing question:
magnetic force including its simple applications.
Can you list the
different ways in
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
which magnetism
understand the nature and characteristics of magnets;
has played a part
in your life today?
understand what is meant by the magnetic field;
understand the concepts related to magnetic force;
solve problems related to magnetism;
appreciate simple applications of magnetism in your everyday life.
151
152
Unit 5 Magnetism
5.1 Magnet
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
identify various types of magnets based on their physical shapes;
Exercise 5.1
describe the properties of magnets.
Most probably,
Magnets have always been an awesome thing for humans, as they play an
you have been
familiar with a
important role in a wide range of devices that you use in your daily life. The
magnet. How
use of magnets was discovered by the ancient Greeks during the period
could you define
of Greek civilization. They found stones that were able to attract iron and
it? When was
nickel like other substances. This naturally occurring stone which was
a magnet first
discovered, then is called as 'lodestone'. This is something like a magnet.
discovered?
A magnet is a material or object that produces a magnetic field that is re-
sponsible for a force that pulls or attracts other materials. Magnets attract
objects made of iron or steel, such as nails and paper clips. Magnets can
also attract or repel other magnets.
Magnets can be made in various shapes and create their own persistent
magnetic field. The magnets that are commonly available in different
shapes are those indicated in Figure 5.1. These magnets of different shapes
Horseshoe Magnet
Ring Magnet
are used in various appliances used at home, like a tape recorder, radio,
motor, door-bell, head phones, etc. They are used in these appliances
to either hold or separate, control, elevate (lift) substances, by changing
electrical energy into mechanical energy (motors, loudspeakers) or me-
chanical into electrical energy (generators and microphones).
Bar Magnet
Cylinderical Magnet
Types of Magnets
Arc Magnet
Square Magnet
There are three categories of magnets. These are:
Figure 5.1 Magnets of different
1. Permanent Magnets: are made up of magnetic material (such as
shapes.
steel) that is magnetized and has its own magnetic field. They are
known as permanent magnets because they do not lose their mag-
netic property once they are magnetized. However, the strength
5.1 Magnet
153
depends on the nature of the material used in its creation. Perma-
nent magnets are used in speakers, mobile phones, cars, generators,
televisions, sensors, etc.
The following are the ways to demagnetize the permanent magnets:
Exposing magnets to extreme temperatures.
The magnetic attraction between the magnet's atoms gets loose
when they are hammered.
Striking one magnet with the other in an inappropriate manner
will reduce the magnetic strength.
2. Temporary Magnet: can be magnetized in the presence of a mag-
netic field. When the magnetic field is removed, these materials lose
their magnetic properties. Iron nails and paper-clips are examples
of temporary magnets.
3. Electromagnets: consist of a coil of wire wrapped around a metal
core made of iron. When the coil of wire conducts a current, a mag-
netic field is generated, making the material behave like a magnet.
Key Concept
The strength of the magnetic field can be controlled by controlling
Magnetic prop-
the electric current. Electromagnets are used in generators, motors,
erties exist when
transformers, loudspeakers, MRI machines, magnetic locks, etc.
the material is
magnetized.
Properties of magnet
It
Every magnet
has two poles:
The following are the basic properties of magnet:
North and South.
When a magnet is dipped in iron filings, you can observe that the
Like poles repel
iron filings cling to the end of the magnet as the attraction is greatest
and unlike poles
at the ends of the magnet. These ends are known as the poles of the
attract each other.
magnets.
Magnetic poles always exist in pairs. Thus, when a magnet is cut
into two pieces, both pieces will have the North Pole and the South
Pole.
154
Unit 5 Magnetism
S
N
S
N
Attraction
N
S
N
S
S
N
N
S
Repulsion
N
S
S
N
Figure 5.2 Properties of magnetic poles.
Whenever a magnet is suspended freely in mid-air, it always points
in a North-South direction. The pole pointing towards geographic
North is known as the North Pole, and the pole pointing towards
geographic South is known as the South Pole.
Like poles repel while unlike poles attract.
The magnetic force between two magnets is greater when the dis-
tance between them is smaller.
Section summary
A magnet has a North pole and a South pole.
Like magnetic poles repel each other; unlike poles attract each
other.
5.2 Magnetic Field
155
Review questions
1. What is a magnet? List its properties.
2. How could a magnet loses its magnetic properties?
3. State the rule for magnetic attraction and repulsion.
4. Describe how a temporary magnet differs from a permanent
magnet.
5. What are magnetic poles? Does magnetic mono-pole exist?
6. If you broke a magnet into two, would you have isolated North
and South poles? Explain.
5.2 Magnetic Field
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe what a magnetic field is;
state the properties of magnetic lines of force;
draw magnetic field lines around magnets.
AS you learnt in unit 4, an electric field is a region where an electric charge
experiences an attraction or repulsion force on other electric charge in
Exercise 5.2
the given region. In the same manner, a magnetic field is a field produced
Can you observe
by the magnet or electric charges in motion. So it is the region around
magnetic field
a magnetic material or moving electric charge within which the force of
lines through our
magnetism acts. Magnetic fields are represented by using magnetic field
naked eyes? Are
lines. It is a visual tool used to visualize the direction and strength of the
they similarities
magnetic field.
between magnetic
field lines and
Magnetic field lines can be drawn using a compass needle. The compass
electric field lines?
needle should be placed on a piece of paper near the magnet. Check the
156
Unit 5 Magnetism
direction in which the compass needle points and mark the direction.
Move the compass needle to different positions and mark the directions.
The lines joining the points shows the magnetic field lines.
Properties of magnetic field lines
In order to understand about the properties of magnetic field lines, try to
perform the following activity.
Activity 5.1
Field around a pair of bar magnets
Take two bar magnets and place them a short distance apart such
that they are repelling each other.
Place a sheet of white paper over the bar magnets and sprinkle
some iron filings onto the paper.
Give the paper a shake to evenly distribute the iron filings. In your
exercise book, draw both the bar magnets and the pattern formed
by the iron filings.
Repeat the procedure for two bar magnets attracting each other
and draw what the pattern looks like in this situation.
Make a note of the shape of the lines formed by the iron filings
as well as their size and direction for both arrangements of the bar
magnet.
What does the pattern look like when you place both bar magnets
side by side?
Exercise 5.3
What did you observe from the above activity?You have noticed that op-
What are the simi-
posite poles of a magnet attract each other and bringing them together
larities and differ-
causes their magnetic field lines to converge (come together). On the other
ences between an
hand, like poles of a magnet repel each other and bringing them together
electric field and a
causes their magnetic field lines to diverge (bend out from each other).
magnetic field?
The following is some more list of some important properties of magnetic
field lines.
5.2 Magnetic Field
157
Magnetic field lines never intersect with each other.
Exercise 5.4
Magnetic field lines form a closed-loop.
Determine where
Outside a magnet, magnetic field lines appear to emerge or start
the field around
from the North pole and merge or terminate at the South pole. Inside
a magnet is the
a magnet, the direction of the magnetic field lines is from the South
strongest and
pole to the North pole.
where it is the
weakest.
The closeness or density of the field lines is directly proportional to
the strength of the field. In areas where the magnetic field is strong,
the field lines are closer together. In a place where the field is weaker,
the field lines are drawn further apart.
Key Concept
The magnetic field is stronger at the poles because the field lines are
Magnetic field
denser near the poles.
lines are imagi-
nary lines used
to represent mag-
netic fields. They
describe the di-
N
S
N
S
rection of the
magnetic field
and the strength
(a)
of the magnetic
field.
S
N
N
S
Exercise 5.5
What are the simi-
larities and differ-
(b)
ences between an
electric field and a
Figure 5.3 Magnetic field lines plot for a bar magnet.
magnetic field?
The following is the discussion of the similarities and differences between
electric and magnetic fields.
158
Unit 5 Magnetism
Similarities between magnetic and electric fields
Electric fields are produced by two kinds of charges, positive and
negative. Magnetic fields are associated with two magnetic poles:
North and South, although they are also produced by charges (mov-
ing charges).
Like poles repel, but unlike poles attract each other.
The electric field points in the direction of the force experienced by
a positive charge. The magnetic field points in the direction of the
force experienced by the North pole.
Differences between magnetic and electric fields
Positive and negative charges can exist separately. The north and
south poles always come together. Single magnetic poles, known
as magnetic monopoles, have been proposed theoretically, but a
magnetic monopole has never been observed.
Electric field lines have definite starting and ending points. Magnetic
field lines are continuous loops. Outside of a magnet, the field is
directed from the North Pole to the South Pole. Inside a magnet, the
field runs from south to north.
Section summary
Magnetic field lines are the imaginary lines around a magnet
which gives us the pattern of magnetic field of the magnet.
Magnetic field lines don't start or end. They form a closed
loop. They flow from North pole to South pole outside the
magnet, while they flow from South pole to North pole inside
the magnet.
5.3 The Earth's magnetic field and the compass
159
Review questions
1. Draw a small bar magnet and show the magnetic field lines
as they appear around the magnet. Use arrows to show the
direction of the field lines.
2. Draw the magnetic field between two like magnetic poles and
then between two unlike magnetic poles. Show the directions
of the fields.
3. Determine where the field around a magnet is the strongest
and where it is the weakest.
4. Explain the magnetic field using the concept of magnetic field
lines.
5. Write down the properties of magnetic field lines.
5.3 The Earth's magnetic field and the compass
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 5.6
describe the Earth's magnetic field;
Does the Earth
explain the origin of the Earth's magnetic field and its importance
have a magnet?
What do you
for the life on Earth.
think?
Earth's Magnetic Field
As you learnt in the previous section, the magnetic field is the region
around a magnetic material or a moving electric charge. Earth has a huge
magnet that produces a magnetic field. The origin of the Earth's magnetic
field is thought to be deep within the Earth in the outer core layer. The
Earth's magnetic field, also known as the geomagnetic field, is the mag-
netic field that extends from the Earth's interior out into space and causes
a compass needle to rotate. The movement of molten iron in the outer
160
Unit 5 Magnetism
core is responsible for generating the Earth's magnetic field. The shape
of the Earth's magnetic field, is similar to that of a huge bar magnet tilted
about 11° from the Earth's geographic North and South poles. In Figure
Key Concept
5.4, you can see a representation of the earth's magnetic field which is very
similar to the magnetic field of a giant bar magnet. So the Earth has two
It
The Earth is
sets of North and South poles: geographic poles and magnetic poles.
surrounded by
a magnetic field
similar to the
Another interesting thing to note is that if you think of the earth as a big
field around a bar
bar magnet, and you know that magnetic field lines always point from
magnet.
North to South, then the compass tells us that what you call the magnetic
North pole is actually the South pole of the bar magnet.
Magnetic axis
A south magnetic
Axis of
pole is near the
rotation
Earth's north
South
North
geographic pole.
magnetic
pole
11°
geographic
pole
Geographic
equator
S
Magnetic
equator
N
A north magnetic
South
North
pole is near the
geographic
magnetic
Earth's south
pole
pole
geographic pole.
Figure 5.4 Earth's magnetic field.
5.3 The Earth's magnetic field and the compass
161
A compass
A compass is an instrument that is used to find the direction of a magnetic
Exercise 5.7
field. It can do this because a compass consists of a small metal needle
Have you ever
that is magnetized itself and that is free to turn in any direction. Therefore,
seen a compass?
in the presence of a magnetic field, the needle is able to line up in the same
If so what do
direction as the field.
you think is the
purpose of a
Compasses are mainly used in navigation to find directions on the Earth.
compass?
This works because the Earth itself has a magnetic field which is similar to
that of a bar magnets, as discussed above. The compass needle aligns with
the magnetic field direction and points North (or South). Once you know
where the North is, you can figure out any other direction. A picture of a
compass is shown in Figure 5.5.
N
The Earth's magnetic field also causes a compass needle to rotate. The
W
E
North pole of the compass needle points toward the Earth's magnetic pole,
OF
which is in the North. This magnetic pole is actually the magnetic South
S
OFF
002
160
pole. Earth's magnetic field is like that of a bar magnet with the magnet's
South pole near Earth's North pole.
Figure 5.5 Compass.
Some animals can detect magnetic fields, which helps them orient them-
selves and find directions. Animals that can do this include pigeons, bees,
monarch butterflies, sea turtles, and fish.
Section summary
Earth is surrounded by a magnetic field similar to the field
around a bar magnet.
Review questions
1. What is the evidence for the existence of the Earth's magnetic
field?
162
Unit 5 Magnetism
2. Explain why a compass will show you which direction is mag-
netic North.
5.4 Magnetic field of a current-carrying conduc-
tor
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the factors through which a magnetic field due to current-
carrying conductor depends on;
Calculate the magnetic field of a current-carrying conductor.
Exercise 5.8
Current is generally defined as the rate of flow of charge. You already know
List factors affect-
that stationary charges produce an electric field which is proportional
ing the strength
to the magnitude of the charge. Moving charges also produce magnetic
of magnetic field
fields which are proportional to the current, and hence, a current-carrying
around a straight
wire produces a magnetic effect around it. This magnetic field is generally
current-carrying
attributed to the sub-atomic particles in the conductor, for example, the
conductor.
moving electrons in the atomic orbitals.
As discussed above, a moving charge (or current), produces a magnetic
field. Figure 5.6 shows a long, straight section of wire carrying a current
odoo
I. Since there is current present in the wire, a magnetic field is produced
around the wire and is composed of closed concentric circles, as repre-
sented by the gray loops in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6 Magnetic field
The strength of a magnetic field, B, some distance d away from a straight
around a current-carrying wire.
wire carrying a current, I, can be found using the equation
B=HoI B
(5.1)
where, µ₀ = X Tm refers to the permeability of free space, I is the
5.4 Magnetic field of a current-carrying conductor
163
magnitude of the current, and d is the distance from the source current
to the magnetic field. The SI unit for magnetic field strength B is called
the Tesla (T) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Nikola Tesla (1856
- 1943). Another smaller unit, called the gauss (G), where 1 G = 10⁻⁴ T is
sometimes used. The strongest permanent magnets have fields near 2 T;
Activity 5.2
superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more. The Earth's
Sketch the mag-
magnetic field on its surface is only about 5 X 10⁻⁵ T or 0.5 G.
netic field pat-
tern of a steady
It should be noted that the distance d must be measured perpendicular to
electric current
the wire. A perpendicular distance measurement is shown in Figure 5.6.
flowing in a long
The strength of the field, B, decreases as the distance away from the wire,
straight wire.
d, increases.
Since magnetic field is a vector quantity, you need to also determine the
direction of the magnetic field. The direction of the magnetic field created
by a current-carrying wire takes the form of concentric circles and is per-
pendicular to the wire. But you have to be able to figure out if those circles
point clockwise or counter-clockwise. To do that, you use a right-hand
rule. If you wrap your right hand's fingers around the wire with your thumb
pointing in the direction of the current, then the direction in which the
fingers would curl will give the direction of the magnetic field. In Figure
5.7, the concentric lines represent the magnetic field lines.
Thus, a current in a long straight wire produces a magnetic field with cir-
cular field lines as may be verified by sprinkling iron fillings on a board
Figure 5.7 Right-hand rule
normal to the wire.
for a magnetic field around a
current-carrying wire.
Generally speaking, the magnetic field produced due to a current-carrying
conductor has the following characteristics:
It encircles the conductor.
It lies in a plane perpendicular to the conductor.
A change in the direction of the current flow reverses the direction
164
Unit 5 Magnetism
of the field.
Key Concept
JET A wire carrying
Example 5.1
an electric current
An infinitely long wire has a current of 3A passing through it. Calculate the
will produce a
magnetic field at a distance of 2 cm from the wire (µ₀ = 4π X 10⁻⁷ Tm).
magnetic field
with closed field
Solution:
lines surrounding
In this example, you are given with I3 A and d = 2 cm.
the wire.
You want to find the magnitude and direction of a magnetic field.
For infinitely long straight wire, the formula for the magnetic field is
B B=2πd
Substituting the given values into the equation gives
B = (4π X 2π x (0.02 m) 10⁻⁷ Tm) X = X 10⁻⁵ T
The direction of the magnetic field can be determined using the right-hand
rule.
Section summary
A magnetic field exists around any wire that carries current.
The strength of the magnetic field is directly proportional to
the magnitude of current and is inversely proportional to the
distance of the point from the wire.
The direction of the magnetic field can be obtained using the
right-hand rule.
5.5 Magnetic force on a moving charge placed in a uniform magnetic field
165
Review questions
1. What will be the strength of the magnetic field if the distance
from the current-carrying conductor is very large?
2. What are the factors on which a magnetic field due to a
current-carrying conductor depends?
5.5
Magnetic force on a moving charge placed in
a uniform magnetic field
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 5.9
describe the effects of magnetic fields on moving charges;
What is the mech-
determine the magnitude and direction of a magnetic force on a
anism by which
one magnet ex-
moving charge.
erts a force on
another?
When a charged particle passes through a uniform magnetic field, a mag-
netic force is exerted on them. If a charged particle is in motion in a
magnetic field with a speed or velocity (v), in the magnetic field (B), then
it will feel a force which is magnetic force (F). At the rest position, these
particles are unaffected by the magnetic fields, but as they begin to move,
Key Concept
the magnetic field pushes at them. Note that a uniform or steady magnetic
jer
Any moving
field is the region or field where it has equal magnitude of strength and
charged particle
same direction at each point.
creates its own
magnetic field
Consider a positively charged particle that is moving in a uniform mag-
and is affected
netic field. Then, the magnitude of the force (magnetic force) is directly
when it moves
proportional to the magnitude of the charge, the component of the ve-
through another
locity which is acting perpendicular to the direction of this field and the
magnetic field.
magnitude of the generated magnetic field.
F = qvBsin Θ
(5.2)
166
Unit 5 Magnetism
Here, q is the magnitude of the charge, vsin Θ is the component of the
velocity that is acting perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field and
the B is the magnitude of the applied magnetic field.
The magnitude of the force becomes zero, when the speed or velocity of
the particle and the magnetic field are parallel to each other, and reaches
maximum when the velocity of the particle and the magnetic field are
perpendicular to each other.
The direction of the magnetic force È is perpendicular to the plane formed
F
B
by v and B, as determined by the right-hand rule, which is illustrated in
Figure 5.8. It states that, to determine the direction of the magnetic force
on a positive moving charge, you point the thumb of the right-hand in the
ID
direction of v, the fingers in the direction of B, and a perpendicular to the
palm points in the direction of F.
Figure 5.8 Right-hand rule for
Example 5.2
a magnetic force on a moving
charge.
Determine the magnitude of the magnetic force of a 50 C charged particles
moving with the velocity of 3 m/s in the same direction to a magnetic field
of magnitude 1 T.
Solution:
You are given q= 50 C, v= 3 m/s, B = 1 T and Θ = 0°.
The required quantity is The magnitude of the magnetic force.
The magnitude of the force is obtained by
F = qvBsin Θ = 50 m/s 1 0° = 0
5.6 Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire
167
Section summary
The force a magnetic field exerts on a charged particle de-
pends on the velocity and charge of the particle and the
strength of the field.
The magnetic force is perpendicular to the plane formed by v
and B.
Review questions
1. Is it possible for the magnetic force on a charge moving in a
magnetic field to be zero?
2. An electron moves at 7.5 X 10⁶ m/s perpendicular to Earth's
magnetic field at an altitude where the field strength is 1.0 X
10⁻⁵ T. Calculate the magnetic force.
5.6 Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire
Exercise 5.10
In the previous
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
section, you have
state the relationship between magnetic force, current and magnetic
learnt how a mag-
field;
netic field exerts
a force on moving
calculate the magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor in a
charges. What
magnetic field;
about the mag-
determine the direction in which a current-carrying wire experiences
netic field around
the current-
a force in an external magnetic field.
carrying wire?
The force on a current-carrying wire is similar to that of a moving charge
Does it produce a
as expected since a charge carrying wire is a collection of moving charges.
force?
A current-carrying wire feels a force in the presence of a magnetic field.
These forces are transmitted to the material of the conductor, and the
conductor as a whole experiences a force distributed along its length. The
electric motor and the moving coil galvanometer both depend on their
168
Unit 5 Magnetism
Key Concept
operation on the magnetic force on wire carrying-currents.
When a
Consider a wire of length L where an electric current I flow through the
current-carrying
wire as shown in Figure 5.9. If this wire is placed in a magnetic field of
wire lies in a
magnetic field,
magnitude B, the magnitude of the force is directly proportional to the
magnetic force
current I in the wire, to the magnetic field B (assumed uniform), and to the
is exerted on the
length of wire exposed to the magnetic field. The force also depends on
moving charges
the angle between the current direction and the magnetic field as shown
within the con-
in Figure 5.9, being proportional to. Thus, the force on a wire carrying a
ductor.
current I with length in a uniform magnetic field B is given by:
F = ILBsin Θ
(5.3)
The direction of the magnetic force on a current-carrying wire in a mag-
netic field can be found using the right-hand rule: Point the fingers of
your right hand in the direction of B. Point your thumb in the direction of
B
0
the conventional current in the wire. The palm of your hand then faces
or pushes in the direction of the force acting on the wire, as illustrated in
L
Figure 5.10.
In general, the force on a current-carrying conductor is:
Figure 5.9 Current-carrying
wire in magnetic field.
i) always perpendicular to the plane containing the conductor and the
direction of the field in which it is placed and
ii) greatest when the conductor is at right angles to the field.
Example 5.3
A wire 25 cm long is at right angles to a 0.30 T uniform magnetic field. The
current through the wire is 6.0 A. What is the magnitude of the force on the
Figure 5.10 Right hand rule for
wire?
a magnetic force on a current-
carrying conductor.
Solution:
In this example, you are given L = 25 cm = 0.25 m, B = 0.3 T, Θ = 90° and I =
6 A.
5.6 Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire
169
You want to find the magnitude of the force.
The magnitude of the magnetic force can be calculated by
F = ILBsin Θ = 6A X 0.25 m X 0.3 T X sin 90° = 0.45 N.
Section summary
When a current carrying wire is placed in a magnetic field,
there exists a force on the wire that is perpendicular to the
plane formed by the field and the wire.
Review questions
1. Explain how the magnetic force is produced on a current-
carrying wire in a magnetic field.
2. List the factors that affect the magnitude of the force a current-
carrying wire experiences.
3. Describe how to use the right-hand rule to determine the di-
rection of a magnetic field around a straight current-carrying
wire.
4. A wire of length 400 m is in a 0.20 T magnetic field. If a 2.5 N
force acts on the wire, what is the value of the current in the
wire?
170
Unit 5 Magnetism
5.7 Magnetic force between two parallel current-
carrying wires
Exercise 5.11
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Explain how to
describe the effects of the magnetic force between two wires.
determine the
explain how parallel wires carrying-currents can attract or repel
direction of the
each other.
magnetic forces
between two
In section 5.4, you have learnt that a wire carrying a current produces
parallel wires?
magnetic field. Further, you also learnt that an external magnetic field will
exert a force on a current-carrying wire.
I₂
When two wires carrying a current are placed parallel to each other, their
magnetic fields will interact, resulting in force acting between the wires.
The magnitude of the force acting on each wire is equal, but the directions
are opposite. This is true even if the wires carry currents of different mag-
nitudes.
(a)
F₁
F2
Now, you will need to consider two cases for two parallel current-carrying
wires.
I₁
1. When current in both wires are in the same direction, you will need
d
to draw a diagram to get a clear idea of the particular situation.
Here, you have two parallel current-carrying wires, separated by a
particular distance d, such that one of the wires is carrying current
I₁ and the other is carrying I₂, which are in the same direction. The
direction of magnetic force is indicated in Figure 5.11 (a) and is found
using the right hand rule. In this case, two forces are acting toward
F1
F2
each other. Therefore, you can say that they are attractive. Therefore,
(b)
I₂
you can conclude that if the current in the two wires placed parallel
is in the same direction, the force acting on them will be perceived
Figure 5.11 Magnetic force
between two parallel wires
as attractive.
carrying currents (a) in the
same direction (b) in opposite
2. When the current in the two wires is going in opposite directions,
directions.
5.8 Applications of magnetism
171
you will need to draw a diagram to get a clear idea of the particular
situation. Here, you have two parallel current-carrying wires, sepa-
Key Concept
rated by a particular distance d, such that one of the wires is carrying
If the two con-
current I₁ and the other is carrying I₂, but in opposite directions.
ductors carry
The direction of magnetic force is indicated in Figure 5.11 (b) and is
current in the
found using the right hand rule. In this case, two forces are acting in
same direction,
opposition to each other. Thus, you can say that they are repulsive.
the wires attract
Therefore, you can conclude that if the current in the two conductors
each other. If the
placed parallel is in the opposite directions, the force acting on them
two wires carry
will be perceived as repulsive.
currents in op-
posite directions,
Section summary
they repel each
other.
The force between two parallel current-carrying conductors
is attractive if the currents are in the same direction, repulsive
if they are in opposite directions.
Activity 5.3
Review questions
Practice the right-
hand rule and
1. Two parallel wires carrying currents in the same direction
determine the
attract each other. Why?
direction of force
in Figure 5.11.
2. Is the force attractive or repulsive between the phase and
neutral lines hung from power poles? Why?
5.8 Applications of magnetism
Exercise 5.12
What do you
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
think are the ap-
describe some applications of magnetism.
plications of the
magnetism?
Magnets play a significant role in a wide range of devices including simple
toys, computers, credit cards, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) ma-
chines, and business equipment. The following is a discussion of some of
the applications of magnetism.
172
Unit 5 Magnetism
Health and medicine
Magnets are found in some commonly used medical equipment such as
MRIs. It uses powerful magnetic fields to generate a radar-like radio signal
from inside the body, using the signal to create a clear, detailed picture of
bones, organs and other tissue. An MRI magnet is very strong-thousands
of times more powerful than common magnets. Another medical use for
magnets is for treating cancer. A doctor injects a magnetically sensitive
fluid into the cancer area and uses a powerful magnet to generate heat in
the body. The heat kills the cancer cells without harming healthy organs.
In the home
Though it may not be obvious, most homes contain many magnets. Re-
frigerator magnets hold papers, bottle openers, and other small items to
the metal refrigerator door. A pocket compass uses a magnetic needle
Figure 5.12 MRI scanning machine.
5.8 Applications of magnetism
173
to show which way is north. The dark magnetic strip on the back of a
credit card stores data in much the same way as a computer's hard drive
does. Vacuum cleaners, blenders, and washing machines all have electric
motors that work on magnetic principles. You also find magnets in phones,
doorbells and children's toys.
Computers and Electronics
Many computers use magnets to store data on hard drives. Magnets alter
the direction of magnetic material on a hard disk in segments that then
represent computer data. Later, computers read the direction of each
segment of the magnetic material to "read" the data. The small speakers
found in computers, televisions, and radios also use magnets; inside the
speaker, a wire coil and magnet convert electronic signals into sound
vibrations.
Electric Power and Other Industries
Magnets offer many benefits to the industrial world. Magnets in electric
generators turn mechanical energy into electricity, while some motors use
magnets to convert electricity back into mechanical work. In recycling,
electrically-powered magnets in cranes grab and move large pieces of
metal, some weighing thousands of pounds. Mines use magnetic sorting
machines to separate useful metallic ores from crushed rock. In food
processing, magnets remove small metal bits from grains and other foods.
Farmers use magnets to catch pieces of metal that COWS eat out in the
N
field. The COW swallows the magnet with its food; as it moves through the
animal's digestive system it traps metal fragments.
040
Compasses and Navigation
S
180
Peoples use magnetic compasses for navigation purposes. They found
out magnets could direct needles and correlate with the North pole, and
Figure 5.13 Magnetic compass
they used that information to navigate. The early compasses were created
used for navigation.
with lodestone because magnets were not yet longer invented. Lodestone
174
Unit 5 Magnetism
comes from the mineral magnetite and is the handiest obviously-occurring
magnet. Modern day magnets, like neodymium magnets and uncommon
earth magnets, are crafted from a complicated process in which some
of the metals are forged together. This technique helps to cause them
to stronger and extra suitable for a way they are used today. Therefore,
lodestone in comparison to sturdy uncommon earth magnets is weaker.
Section summary
Magnetism has a number of applications from health to navi-
gation.
Review question
List other applications of magnetism not discussed here.
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on magnetism unit under the guidance
of your teacher.
1. Magnet and Compass PhET Experiment.
2. Generator PhET Experiment.
3. Magnets and Electromagnets PhET Experiment.
5.8 Applications of magnetism
175
End of unit summary
Every magnet has two poles: North and South. These are
inseparable. Like poles repel each other and unlike poles
attract each other.
The Earth also has a magnetic field.
A compass needle can be used to find the magnetic North
pole and help us find our direction.
A current-carrying conductor produces a magnetic field
around it. The right-hand rule is used to determine the direc-
tion of the magnetic field.
When a current-carrying conductor is placed in the magnetic
field, it experiences a magnetic force.
The magnitude of magnetic force on a moving charge q in a
magnetic field B is given by F= qvBsin Θ.
The magnitude of the magnetic force on a wire carrying a
current I with length in a uniform magnetic field B is given by
F= ILBsin Θ.
The force between conductors is attractive when the currents
flow in the same direction in the two wires. When the two
wires are carrying currents in opposite directions, they repel
each other.
End of unit questions and problems
1. What is a magnet?
2. How do magnets and their properties influence everyday life?
3. Describe what is meant by the term magnetic field.
4. Much like the static electric force, there is a magnetic force
176
Unit 5 Magnetism
between two magnets. How are the magnetic and electric
forces similar? How are they different?
5. What happens to the poles of a magnet if it is cut into pieces?
6. What happens when like magnetic poles are brought close
together? What about when unlike magnetic poles are brought
close together?
7. Draw the shape of the magnetic field around a bar magnet.
8. Explain how a compass needle indicates the direction of a
magnetic field.
9. Compare the magnetic field of the Earth to the magnetic field
of a bar magnet.
10. Explain the difference between the geographical North Pole
and the magnetic North pole of the Earth.
11. Draw magnetic field lines for two similar magnetic poles and
two dissimilar magnetic poles.
12. A wire 0.50 m long carrying a current of 8.0 A is at right angles
to a uniform magnetic field. The force on the wire is 0.40 N.
What is the strength of the magnetic field?
13. The current through a wire 0.80 m long is 5.0 A. The wire is per-
pendicular to a 0.60 T magnetic field. What is the magnitude
of the force on the wire?
14. An electric wire in the wall of a building carries a current of 25
A vertically upward. What is the magnetic field at a distance
of 10 cm from the wire?
15. Determine the magnitude and direction of magnetic force on
an electron traveling 8.75 X 10⁵ m/s horizontally to the East in
a vertically upward of magnetic field 0.75 T.
