Unit 1
Vector Quantities
Introduction
In science, particularly in physics, you try to make measurements as pre-
Brainstorming
cise as possible. Several times in the history of science, precise mea-
question:
surements have led to new discoveries or important developments. Any
List some phys-
number or sets of numbers used for a quantitative description of a phys-
ical quantities,
ical phenomenon is called a physical quantity. Physical quantities can
and classify them
generally be divided in two groups: scalars and vectors. Scalars have only
as scalars and
magnitudes while vectors have both magnitude and direction. The con-
vectors.
cepts of vectors and scalars help us in understanding physics of different
natural phenomena. You will learn about this topics in this unit.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
understand the differences between scalar and vector quantities;
demonstrate vectors representation graphically;
know how to add and subtract two or more vectors graphically;
resolve a single vector into its components.
2
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
1.1 Scalars and Vectors
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define scalar and vector quantities;
Exercise 1.1
describe the difference between vector and scalar quantities;
jer
From what you
learnt in grade 9,
list some scalar and vector quantities.
what do you think
are the differences
As discussed in the introduction, physical quantities can be classified into
between vectors
two categories. Physical quantities that fall in the first category are those
and scalars?
that can be completely specified by a number together with an appropri-
ate unit of measurement. For instance, it makes perfectly good sense to
say that the length of an object is 1.42 m or that the mass of an object is
Key concepts
12.21 kg. You do not have to add anything to the description of length or
mass. Similarly, the statement that the density of water is 1000 kg/m³ is a
JET
Scalars are
complete description of density. Quantities that can be specified in this
quantities that
have only mag-
simple and straightforward way are called scalar quantities. Thus, scalar
nitude whereas
quantities are physical quantities that can be completely specified by a
Vectors are quan-
single number together with an appropriate unit of measurement. Time,
tities that have
distance, speed, length, volume, temperature, energy and power are other
both direction
examples of scalar quantities.
and magnitude.
On the other hand, quantities that fall in the second category are those
which require both magnitude and direction for their complete description.
Exercise 1.2
A simple example is velocity. The statement that the velocity of a train is
List examples of
100 km/h does not make much sense unless you also tell the direction in
scalars and vec-
which the train is moving. Force is another such quantity. You must specify
tors other than
not only the magnitude of the force but also the direction in which the
those discussed in
force is applied. Such quantities are called vectors. A vector quantity has
the textbook.
both magnitude and direction. Displacement, acceleration, momentum,
impulse, weight and electric field strength are other examples of vector
quantities.
1.2 Vector representations
3
Section summary
In physics, you deal generally with two kinds of quantities:
scalars and vectors.
Scalar are quantities that are specified only by their magni-
tude while vectors are quantities that are specified by their
magnitude and direction.
Review questions
1. Explain how vector quantities differ from scalar quantities
and give some examples for each.
2. Which of the following physical quantities are vectors and
which are not: force, temperature, volume, velocity, age,
weight?
1.2 Vector representations
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 1.3
identify the magnitude and direction of a vector;
How can you
discuss how vectors can be represented algebraically and graphi-
represent vectors?
cally;
discuss about the different types of vectors.
In the previous section, you learnt that vectors are represented both in mag-
nitude and direction. On the other hand, vector quantities are represented
either algebraically or geometrically. Algebraically, they are represented
by a bold letter as A or with an arrow over the letter, for example, A. For
example, a displacement can be represented by the expression S = 50 km,
Southwest. S = 50 km designates only the magnitude of the vector. The
magnitude is also indicated by placing the absolute value notation around
4
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
the symbol that denotes the vector; so, you can write equivalently that
S ≡ |S|.
On the other hand, vectors are represented geometrically by an arrow, or
an arrow-tipped line segment. Such an arrow having a specified length and
direction shows the graphical representation of a vector. You will use this
representation when drawing vector diagrams. The initial point of arrow
is called tail and the final point of the arrow is the head as it is indicated
in Figure 1.1. The arrow is drawn to scale so that its length represents the
magnitude of the vector, and the arrow points in the specified direction of
the vector. Hence,
magnitude
head
The length of the arrow represents the vector magnitude if it is drawn
direction,
in scale.
tail
The arrow head represents the vector direction.
Figure 1.1 Head and tail of a
vector.
Thus, in order to draw a vector accurately, you must specify a scale and
include a reference direction in the diagram. To do this, you need a ruler
to measure and draw the vectors to the correct length. The length of the
arrow should be proportional to the magnitude of the quantity being repre-
sented. So you must decide on a scale for your drawing. For example, you
might let 1 cm on paper represent 2 N (1 cm represents 2 N), a force of 20
N towards the East would be represented as an arrow 10 cm long. A scale
allows us to translate the length of the arrow into the vector's magnitude.
Key concepts
The important thing is to choose a scale that produces a diagram of rea-
sonable size. A reference direction may be a line representing a horizontal
Vectors are
surface or the points of a compass.
represented either
algebraically or
geometrically.
The following are the procedures that you might use for drawing vectors
graphically.
1. Decide upon a scale and write it down.
2. Determine the length of the arrow representing the vector by using
the scale.
1.2 Vector representations
5
3. Draw the vector as an arrow. Make sure that you fill in the arrow
Activity 1.1
head.
By using a ruler,
4. Fill in the magnitude of the vector.
a protractor, and
a square paper,
Example 1.1
graphically draw
Draw the vector, 16 km East, to scale by indicating the scale that you have
the following nu-
used:
merical vectors.
Solution
A) 10 cm, 60°
First, let us decide upon a scale. Let 1 cm represent 4 km. So if 1 cm = 4 km,
B) 15 cm , 120°
then 16 km = 4 cm and the direction is in the East. Using this information,
C) 3 cm, 30°
you can draw the vectors as arrows as follows.
16 km
Figure 1.2 A scaled diagram for a vector with a magnitude of 16 km.
On the other hand, the following are some of the different types of vectors.
1. Zero vector or Null vector: a vector with zero magnitude and no
direction.
2. Unit Vector: vector that has magnitude equal to one.
3. Equal vectors: vectors that have the same magnitude and same
direction.
Figure 1.3 Two equal vectors.
4. Negative of a vector: a vector that have the same magnitude but
opposite direction with the given vector.
Section summary
Algebraically, a vector is represented by a bold face letter or
an arrow over the letter.
Geometrically, a vector is represented by an arrow where the
length of the arrow represents magnitude and the arrow head
represents the direction for the vector.
6
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
1. Give an example of a vector stating its magnitude, units and
direction.
2. Choose your own scale and draw arrows to represent the fol-
lowing vectors:
A) À = 40 km North,
B) B = 32 m/s making an angle of 60° with the horizontal.
3. Discuss the different types of vectors.
1.3 Vector addition and subtraction
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 1.4
explain how to add and subtract vectors;
Is it possible to
add two vectors in
define the term resultant vector.
the same way as
you did in scalars?
Different mathematical operations can be performed with vectors. You
Explain.
need to understand the mathematical properties of vectors, like addition
and subtraction.
Addition of Vectors
The addition of scalar quantities is non problematic, it is a simple arith-
Key concepts
metic sum. For example, the total mass of 2 kg plus 3 kg is 5 kg. The
increase in temperature from 5° C to 12° C is 7°C. However, like scalars,
Scalars and
you cannot add two vectors. This is because when two vectors are added,
vectors can never
you need to take account of their direction as well as their magnitude. Of
be added.
For any two
course, you should remember that only vectors of the same kind can be
vectors to be
added. For example, two forces or two velocities can be added. But a force
added, they must
and a velocity cannot be added.
be of the same
nature.
The resultant of a number of vectors is the single vector whose effect is
the same as the individual vectors acting together. In other words, the
1.3 Vector addition and subtraction
7
individual vectors can be replaced by the resultant where the overall effect
is the same.
A+B
B
If vectors À and B have a resultant Ř, this can be represented mathemati-
cally as,
A
Ř = A+B
(1.1)
Figure 1.4 Addition of vectors À
and B.
Subtraction of Vectors
Vector subtraction is a straight forward extension of vector addition. If
you want to subtract B from Å, written À - B, you must first define what
is meant by subtraction. As it is discussed in the previous section, the
negative of vector B is defined to be - B; that is, graphically the negative of
B
any vector has the same magnitude but opposite in direction as shown in
Figure 1.5. In other words, B has the same length as - B, but points in the
-B
opposite direction. Essentially, you just flip the vector so that it points in
the opposite direction.
The subtraction of vector B from vector À is then simply defined to be the
addition of - B to À. That is,
Figure 1.5 Vector B and the
negative of Vector B.
A-B=A+(-B)
(1.2)
Note that vector subtraction is the addition of a negative vector. The order
B
of subtraction does not affect the results. Hence, as it is indicated in Figure
1.6, draw vector - B from the tip of À and join the tail of À with the tip of
-B
- B, then the resulting vector is the difference (A - B).
À
A-B
Section Summary
Vector addition is a means of finding the resultant of a number
Figure 1.6 Subtraction of B
of vectors.
from À.
Subtraction of a vector is addition of the negative of a vector.
8
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
Exercise 1.5
1. What is meant by subtraction of vector?
If two vectors
have equal mag-
2. What is meant by resultant vector?
nitude, what are
the maximum
and minimum
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
magnitudes of
their sum?
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the graphical method of vector addition;
use the graphical method of vector addition to solve problems.
You can add or subtract vectors using the algebraic or graphical method of
vector addition. You will learn about the algebraic method in your grade
11 physics. In this section, you will learn about the graphical method of
vector addition and subtraction.
As discussed above, one method for adding vectors involves manipulating
their graphical representations on paper. So using the graphical method of
vector addition, vectors are drawn to scale and the resultant is determined
using a ruler and protractor. The following is the discussion of the primary
graphical techniques: the triangle method, the parallelogram method, and
the polygon method.
Key concepts
Procedure for using graphical method of vector addition
Graphically, vec-
Decide on an appropriate scale. Record it on the diagram.
tors can be added
Pick a starting point.
using the triangle,
parallelogram and
Draw first vector with appropriate length and in the indicated
polygon method
direction.
of vector addition.
Draw the second and remaining vectors with appropriate
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
9
length and direction.
Draw the resultant based on the specific rule you are using.
Measure the length of the resultant; use the scale to convert
to the magnitude of the resultant.
Use a protractor to measure the vector's direction.
Triangle method of vector addition
Triangle law of vector addition is used to find the sum of two vectors. This
law is used to add two vectors when the first vector's head is joined to
the tail of the second vector and then joining the tail of the first vector
to the head of the second vector to form a triangle, and hence obtain the
resultant sum vector. That's why the triangle law of vector addition is also
called the head-to-tail method for the addition of vectors.
Thus, if two vectors acting simultaneously on a body are represented both
B
in magnitude and direction by two sides of a triangle taken in an order,
(a)
then the resultant vector (both magnitude and direction) of these two
vectors is given by the third side of that triangle taken in the opposite order.
A
This is the statement for the triangle law of vector addition.
R
Consider two vectors À and B shown in Figure 1.7 (a). To add these two
(b)
B
vectors using the triangle method, the head of vector À should be joined
A
to the tail of vector B. Then, the resultant vector R has its tail at the tail of
À and its head at the head of B as shown in Figure 1.7 (b). This is written
Figure 1.7 The triangle rule for
the addition of two vectors.
as:
Ř = A+B
(1.3)
10
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
NB
Activity 1.2
Consider adding two vectors À and B graphically. The two vectors
are shown in Figure 1.8. Using the above procedure of vector addi-
Θ
tion, add these two vectors using the triangle law of vector addition
if the angle Θ is 30°.
A = 5 N
Figure 1.8 Two vectors À and B.
Parallelogram method of vector addition
The vector addition may also be understood by the law of parallelogram.
The parallelogram law of vector addition is used to add two vectors when
the vectors that are to be added form the two adjacent sides of a parallel-
ogram by joining the tails of the two vectors. Then, the sum of the two
vectors is given by the diagonal of the parallelogram.
(a)
B
Thus, if two vectors are represented by the two adjacent sides (both in
A
magnitude and direction) of a parallelogram drawn from a point, then
their resultant vector is represented completely by the diagonal of the
A
parallelogram drawn from the same point. This is the statement for the
B
(b)
R-B-A
B
parallelogram law of vector addition
Suppose two vectors À and B are at arbitrary positions as shown in Figure
A
1.9 (a). Translate either one of them in parallel to the beginning of the other
Figure 1.9 The Parallelogram
vector, so that after the translation, both vectors have their origins at the
rule for the addition of two
same point. Now, at the end of vector À you draw a line parallel to vector B
vectors.
and at the end of vector B you draw a line parallel to vector À (the dashed
lines in Figure 1.9 (b)). In this way, you obtain a parallelogram. From
Activity 1.3
the origin of the two vectors, you draw a diagonal of the parallelogram as
Repeat activity 1.2
shown in (Figure 1.9 (b)). The diagonal is the resultant Ř of the two vectors.
using the parallel-
Thus,
ogram method of
vector addition.
R=A+B =
(1.4)
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
11
Since vector addition is commutative,
A+B=B+A
A
(1.5)
B
Polygon method of vector addition
TO
C
(a)
This law is used for the addition of more than two vectors. According to
this law, if you have a large number of vectors, place the tail end of each
successive vector at the head end of previous one. The resultant of all
TO
A
vectors can be obtained by drawing a vector from the tail end of first to the
head end of the last vector.
C
Suppose you want to draw the resultant vector Ř of four vectors A, B,
TR
B
Č, and D shown in Figure 1.10 (a). You select any one of the vectors as
(b)
the first vector and make a parallel translation of a second vector to a
position where the origin ("tail") of the second vector coincides with the
Figure 1.10 The polygon rule
end ("head") of the first vector. Then, you select a third vector and make
for the addition of vectors.
a parallel translation of the third vector to a position where the origin of
the third vector coincides with the end of the second vector. You repeat
Activity 1.4
this procedure until all the vectors are in a head-to-tail arrangement like
Use the polygon
the one shown in (Figure 1.10 (b)). You draw the resultant vector Ř by
method of vec-
connecting the origin ("tail") of the first vector with the end ("head") of the
tor addition to
last vector. The end of the resultant vector is at the end of the last vector.
find the resultant
vector Ř of the
Thus, the resultant vector R is an arrow drawn from the tail of vector D
three vectors:
to the head of vector B, i.e., Ř = D + À + C + B as shown in Figure 1.10
À = 25.0m, 49.0⁰
(b). Because the addition of vectors is associative and commutative, you
North of East,
obtain the same resultant vector regardless of which vector you choose to
B = 23.0m, 15.0°
be first, second, third, or fourth in this construction.
North of East and
C = 32.0m,68.0⁰
Note: You will follow the same procedure during the subtraction of vectors.
South of East.
Let us now consider a few special cases of addition of vectors.
Choose a reason-
able scale.
1. When the two vectors are in the same direction (parallel to each
other)
12
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
If vectors À and B are parallel, then the magnitude of the resultant
vector Ř is the sum of the magnitudes of the two vectors. Hence, the
magnitude of the resultant vector is
|R|=|A+B|
(1.6)
Since the two vectors are in the same direction, the direction of the
resultant vector is in the direction of one of the two vectors.
Key concepts
To determine the resultant of two vectors acting:
À
B
+
tin the same direction, add the given vectors and take the
(East)
1R
(a)
common direction.
1R
rin opposite directions, get the difference and take the direc-
+
B
(East)
tion of the vector with the greater value.
À
(b)
Figure 1.11 Resultant vector Ř
2. When the two vectors are acting in opposite directions
of two vectors À and B when
If vectors À and B are anti-parallel (i.e., in opposite direction), then
they are (a) same direction and
the magnitude of the resultant vector Ř is the difference of the mag-
(b) opposite direction.
nitudes of the two vectors. Hence, the magnitude of the resultant
vector is
|R|=|A-B|
(1.7)
Since the two vectors are in opposite directions with one another, the
direction of the resultant vector is in the direction of the larger vector.
Note: The resultant of two vectors acting on the same point is maxi-
mum when the vectors are acting in the same direction and mini-
mum when they act in opposite directions.
3. When the two vectors are perpendicular
If vectors À and B are perpendicular to each other as shown in 1.12,
then the magnitude of the resultant vector Ř is obtained using the
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
13
Pythagoras theorem. Hence, the magnitude of the resultant vector is
|R|= V A² + B²
(1.8)
1R
The direction of the resultant vector is obtained using the trigono-
B
metric equation:
Θ = tan
(1.9)
Θ
Note: You can compare the result you obtain in each of the three
À
cases with a ruler and protractor. Surely, you will obtain similar
Figure 1.12 Two perpendic-
result.
ular vectors À and B; and its
resultant vector Ř.
Example 1.1
Exercise 1.6
Two vectors have magnitudes of 6 units and 3 units. What is the magnitude
If two vectors À
of the resultant vector when the two vectors are (a) in the same direction,
and B are per-
(b) in opposite direction and (c) perpendicular to each other?
pendicular, how
you can find the
Solution:
sum of the two
You are given with two vectors of magnitudes 6 units and 3 units.
vectors?
(a) When the two vectors are in the same direction,
|R| = (6+3) units = 9 units.
(b) When the two vectors are in the opposite directions,
|R| = (6 3) units = 3 units.
(c) When the two vectors are perpendicular to each other,
|R| = + B² = + units = 6.7 units.
Please compare the result you obtained here with the value you obtained
with the direct measurement by a ruler.
Section Summary
Two vectors can be added by graphical means using the tri-
angle and the parallelogram method. But for more than two
vectors, the polygon method is used.
14
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
1. Two vectors À and B have the same magnitude of 5 units and
they start from the origin: B points to the North East and À
points to the South West exactly opposite to vector B. What
would be the magnitude of the resultant vector? Why?
2. If two vectors have equal magnitude, what are the maximum
and minimum magnitudes of their sum?
3. If three vectors have unequal magnitudes, can their sum be
zero? Explain.
4. Consider six vectors that are added tail-to-head, ending up
where they started from. What is the magnitude of the resul-
tant vector?
5. Vector C is 6 m in the x-direction. Vector D is 8 m in the
y-direction. Use the parallelogram method to work out C + D.
1.5 Vector resolution
Exercise 1.7
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
What do you
resolve a vector into horizontal and vertical components;
think is vector
find the resultant of two or more vectors using the component
resolution?
method.
In the previous discussion of vector addition, you saw that a number
of vectors acting together can be combined to give a single vector (the
resultant). In much the same way, a single vector can be broken down into
a number of vectors when added give the original vector. These vectors
which sum to the original are called components of the original vector.
The process of breaking a vector into its components is called resolving
into components.
1.5 Vector resolution
15
Placing vectors in a coordinate system that you have chosen makes it
possible to decompose them into components along each of the chosen
coordinate axes. In the rectangular coordinate system shown in Figure
1.13, vector À is broken up or resolved into two component vectors. One,
Ax, is parallel to the x-axis, and the other, Ay, is parallel to the y-axis.
The horizontal and vertical components can be found by two methods:
graphical method and simple trigonometry. Let us look at them one by one.
Graphical method of vector resolution:
The following are the steps that you follow to resolve a vector graphically.
1. Select a scale and draw the vector to scale in the appropriate direc-
tion.
y
2. Extend X- and y-axes from the tail of the vector to the entire length
of the vector and beyond.
A
Ay=A sin Θ
3. From the arrow head of the vector, construct perpendicular projec-
tions to the X- and the y-axes.
Θ
4. Draw the x-component from the tail of the vector to the intersection
x
Aₓ=A cos Θ
of the perpendicular projection with the x-axis. Label this compo-
nent as Ax.
Figure 1.13 The horizontal (Aₓ)
and vertical (Ay) components
5. Draw the y-component from the tail of the vector to the intersection
of vector Ã.
of the perpendicular projection with the y-axis. Label this compo-
nent as Ay.
6. Measure the length of the two components and use the scale to
determine the magnitude of the components.
Trigonometric method of vector resolution:
The trigonometric method of vector resolution relies on an understanding
of the sine, cosine, and tangent functions. You can find the components
by using trigonometry. The components are calculated according to these
16
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
equations, where the angle Θ is measured counterclockwise from the posi-
tive x-axis.
Aₓ = Acos 0
(1.10)
and
Ay= Asin Θ
(1.11)
You can see that the original vector is the sum of the two component
Key concepts
vectors.
Vectors can be
A = Aₓ + Ay
(1.12)
resolved into com-
Because Aₓ and Ay are at a right angle (90°), the magnitude of the resultant
ponents along a
vector can be calculated using the Pythagorean Theorem.
specified set of
coordinate's axes.
(1.13)
To find the angle or direction of the resultant, recall that the tangent of the
angle that the vector makes with the x-axis is given by the following.
Θ where tan Θ = Opposite Adjacent side side side
(1.14)
N
Example 1.2
W
E
A motorist undergoes a displacement of 250 km in a direction 30° North of
$-250 km
East. Resolve this displacement into its components.
SN
Solution:
Draw a rough sketch of the original vector. You can use trigonometry to
30°
calculate the magnitudes of the components (along North and along East)
SE
of the original displacement:
Figure 1.14 Resolving of resul-
tant displacement.
SN = (250) (sin 30°) = 125 km
SE = (250) (cos 30°) = 216.5 km
1.5 Vector resolution
17
Please check your answer with the graphical method, i.e., with ruler and
brotractor.
N
End
Example 1.3
A boy walks 3 km due East and then 2 km due North. What is the magnitude
5
SN=2 km
and direction of his displacement vector?
0
Start
SE=3 km
Solution:
You first make an overhead view of the boy's movement as shown in Figure
Figure 1.15 The magnitude and
1.15. The magnitude of the displacement |S| is given by the Pythagorean
direction of the boy's motion.
theorem as follows:
|S| = [(3 + (2 1/2 = 3.6 km
The direction that this displacement vector makes relative to east is given
by:
tan 0 = 2 km = 0.666 0.666
Thus,
= tan⁻¹(0.666)=33.699
Hence, the boy's displacement vector is 3.61 km with 56.31° East of North,
or 33.69° North of East.
Exercise 1.8
Could a vector
Please check your answer with the graphical method, i.e., with ruler and
ever be shorter
protractor.
than one of its
Section summary
components?
Could it be equal
Any vector can be resolved into a horizontal and a vertical
in length to one of
component.
its components?
Explain.
The combined effect of the horizontal and vertical compo-
nents of the vector quantity is the same as the original vector.
18
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
1. What is resolution of a vector?
2. Draw simple vector diagrams and resolve them into their com-
ponents.
(a) 40 N at an angle of 30° from the horizontal.
(b) 10 m/s at an angle of 80° from the horizontal.
(c) 1900 km at an angle of 40° from the vertical.
3. A car travels 10 km due North and then 5 km due West. Find
graphically and analytically the magnitude and direction of
the car's resultant vector.
4. A girl walks 25.0° North of East for 3.10 km. How far would
she have to walk due North and due East to arrive at the same
location?
Virtual Lab
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiment on vector quantities unit under the guid-
ance of your teacher.
1. Vector Addition PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
Scalar is a quantity specified only by its magnitude.
Vectors is a quantity specified by its magnitude and direction.
The vector is represented by an arrow drawn at a suitable scale
where:
1.5 Vector resolution
19
- The arrow length represents the vector magnitude.
- The arrow head represents the vector direction.
Vector addition is nothing but finding the resultant of a num-
ber of vectors acting on a body while vector subtraction is
addition of the negative of a vector.
The sum of two or more vectors is called the resultant. The
resultant of two vectors can be found using either the paral-
lelogram method or the triangle method. For more than two
vectors, one can use the polygon method of vector addition.
The method of finding the components of vectors is called
resolving vector.
When vector À is decomposed along the rectangular coordi-
nate system, the horizontal component of À is Aₓ = Acos Θ
and the vertical component of À is Ay = Asin Θ.
End of unit questions and problems
1. A vector drawn 15 mm long represents a velocity of 30 m/s.
How long should you draw a vector to represent a velocity of
20 m/s?
2. A vector that is 1 cm long represents a displacement of 5 km.
How many kilometers are represented by a 3 cm vector drawn
to the same scale?
3. Describe how you would add two vectors graphically.
4. Which of the following actions is permissible when you are
graphically adding one vector to another? A) move the vector
B) rotate the vector C) change the vector's length.
5. In your own words, write a clear definition of the resultant of
two or more vectors.
20
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
6. Explain the method you would use to subtract two vectors
graphically.
7. You walk 30 m South and 30 m East. Find the magnitude and
direction of the resultant displacement both graphically and
algebraically.
8. A hiker walks 14.7 km at an angle 35° East of South. Find the
East and North components of this walk.
9. If two vectors have equal magnitudes, can their sum be zero?
Explain.
10. Based on the three vectors in Figure 1.16, which of the follow-
ing is true?
B
(a) A+B+C=0
(b) A=C+B
A
(c) C+A=B
Figure 1.16 Magnitude and
11. For the two vectors À and B with magnitude 6.8 cm and 5.5
y
cm in Figure 1.17, determine the magnitude and direction of:
(a) R=A+B
A
B
X
(b) R=A-B
(c) R=B-A
Figure 1.17 Magnitude and
12. Three vectors A, B and C have a magnitude and direction of
direction of two vectors
21 unit North, 16 unit East and 26 unit South, respectively.
Graphically determine the resultant of these three vectors?
13. If vx = 9.8 m/s and vy = 6.4 m/s, determine the magnitude and
direction of v.
Joma
GIRMA
Joma
BAREGA
