Unit 6
Electromagnetic Waves and
Geometrical Optics
Introduction
Light is one form of an Electromagnetic wave. Light lets us see things and
is responsible for our visual contact with our immediate environment. It
enables us to admire and adore various beautiful manifestations of nature.
You can use light rays to model mirrors, lenses, telescopes, microscopes,
and prisms. The study of how light interacts with materials is called optics.
Brainstorming
When dealing with light rays, you are usually interested in the shape of
Activity
a material and the angles at which light rays hit it. This kind of optics is
Do you remember
referred to as geometrical optics. This unit deals with topics related to
the definition of
Electromagnetic waves and geometrical optics.
wave that you
learnt in grade
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
9? Try to discuss
understand the concept of Electromagnetic waves;
in group and
tell your answer
understand the properties and transmission of light in various me-
of wave to your
dia and their applications;
teacher.
investigate the properties of light through experimentation and
illustration using diagrams and optical instruments;
predict the behavior of light through the use of ray diagrams;
appreciate the contributions of optics in our day to day life.
177
178
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.1 Electromagnetic (EM) waves
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the propagation of EM waves;
state sources of EM waves.
Exercise 6.1
A wave transfers energy from one place to another without transferring
What are the dif-
matter. Waves, such as water waves and sound waves, transfer energy by
ferent types of
making particles of matter move. The energy is passed along from particle
waves?
to particle as they collide with their neighbors.
Depending on their medium of propagation, waves are categorized into
Key Concept
mechanical waves and EM waves.
EM is a wave
Mechanical waves are the types of waves that use matter to transfer
that consists of
energy. They cannot travel in almost empty space between the Earth
oscillating electric
and the Sun.
and magnetic
fields, which radi-
An EM wave is a wave that can travel through empty space or through
ate outward from
matter. They are produced by charged particles, such as electrons,
the source at the
that move back and forth or vibrate. It is thus made of electric and
speed of light.
magnetic fields as shown in Figure 6.1. Both parts are called fields
and vibrate at right angles to the wave motion. Thus, EM waves are
transverse waves as you learnt in grade 9. In transverse waves, the di-
rection of oscillation is perpendicular to the direction of propagation
Exercise 6.2
of waves while in a longitudinal wave, the direction of oscillation
Did you recall the
is parallel to the direction of propagation of the wave. Recall that a
differences be-
wave on a rope is a transverse wave that causes the rope to move at
tween transverse
right angles to the direction the wave is traveling.
and longitudinal
waves?
Like all waves, an EM wave has a frequency and a wavelength. The num-
ber of times the electric and magnetic parts vibrate each second is the
frequency of the wave. The wavelength is the distance between the crests
or troughs of the vibrating electric or magnetic parts.
6.1 Electromagnetic (EM) waves
179
Electric field(E)
tw
Magnetic field (B)
Direction
Y
B
Direction
X
Z
too
tw
Figure 6.1 Electric field and magnetic field in an EM wave.
Radiant Energy from the Sun
The Sun emits EM waves that travel through space and reach Earth. The
energy carried by EM waves is called radiant energy. Almost 92 % of the
radiant energy that reaches the Earth from the Sun is carried by infrared
and visible light waves. Infrared waves make you feel warm when you sit
in sunlight and visible light waves enable you to see. A small amount of
the radiant energy that reaches Earth is carried by ultraviolet waves. These
are the waves that can cause sunburn if you are exposed to sunlight for too
long.
Section summary
EM waves are transverse waves made of vibrating electric and
magnetic fields.
Review questions
1. Explain how an EM wave propagates.
2. Do EM waves need a medium to travel through?
3. Describe the properties of EM waves.
180
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.2 EM Spectrum
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe what an EM spectrum is;
describe and explain the differences and similarities of the spec-
trum's of EM waves;
Exercise 6.3
What do you know
describe the uses and dangers of the spectrum's of EM waves.
about the EM
spectrum?
As shown in Figure 6.2, an EM spectrum is the complete range of EM wave
frequencies and wavelengths. At one end of the spectrum, the waves have
a low frequency, a long wavelength, and low energy. At the other end of
the spectrum, the waves have a high frequency, a short wavelength, and
high energy. All of the waves, from radio waves to visible light to gamma
rays, are the same kind of wave. They differ from each other only by their
frequencies, wavelengths, and energies.
You briefly describe these different spectrum's of EM wave, in order of
decreasing wavelengths.
Radio
Microwave
Infrared
Visible
Ultraviolet
X-Ray
Gamma Ray
Longer
Wavelength (m)
Shorter
10²
1
1
1
10⁻¹
10⁻²
10⁻³
10⁴
10⁻⁵
10⁻⁶
10⁻⁷
10 ⁸
10⁻⁹
10⁻¹⁰
10⁻¹¹
10⁻¹²
10⁻¹³
Lower
Frequency (Hz)
Higher
10⁶
107
10⁸
10
9
10
10
10
11
10¹²
10
13
10
14
10
15
10
16
1017
10
18
1019
10²⁰
10
21
Radio
Microwave
Infrared
Ultraviolet
X-Ray
Gamma Ray
Visible Light
700nm
600nm
500nm
400nm
Figure 6.2 The EM spectrum.
6.2 EM Spectrum
181
Radio waves
Radio waves are made by various types of transmitters, depending on the
Key Concept
wavelength. They are also given off by stars, sparks, and lightning, which
The EM spec-
is why you hear interference on your radio in a thunderstorm. They have
trum consists
the lowest frequencies in the EM spectrum, ranging from 500 kHz to about
of the following
1000 MHz and a wavelength of around 1 meter to thousands of meters.
types of radia-
tion: radio waves,
They are used mainly for communications purposes like police radio com-
microwaves, in-
munications, military aircraft radios and television transmissions. On
frared, visible,
the other hand, large doses of radio waves are believed to cause cancer,
ultraviolet, X-rays,
leukaemia and other disorders.
gamma-rays.
Gamma-rays have
Microwaves
the highest energy
and are the most
Microwaves are basically extremely high-frequency radio waves, and are
penetrating, while
made by various types of transmitters. In a mobile phone, they are made
radio waves have
by a transmitter chip and an antenna; in a microwave oven, they are made
the lowest energy
by a "magnetron". Their wavelength is usually a couple of centimeters.
and are the least
Stars also give off microwaves.
penetrating.
Microwaves cause water and fat molecules to vibrate which makes the
substances hot. Thus, you can use microwaves to cook many types of
food. Mobile phones use microwaves, which can be generated by a small
antenna. They are also used by traffic speed cameras, and for radar, which
is used by aircraft, ships and weather forecasters.
Prolonged exposure to microwaves is known to cause "cataracts" in your
eyes which is a clouding of the cornea. So do not make it a habit of pressing
your face against the microwave oven door to see if your food is ready.
Microwaves from mobile phones can affect parts of your brain as you are
holding the transmitter right by your head. The current advice is to keep
calls short. To avoid being harmed by the powerful radar units in modern
military planes, people who work on aircraft carrier decks wear special
suits which reflect microwaves.
182
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Infrared waves
Infrared waves are just below visible red light in the EM spectrum. You
probably think of Infrared waves as heat because they are given off by hot
objects and you can feel them as warmth on your skin. Infrared waves
are also given off by stars, lamps, flames and anything else that is warm
including you.
Infrared waves are used for many tasks, for example, as remote controls
for TVs and video recorders and physiotherapists use heat lamps to help
heal sports injuries. Infrared waves are used to see objects in the dark.
Police helicopters track criminals at night using cameras that can see in
the dark. Night sights for weapons sometimes use a sensitive infrared
detector. Weather forecasters use satellite pictures to see what is heading
our way. Some of the images they use were taken using infrared cameras,
because they show cloud and rain patterns more clearly.
Exercise 6.4
The danger from too much infrared radiation is very simple: it simply
What are the uses
makes you hot.
and dangers of
each of the EM
Visible Light
spectrum?
Our eyes can detect only a tiny part of the EM spectrum called visible light.
The frequency of visible light ranges between about 4 X 10¹⁴ Hz to 7 X 10¹⁴
Hz. Its wavelength in vacuum ranges between about 700 nm and 400 nm.
Visible light, emitted or reflected from objects around us gives us with
information about the world. The color of the visible spectrum will be
discussed in detail in Section 6.8 of this unit.
You use light to see things. As the Sun sends so much light towards our
planet, you have evolved to make use of those particular wavelengths in
order to sense our environment.
Too much light can damage the retina in your eye. This can happen when
you look at something very bright such as the Sun. Although the damage
6.2 EM Spectrum
183
AM
FM
TV
Radar
TV Remote
Light Bulb
Sun
X-ray machine
Radioctive Elements
Radio waves
Infrared
Ultraviolet
X-rays
Gamma rays
100m
1m
1cm
0.01cm
1000nm
10nm
0.01nm
0.0001nm
Visible spectrum
Figure 6.3 Visible spectrum.
can heal, if it is too bad, it will be permanent.
Ultraviolet rays
Ultraviolet (UV) rays covers wavelengths ranging from about 4 X 10⁻⁷ m
(400 nm) down to 6 X 10⁻¹⁰ m (0.6 nm). UV radiation is produced by special
lamps and very hot bodies. The sun is also an important source of UV light.
But fortunately, most of it is absorbed in the ozone layer in the atmosphere
at an altitude of about 40 to 50 km.
Uses for UV light include getting a sun tan, detecting forged bank notes in
shops and hardening some types of dental filling. You also see UV lamps
in discos where they make your clothes glow. When you mark your posses-
sions with a security marker pen, the ink is invisible unless you shine a UV
lamp at it. UV rays can be used to kill microbes. Hospitals use UV lamps to
sterilize surgical equipment and the air in operating theaters. Food and
drug companies also use UV lamps to sterilize their products. Suitable
doses of UV rays cause the body to produce vitamin D, and this is used by
doctors to treat vitamin D deficiency and some skin disorders.
184
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Large doses of UV can damage the retinas in your eyes, so it is important
to check that your sunglasses will block UV light. If your sunglasses do
not block UV, you will actually get more UV light on your retinas than if
you did not wear them. Large doses of UV cause sunburn and even skin
cancer. Fortunately, the ozone layer in the Earth's atmosphere screens us
from most of the UV given off by the Sun.
X-rays
X-rays are very high frequency waves and carry a lot of energy. They will
pass through most substances, and this makes them useful in medicine
and industry to see inside things. X-rays are given off by stars and strongly
by some types of nebula. When you use X-rays, you make them by firing
a beam of electrons at a "target". If you fire the electrons with enough
energy, X-rays will be produced.
X-rays are used by doctors to see the inside parts of a patient. X-rays are
also used in airport security checks to see inside your luggage. They are
also used by astronomers as many objects in the universe emit X-rays,
which you can detect using suitable radio telescopes.
X-rays can cause cell damage and cancers. This is why Radiographers in
hospitals stand behind a shield when they X-ray their patients.
Gamma rays
Gamma rays are given off by stars and by some radioactive substances.
They are extremely high frequency waves and carry a large amount of
energy. They pass through most materials and are quite difficult to stop;-
you need lead or concrete in order to block them out.
Because gamma rays can kill living cells, they are used to kill cancer cells
without having to resort to difficult surgery. This is called "Radiotherapy"
and works because cancer cells cannot repair themselves like healthy cells
6.2 EM Spectrum
185
can when damaged by gamma rays. In industry, radioactive "tracer" sub-
stances can be put into pipes and machinery, then you can detect where
the substances go. This is basically the same use as in medicine. Gamma
rays kill microbes and are used to sterilize food so that it will keep fresh for
longer. This is known as "irradiated" food. Gamma rays are also used to
sterilize medical equipment.
Gamma rays cause cell damage and can cause a variety of cancers. They
cause mutations in growing tissues and hence, unborn babies are espe-
cially vulnerable.
Section summary
The EM spectrum is made up of a broad range of frequencies
of EM radiation.
Each type of the EM spectrum have their own benefits and
side effects.
Review questions
1. Mention one source of EM waves.
2. Arrange the following types of EM radiation in order of in-
creasing frequency: infrared, X-rays, UV rays, visible light, and
gamma.
3. Discuss on the use of each type of EM spectrum.
4. Describe the dangers of each type of EM spectrum.
186
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.3 Light as a wave
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
illustrate the propagation of light;
describe the medium of propagation of light;
Exercise 6.5
describe the speed of light waves.
Does light require
In the previous section, you learnt that light is a form of EM wave. Light is,
a medium to
travel?
thus, another type of wave that carries energy. The light that humans can
see is called a 'visible light'.
Medium of propagation of light
Like other waves, light waves can travel through matter. Although it travels
through matter, it is different from waves like water and sound waves. This
is because light is an EM wave and it can pass through a vacuum. That is
Key Concept
why you can see light from the moon, distant stars, and galaxies.
It As light is an
EM wave, it can
Speed of light
travel in a vacuum
as well as through
An EM wave, including light, is special because, no matter what the fre-
materials such
quency, it all moves at a constant velocity (in a vacuum), which is known
as air, water, and
as the speed of light. The speed of light has the symbol c and is equal to
glass.
2.99792458 X 10⁸ m/s ≈ 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s.
In reality, nothing travels faster than the speed of light. Thus, in empty
space, light travels at a speed of about 300,000 kilometers. Light travels so
fast that light emitted from the Sun travels 150 million km to Earth in only
Exercise 6.6
about eight and a half minutes. Even though light travels incredibly fast,
How do you know
stars other than the Sun are so far away that it takes years for the light they
emit to reach Earth.
that light trav-
els through a
vacuum?
On the other hand, when light travels through matter, it interacts with the
atoms and molecules in the material and slows down. As a result, light
6.3 Light as a wave
187
travels fastest in empty space, and slowest in solids. In glass, for example,
light travels about 197,000 km/s.
Because all EM waves in a vacuum have the same speed c (i.e., speed of
Key Concept
light), it follows that:
It
EM waves
in general and
c=Xxf =
(6.1)
light in par-
where Л is the wavelength of the EM wave, and f is the frequency of the
ticular travel
EM wave. Thus, the greater the frequency of an EM wave, the smaller its
with a speed of
3.00 X 10⁸ m/s in a
wavelength becomes.
vacuum.
Example 6.1
Find the frequency of red light with a wavelength of 700 nm.
Solution:
You are given that A = 700 nm and c = 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s. You are asked to find
the frequency.
You can obtain the frequency by rearranging the formula c = 1xf, to yield
10⁻⁹n Hz
Example 6.2
An FM radio station broadcasts EM radiation at a frequency of 103.4 MHz.
Calculate the wavelength of this radiation.
Solution:
In this example, you are given f = 103.4 MHz and c = 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s. What
you want to find is the wavelength, Л.
From the expression c = 1xf, X you can easily derive for Л. Thus,
188
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Propagation of light
Exercise 6.7
A source of light such as a light bulb gives off light rays that travel away
from the light source in all directions just as the rock hitting the pond
If you drop a rock
causes waves to form in the water as in Figure 6.4 (b). However, while the
on the smooth
water waves spread out only on the surface of the pond, light waves spread
surface of a pond,
what would hap-
out in all directions from the light source as it is indicated in Figure 6.4 (a).
pen?
To understand the direction of propagation of a light wave, look at light
entering a room through a small opening in a wall. You will note the
motion of dust particles, which essentially provide simple evidence that
light travels in a straight line. An arrow headed straight line represents the
direction of propagation of light and is called a ray.
Exercise 6.8
How is light prop-
Light rays are drawn using straight lines with arrow heads and are used
agated?
to show the path that light travels. A collection of rays is called a beam.
Light rays are, therefore, narrow beams of light that travel in a straight line.
You can use the idea of a light ray to indicate the direction through which
light travels. A ray diagram is a drawing that shows the path of light rays.
In Figure 6.5, the light rays from the object enter the eye, and the eye sees
the object.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4 (a) Light moves away in all directions from a light source, (b) Ripples
spread out on the surface of water.
6.3 Light as a wave
189
light
analyze
observe
reflection
of the light
object
Figure 6.5 Light rays from the object to the eyes.
The most important thing to remember is that you can only see an object
when light from the object enters our eyes. The object must be a source of
light (for example, a light bulb) or else it must reflect light from a source
(for example, the moon) and the reflected light enters our eyes.
Section summary
Light travels in all directions from its source, in straight lines
with arrows to show the path of light.
Light rays are not real. They are merely used to show the path
that light travels.
Like all forms of EM waves, light can travel through empty
space as well as through matter.
In vacuum, light travels with a speed of 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s.
Review questions
1. Are light rays real? Explain.
2. Give evidence to support the statement: "Light travels in
190
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
straight lines". Draw a ray diagram to prove this.
3. Explain how light wave propagates.
4. Do EM waves need a medium to travel through?
5. What is the speed of light? What symbol is used to refer to the
speed of light? Does the speed of light change?
6. Calculate the frequency of an EM wave with a wavelength of
400 nm.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
Exercise 6.9
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
When you smile
state laws of reflection and refraction;
infront of a mirror,
solve problems based on the laws of reflection and refraction;
you see your own
face smiling back
identify area of application of these laws in your locality and/or
at you. Do you
elsewhere.
know the reason
behind it?
Reflection of light
When you look in a mirror, you see your image because of the reflection of
light rays on the mirror. Thus, when a ray of light approaches a smooth
polished surface and the light ray bounces back, it is called the reflection
Perpendicular
to surface
of light. The incoming light ray is called the incident ray. The light ray
Incident ray
Reflected ray
Θ₁
Θᵣ
moving away from the surface is the reflected ray. The most important
characteristic of these rays is their angles in relation to the reflecting sur-
face. These angles are measured with respect to the normal of the surface.
Surface
The normal is an imaginary line perpendicular to the surface. The angle
of incidence, Θᵢ, is measured between the incident ray and the surface
Figure 6.6 A light ray strikes a
normal. The angle of reflection, Θᵣ, is measured between the reflected ray
surface and is reflected.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
191
and the surface normal. This is shown in Figure 6.6.
When a light ray strikes a surface and is reflected, as in Figure 6.6, the
reflected ray obeys the law of reflection. According to the law of reflection,
i. Θᵢ = Θᵣ and
Key Concept
Reflection is
ii. The incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidence
the change in
and the reflected ray all lie in the same plane.
direction of light
These laws are applicable to all types of reflections, i.e., specular and dif-
rays at a surface
fuse reflection. The following is the discussion of the distinction between
that causes them
these two types of reflection.
to move away
from the surface.
Specular Reflection and Diffuse Reflection
The reflection of light from a smooth shiny surface, as in Figure 6.7 (a), is
referred to as specular reflection. In this type of reflection, all the reflected
light moves in the same direction. In contrast, if a surface is rough, as in
Figure 6.7 (b), the reflected light is sent out in a variety of directions, giving
rise to diffuse reflection. For example, when the surface of a road is wet,
the water creates a smooth surface and headlights reflecting from the road
undergo specular reflection.
Exercise 6.10
The law of reflec-
tion is true for
any surface. Does
this mean that
(a)
(b)
when parallel rays
approach a sur-
Figure 6.7 (a) Specular and (b) diffuse reflection.
face, the reflected
rays will also be
Refraction of light
parallel?
In the first part of this section, you studied light reflecting off various sur-
faces. Light seems to travel along straight-lines in a transparent medium.
192
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
In this subsection, you will learn about the refraction of light. Let us start
our discussion by considering the apparent displacement of a pencil partly
immersed in water using the following activity:
Activity 6.1
1. Fill a large, opaque drinking glass or cup with water.
2. Place a pencil in the water at an angle.
3. Looking directly down into the cup from above, observe the
Figure 6.8 Refraction of light.
straw where it touches the water as shown in Figure 6.8.
4. Placing yourself so that the pencil angles to your left or right,
slowly back away about 1 T. Observe the pencil as it appears
above, at and below the surface of the water.
Exercise 6.11
5. Describe the pencil's appearance from above.
What happens
when light
6. Compare the pencil's appearance above and below the water's
passes through a
surface in step 4.
medium? Does it
still move along
Have you noticed how the light reaching you from the portion of the pencil
a straight line
inside water seems to come from a different direction compared to the
path or change its
part above water. This makes the pencil appear to be displaced at the
direction?
interface. These observations indicate that light does not travel in the
same direction in all media.
normal to surface
incident ray
reflected ray
Like all waves, the speed of light is dependent on the medium through
which it is traveling. When light moves from one medium into another
Θ,
01
Medium 1
(for example, from air to glass), the direction of propagation of light in the
second medium changes. This phenomenon is known as the refraction
Medium 2
of light. Refraction is therefore the bending of light as it moves from one
Θ₂
optical medium to another.
refracted ray
Figure 6.9 Ray showing the
Glass, water, ice, diamonds and quartz are all examples of transparent
refraction of light.
media through which light can pass. The speed of light in each of these
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
193
materials is different. The speed of light in water, for instance, is less than
the speed of light in air; the speed of light in glass is less than the speed
of light in water. When light moves from a material in which its speed is
higher to a material in which its speed is lower, such as from air to glass,
the ray is bent toward the normal, as shown in Figure 6.10 (a). On the other
hand, if the ray moves from a material in which its speed is lower to one in
which its speed is higher, as in Figure 6.10 (b), the ray is bent away from
the normal. If the incident ray of light is parallel to the normal, then no
refraction (bending) occurs in either case.
Normal
Normal
Key Concept
Θ₁ > Θ₂
Θ₁ < Θ₂
Refraction is
v₁
Θ₁
v₁
Θ₁
the bending of
light as it travels
Air
Glass
from one medium
Glass
Air
V₂ > v₁
to another.
V₂ < v₁
V₂
Θ₂
Θ₂
V₂
JE
Refraction oc-
curs when light's
Figure 6.10 Bending of a light ray (a) toward the normal and (b) away
velocity changes.
from the normal.
The following are the laws of refraction of light:
The incident ray, the refracted ray, and the normal to the interface of
Exercise 6.12
two transparent media at the point of incidence all lie in the same
Explain why light
plane.
bends when it
passes from one
The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the
medium to an-
angle of refraction is constant. This law is also known as Snell's law
other.
of refraction. If Θ₁ is the angle of incidence and Θ₂ is the angle of
refraction as shown in Figure 6.11, then,
sin Θ₁
= constant
(6.2)
sin Θ₂
This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first. Let us study refractive index in some detail.
194
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
The Refractive Index
Exercise 6.13
The speed of light and the degree of bending of the light depend on the
Why does light
refractive index of the material through which the light passes. You can
travel faster
think of the refractive index as a measure of how difficult it is for light to
through air than
get through a material.
water?
Consider a ray of light traveling from medium 1 into medium 2, as shown
in Figure 6.11.
Θ₁
Medium 1
n₁,V₁
n₂,V₂
Medium 2
Θ₂
Figure 6.11 Ray showing the refraction of light between different
medium.
Let v₁ be the speed of light in medium 1, and v₂ be the speed of light in
medium 2. The refractive index of medium 2 with respect to medium 1
is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium 1 and the speed of
light in medium 2. This is usually represented by the symbol n₂₁ which is
expressed in an equation as:
n₂₁ = speed speed of of light light in in medium medium 2 1 = V₂ V₁
(6.3)
By the same argument, the refractive index of medium 1 with respect to
medium 2 is represented as n₁₂ and it is given by
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
195
n₁₂ = speed speed of of light light in in medium medium 2 1 = V₁ V₂
(6.4)
If medium 1 is vacuum or air, then the refractive index of medium 2 is con-
sidered with respect to vacuum. This is called the absolute refractive index
(or simply the refractive index) of the medium. It is simply represented
as n. If c is the speed of light in a vacuum and is the speed of light in the
medium, then, the refractive index of the medium n is given by:
speed of light in vacuum c
Key Concept
n =
=
(6.5)
speed of light in medium V
The absolute
refractive index of
The refractive index of different materials is given in Table 6.1. From the
a material is the
table, you can see that the refractive index of water, nw = 1.33. This means
ratio of the speed
that the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light in water
of light in a vac-
is equal to 1.33.
uum to its speed
in the medium.
Table 6.1 Absolute refractive index of some material mediums
Material medium
Refractive index
Material medium
Refractive index
Air
1.0003
Canada Balsam
1.53
Ice
1.31
Water
1.33
Rock salt
1.54
Alcohol
1.36
Kerosene
1.44
Carbon disulphide
1.63
Fused quartz
1.46
Dense flint glass
1.65
Turpentine oil
1.47
Ruby
1.71
Benzene
1.5
Sapphire
1.77
Crown glass
1.52
Diamond
2.42
In Figure 6.11 above, if a light ray is incident on the surface between these
materials with an angle of incidence Θ₁, the refracted ray passes through
the second medium with an angle of refraction Θ₂. Snell's law which was
discussed above can thus be written as follows:
n₁sinΘ₁=n₂sinΘ₂
(6.6)
196
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
where n₁ = refractive index of material 1, n₂ = refractive index of material 2,
Θ₁ = angle of incidence and Θ₂ = angle of refraction. Remember that angles
of incidence and refraction are measured from the normal, which is an
imaginary line perpendicular to the surface.
Example 6.3
If a light ray with an angle of incidence of 35° passes from water to air, find
the angle of refraction using Snell's Law.
Solution:
As depicted in Table 6.1, the refractive index is 1.33 for water and about 1
for air. You are also given the value of the angle of incidence, i.e., 35°. So
you can use Snell's law to find the value for the angle of refraction.
n₁sin Θ₁ = Θ₂
1.33 X sin 35° = 1 Θ₂
sin Θ₂ = 1.33 X 0.57 = 0.763
Θ₂ = (0.763) = 49.7°
In this example, since the light ray passes from a medium of high refractive
index to a medium of low refractive index, the light ray is bent away from
the normal.
Total internal reflection
Exercise 6.14
What happens to
When light passes from a dense medium (larger index of refraction) to a
the refracted ray
less dense medium (smaller index of refraction), for example, from water
when the angle
to air, the refracted ray bends away from the normal, as in Figure 6.10 (a).
of incidence is
As the angle of incidence increases, the angle of refraction also increases.
increased?
When the angle of incidence reaches a certain value, called the critical
angle Θc, the angle of refraction is 90°. Then, the refracted ray points along
the surface, as shown in Figure 6.12 (b). When the angle of incidence
exceeds the critical angle, as in Figure 6.12 (c), there is no refracted light.
All the incident light is reflected back into the medium from which it came,
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
197
Refracted
O₂
ray
Air (n₂=1)
n₂
Θ₂ = 90°
n₂
Water
n₁
(n₁=1.3)
n₁
Incident
Θ
Θc
Θc
Θ₁
Θc
Incident
ray
Incident
Total
Reflected
ray
internal
ray
ray
reflection
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.12 The critical angle and total internal reflection.
a phenomenon called total internal reflection.
For total internal reflection to take place, the following two conditions
must be satisfied.
Light must travel from an optically denser medium (i.e., a medium
having a high refractive index) to an optically rarer medium (i.e., a
medium having a lower refractive index). It does not occur when
light propagates from a less dense to a denser medium, for example,
from air to water.
The angle of incidence in the denser medium must be greater than
the critical angle.
Now you shall learn how to derive the value of the critical angle for two
given media. The process is fairly simple and involves just the use of Snell's
Law that you have already studied. To recap, Snell's Law states:
n₁sinΘ₁=n₂sinΘ₂
(6.7)
For total internal reflection, you know that the angle of incidence is the
critical angle (i.e., Θ₁ = Θᶜ). You also know that the angle of refraction at
the critical angle is 90° (i.e., Θc = 90° ). You can then write Snell's law as:
n₁sin Θc = n₂ 90°
198
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Solving for Θc gives:
Total internal reflection is a powerful tool since it can be used to confine
light. One of the most common applications of total internal reflection is
in fibre optics. Optical fibres are usually thinner than a human hair. The
construction of a single optical fibre is shown in Figure 6.13. When light
is incident on one end of the fibre at a small angle, it undergoes multiple
total internal reflections along the fibre. The light finally emerges with
undiminished intensity at the other end. Even if the fibre is bent, this
process is not affected.
Cladding
n₂
O2
Cladding
n=1
Core
Core
E
n₂
Cladding
(a) A light in glass fiber pipe
(b) Light emerging from a bundle of glass fibers.
Figure 6.13 Light is guided along a fibre by multiple internal reflec-
tions.
Optical fibres are most common in telecommunications, because informa-
tion can be transported over long distances with minimal loss of data. The
minimized loss of data gives optical fibres' an advantage over conventional
cables. Data is transmitted from one end of the fibre to another in the form
of laser pulses.
Optic fibres are also used in medicine in endoscopes. The main part of
an endoscope is the optical fibre. Endoscopes are used to examine the
inside of a patient's stomach by inserting the endoscope down the patient's
throat. Other medical applications of optical fibres' are in neurosurgery
and the study of the bronchi.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
199
Example 6.4
A particular glass has an index of refraction of n = 1.52. What is the critical
angle for total internal reflection for light leaving the glass and entering air
for which n = 1.00?
Solution:
You are given n₁ = 1.52 and n₂ = 1.00.
Using the expression for Θᶜ,
The Dispersion of Light: Prisms and Rainbows
Before discussing the dispersion of light, let us first go back to the refraction
Exercise 6.15
of light through a prism. The inclined refracting surfaces of a glass prism
How could the
show exciting phenomena. Let us find it out through the following activity.
white light of the
Activity 6.2
sun give us vari-
jer Take a thick sheet of cardboard and make a small hole or narrow
ous colors of the
slit in its middle.
rainbow?
Allow sunlight to fall on the narrow slit. This gives a narrow beam
of white light.
Now, take a glass prism and allow the light from the slit to fall on
one of its faces as shown in Figure 6.14.
Turn the prism slowly until the light that comes out of it appears
on a nearby screen.
Key Concept
What do you observe? You will find a beautiful band of colors.
The prism can
Why does this happen?
split the incident
white light into a
Notice the colors that appear at the two ends of the color band. What is
band of colors.
the sequence of colors that you see on the screen? The various colors seen
are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green, Yellow, Orange and Red as shown in Figure
6.14. The acronym VIBGYOR will help you to remember the sequence of
colors.
200
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Red
Orange
Yellow
White light
Green
Blue
Indigo
Violet
Glass Prism
Figure 6.14 Dispersion of white light by a glass prism.
The band of colored components in a light beam is called its spectrum.
The splitting of light into its component colors is called dispersion. You
have seen that white light is dispersed into its seven color components
by a prism. Why do you have these colors? Different colors of light bend
at different angles with respect to the incident ray, as they pass through
a prism. The red light refracts the least, while the violet light refracts the
most. Thus, the rays of each color emerge along different paths and thus
become distinct. It is the band of distinct colors that you see in a spectrum.
Figure 6.15 Rainbow in the sky.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
201
The rainbow is a familiar example of dispersion, in this case the dispersion
of sunlight. A rainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky after a
rain shower (Figure 6.15). It is caused by the dispersion of sunlight by tiny
water droplets present in the atmosphere. A rainbow is always formed in
a direction opposite to that of the Sun. The water droplets act like small
prisms. They refract and disperse the incident sunlight, then reflect it
internally, and finally refract it again when it comes out of the raindrop.
Due to the dispersion of light and internal reflection, different colors reach
the observer's eye.
Section summary
1. Light rays reflect off surfaces. The incident ray shines in on
the surface and the reflected ray is the one that bounces off
the surface. The surface normal is the perpendicular line to
the surface where the light strikes the surface.
2. The angle of incidence is the angle between the incident ray
and the surface normal, and the angle of reflection is the angle
between the reflected ray and the surface normal.
3. The law of reflection states the angle of incidence is equal to
the angle of reflection and that the incident, the reflected and
the normal lie in the same plane.
4. Specular reflection takes place when parallel rays fall on a
surface and they leave the object as parallel rays.
5. Diffuse reflection takes place when parallel rays are reflected
in different directions.
6. Refraction is the bending of light that occurs because light
travels at different speeds in different materials. It obeys the
laws of refraction.
7. Refractive index is a material property that describes how the
material affects the speed of light traveling through it.
202
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
8. Total internal reflection takes place when light is reflected
back into the medium because the angle of incidence is
greater than the critical angle. The critical angle is the an-
gle of incidence where the angle of reflection is 90°. The light
must shine from a dense to a less dense medium.
9. A prism can be used to split the incident white light into a
band of visible colors.
Review questions
1. A ray of light strikes a surface at 25° to the surface. Draw a ray
diagram showing the incident ray, reflected ray, and surface
normal. Find the angle of reflection.
2. State the law of reflection.
3. Explain how light is reflected from rough and smooth surfaces.
4. State Snell's Law.
5. Describe what is meant by the refractive index of a medium.
6. A ray of light strikes the interface between air and diamond. If
the incident ray makes an angle of 30° with the interface, cal-
culate the angle made by the refracted ray with the interface.
7. A ray of light traveling in air enters obliquely into water. Does
the light ray bend towards the normal or away from the nor-
mal? Why?
8. You are given kerosene, turpentine and water. In which of
these does the light travel fastest? Use the information given
in table 6.1.
9. A ray of light travels from silicon to water. If the ray of light in
the water makes an angle of 69° to the surface normal, what
is the angle of incidence in the silicon?
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
203
10. What are the conditions that must be satisfied for total inter-
nal reflection to occur?
11. Define what is meant by the critical angle when referring to
total internal reflection. Include a ray diagram to explain the
concept.
12. Why a Diamond Sparkles?
13. Will light traveling from diamond to silicon ever undergo total
internal reflection?
14. When white light strikes a prism, which color of light is re-
fracted the most and which is refracted the least?
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
apply the laws of reflection and refraction;
describe image formation as a consequence of reflection and refrac-
tion;
perform calculations based on the law of reflection and refraction;
distinguish between real and virtual images;
Exercise 6.16
Did you glance in
In this section, you shall study about the different types of mirrors and
the mirror before
lenses. You will use the laws of reflection to understand how mirrors form
leaving for school
images while you will use the laws of refraction to understand the images
this morning?
formed by lenses.
Mirror
A mirror is a reflective surface that does not allow the passage of light
and instead bounces it off, thus producing an image. Plane and spherical
204
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
mirrors are the two types of mirrors.
Plane Mirrors
Exercise 6.17
A mirror that has a flat reflective surface is called a plane mirror.
How does a plane
mirror form an
Image formation by a plane mirror
image?
If you place a candle in front of a plane mirror, you will see two candles.
The actual, physical candle is called the object and the picture you see
in the mirror is called the image. The object is the source of the incident
rays. The image is the picture that is formed by the reflected rays. In a
plane mirror, your image looks much the same as it would in a photograph.
In order to understand how a plane mirror forms an image, let us do the
following activity.
Activity 6.3
1. Stand one step away from a large mirror.
2. What do you observe in the mirror? This is called your image.
3. What size is your image? Bigger, smaller or the same size as
your actual size?
4. How far is your image from you? How far is your image from
the mirror?
5. Is your image upright or upside down?
6. Take one step backwards. What does your image do? How far
are you from your image?
7. Lift your left arm. Which arm does your image lift?
What did you notice from the above activity? The formation of an image
by a plane mirror is illustrated in the Figure 6.16. The object is the blue
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
205
arrow, and you locate the image by finding the position where at least two
rays intersect after leaving the same point on the object (arrow head) and
reflecting off the mirror.
Mirror
The rays that originate from the arrow head are labeled A and B, while the
A
A'
reflected rays are labeled A' and B'. Ray A that leaves the arrow head and
B
hits the mirror at an angle of incidence of zero reflects directly back (ray A').
Θ
Ray B hits the mirror at an angle and is reflected at an angle of reflection
Object
Θ
Image
that is equal to the angle of incidence (law of reflection); the reflected ray
B
is labeled B'. Notice that the reflected rays A' and B' do not converge, but
diverge (spread apart after reflection). In this case, the image is found
Figure 6.16 Image formation in
the plane mirror.
by extending the reflected rays back to find the point where they appear
to come from. The point where they intersect is then the location of the
image of the arrow head (shown in yellow), as shown in Figure 6.16. This
type of image is called a virtual image.
Key Concept
Thus, the image of an object in a plane mirror appears to be behind the
The image formed
mirror. You also find that the virtual image is located at the same distance
by a plane mirror
behind the mirror as the object distance. Also the height of the image is
is:
identical to the height of the object and is upright. The image size is the
virtual.
same as the object size and is upright. Although mirrors do not produce
the same dis-
an inverted image, left and right are inverted. The image of a right hand is
tance behind the
a left hand.
mirror as the ob-
ject is in front of
Number of images formed by two plane mirrors inclined to
the mirror.
laterally in-
each other
verted. This
If two plane mirrors are placed inclined to each other at an angle Θ, the
means that the
number of images formed by mirrors is
image is inverted
from side to side.
360° Θ if (360°) is an even integer.
the same size
as the object.
upright.
≈ (360), if Θ is an odd integer.
206
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
For example, 5 images are formed by two mirrors at a 60° angle. Two
mirrors inclined to each other at different angles may provide the same
number of images. Fore example, for any value of Θ between 90° and 120°,
the number of maximum images formed is n = 3. This in turn implies that
if Θ is given, n is unique but if n is given, Θ is not unique.
On the other hand, the number of images seen may be different from the
number of images formed and depends on the position of the observer
relative to the object and mirrors. For instance, if Θ= 120°, the maximum
number of images formed will be 3 but the number of images seen may be
1, 2 or 3 depending on the position of the observer.
Uses of plane mirrors
A plane mirror is used
in looking glasses,
in construction of kaleidoscope, telescope, sextant, and periscope,
for seeing round the corners,
as deflector of light, etc.
Spherical Mirrors
Some mirrors are not flat. A spherical mirror is formed by the inside
(concave) or outside (convex) surfaces of a sphere. Thus, a concave mirror
has a surface that is curved inward, like the bowl of a spoon. Unlike plane
mirrors, concave mirrors cause light rays to come together, or converge. A
convex mirror, on the other hand, has a surface that curves outward, like
the back of a spoon. Convex mirrors cause light waves to spread out, or
diverge. Examples of a concave and a convex mirror are shown in Figure
6.17.
The following are some of the few important terms used to describe spher-
ical mirrors.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
207
Principal axis
Principal axis
P
C
P
F
F
C
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.17 Spherical mirrors.
The center of the sphere, of which the mirror is apart is called the
center of curvature (C) of the mirror and the radius of this sphere
defines its radius of curvature (R).
The middle point P of the reflecting surface of the mirror is called its
pole.
The straight line passing through the center of curvature and the
pole is said to be the principal axis of the mirror.
The circular outline (or periphery) of the mirror is called its aperture.
Aperture is a measure of the size of the mirror.
A beam of light incident on a spherical mirror parallel to the prin-
cipal axis converges to or appears to diverge from a common point
after reflection. This point is known as principal focus (F) of the
mirror.
The distance between the pole and the principal focus gives the focal
length (f) of the mirror.
For spherical mirrors of small apertures, the radius of curvature is
found to be equal to twice the focal length. You put this as R = 2f.
This implies that the principal focus of a spherical mirror lies midway
between the pole and center of curvature.
208
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
1
2
Ray diagrams used to form images by spherical mirrors
4
You can study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by drawing ray
3
diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed in front of a
C
4
spherical mirror. In order to locate the image of an object, any two of the
2
3
following rays can be considered for locating the image.
1
1. Ray striking the pole: A ray of light striking the pole of the mirror at
Figure 6.18 Rays used to form
an angle is reflected back at the same angle on the other side of the
image by concave mirror.
principal axis (Ray number 1 in Figures 6.18 and 6.19).
2
2. Parallel ray: For a concave mirror, the ray parallel to the principal
2
axis is reflected in such a way that after reflection it passes through
3
3
the principal focus (Ray number 2 in Figure 6.18). But for a convex
mirror, the parallel ray is so reflected that it appears to come from
C
4
the principal focus (Ray number 2 in Figure 6.19).
4
3. Ray through center of curvature: A ray passing through the center
Figure 6.19 Rays used to form
of curvature hits the mirror along the direction of the normal to
image by convex mirror.
the mirror at that point and retraces its path after reflection (Ray
number 3 in Figures 6.18 and 6.19).
Exercise 6.18
4. Ray through focus: A ray of light heading towards the focus or inci-
dent on the mirror after passing through the focus returns parallel
How can you lo-
to the principal axis (Ray number 4 in Figures 6.18 and 6.19).
cate the image
formed by a con-
Remember that in all the above cases, the laws of reflection are followed.
cave mirror for
At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that
different positions
the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
of the object? Are
the images real or
virtual? Are they
a) Image formation by a concave mirror
enlarged, dimin-
ished or have the
The intersection of at least two of the above four reflected rays gives the
same size?
position of the image of the object. Thus, any two of the above rays can be
considered for locating the image. Using the above rules of ray diagrams,
the image formed for the different positions of an object is given in Figure
6.20.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
209
ImageF
P
P
C
F
Object
C
Object
Object at infinity
Object beyond C
Object
Object
€
P
C
F
Image
F
Image
Object at C
Object between F and P
Object
Object
C.
Image
C
P
F
Object between C and F
Object at F
Figure 6.20 Formation of an image by a concave mirror.
Table 6.2 Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the
object
Position of the
Position of the
Size of the im-
Nature of the im-
object
image
age
age
At infinity
At the focus F
Highly
dimin-
Real and inverted
ished,
point-
sized
Beyond C
Between F and
Diminished
Real and inverted
C
At C
At C
Same size
Real and inverted
Between C and
Beyond C
Enlarged
Real and inverted
F
At F
At infinity
Highly enlarged
Real and inverted
Between P and
Behind the mir-
Enlarged
Virtual and erect
F
ror
210
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Activity 6.4
Draw neat ray diagrams for each position of the object shown
in Figure 6.20.
You may choose any two of the rays mentioned in the previous
Key Concept
sub section for locating the image.
JV
The proper-
ties of the image
Compare your diagram with those given in Figure 6.20.
produced by a
Describe the nature, position, and relative size of the image
concave mirror
formed in each case.
depend on the
location of the
Tabulate the results in a convenient format.
object.
Uses of concave mirrors
Exercise 6.19
Explain why
Concave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights and vehicles
concave mir-
headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are often used as
rors are used
shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The dentists use concave
in flash lights
mirrors to see large images of the teeth of their patients. Large concave
and automobile
mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce heat in solar furnaces.
headlights.
b) Image formation by convex mirror
You studied the formation of the image using a concave mirror. Now you
shall study the formation of images by a convex mirror. Let us first illustrate
this using an activity.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
211
Activity 6.5
Take a convex mirror. Hold it in one hand.
Hold a pencil in the upright position in the other hand.
Observe the image of the pencil in the mirror. Is the image
erect or inverted? Is it diminished or enlarged?
Move the pencil away from the mirror slowly. Does the image
become smaller or larger?
Repeat this activity carefully. State whether the image will
move closer to or farther away from the focus as the object is
moved away from the mirror.
What did you noticed from this activity? Consider two positions of the
object when studying the image formed by a convex mirror. The first
position is when the object is at infinity and the second is when the object
is at a finite distance from the mirror. The ray diagrams for the formation
of an image by a convex mirror for these two positions of the object are
shown in Figure 6.21 (a) and (b), respectively. The results are summarized
in table 6.3.
P
F
C
Object between
P
Image
infinity and the pole
F
C
Object at
infinity
Figure 6.21 Formation of an image by a convex mirror.
212
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Table 6.3 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex
mirror
Position of the object
Position of the image
Size of the image
Nature of the image
At infinity
At the focus F, behind
Highly
dimin-
Virtual and erect
the mirror
ished,
point-
sized
Between infinity and Between P and F, be- Diminished
Virtual and erect
the pole P of the mir-
hind the mirror
ror
Uses of convex mirrors
Convex mirrors are commonly used as rear-view (wing) mirrors in vehicles.
These mirrors are fitted on the sides of the vehicle enabling the driver to
see traffic behind him or her to facilitate safe driving. Convex mirrors are
preferred because they always give an erect, though diminished, image.
Also, they have a wider field of view as they are curved outwards. Thus,
convex mirrors enable the driver to view a much larger area than would be
possible with a plane mirror.
Mirror Formula and Magnification
In spherical mirrors, the distance of the object from its pole is called the
object distance (u). The distance of the image from the pole of the mirror
is called the image distance (v). You already know that the distance of the
principal focus from the pole is called the focal length (f).
There is a relationship between these three quantities given by the mirror
formula, which is expressed as
v+1=1
(6.8)
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
213
R
Mirror
h
C
Image
Object
F
h'
V
u
Figure 6.22 u, v, f, h and h' for a mirror.
On the other hand, the magnification produced by a spherical mirror gives
the relative extent to which the image of an object is magnified with respect
to the object's size. Thus, the magnification m produced by a spherical
mirror is given by
m = height height of ofthe the image object (h') (h) = h' h
(6.9)
The magnification m is also related to the object distance (u) and image
distance (v). It can be expressed as
Magnification (m) =-=-- h' h u V
(6.10)
These formulas are valid for spherical mirrors in all positions of the object.
While substituting the numerical values for u, v, f, and R in the mirror
formula for solving problems, you must use the sign convention indicated
in Table 6.4.
214
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Table 6.4 Sign conventions for spherical mirrors
Quantity
Positive when
Negative when
Object location, u
object is in front of mirror
object is in back of
(real object)
mirror (virtual object)
Image location, v
image is in front of mirror
image is in back of
(real image)
mirror (virtual image)
Image height, h'
image is upright
image is inverted
Focal length, f
mirror is concave
mirror is convex
Magnification, m
image is upright
image is inverted
Example 6.5
A convex mirror used for rear-view on an automobile has a radius of cur-
vature of 3.00 T. If a bus is located at 5.00 m from this mirror, find the
position, nature and size of the image.
Solution:
You are given radius of curvature, R = 3.00 m and object distance, u=+ =
5.00 m; The focal length is f = R/21 = 3.00 2 = - 1.50m (as the principal focus
of a convex mirror is behind the mirror).
You want to find the value for the image distance, v and height of the image,
h'.
Using the mirror equation,
1 1 1
v+u f'
1
1
1
1
1
-5.00
-
1.50
=
=
=
v
ƒ
u
1.50
+5.00
7.50
.`. v = -7.50 6.50 = -1.15m
Therefore, the image is 1.15 m at the back of the mirror.
a (-1.15m)
The image is thus virtual, erect and smaller in size by a factor of 0.23.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
215
Example 6.6
An object, 6.0 cm in size, is placed at 25.0 cm in front of a concave mirror
of 15.0 cm focal length. At what distance from the mirror should a screen
be placed in order to obtain a sharp image? Determine the nature and the
size of the image.
Solution:
The given quantities are object size, h = + 6.0 cm, object distance, и = + 25.0
cm and focal length, and f = + 15.0 cT.
You are asked to find the image distance, v and image size, h'.
Since 1+1=1,
1
1
1
1
1
5.00 - 3.00
=
=
=
v ƒ u 15.0 25.0 75
.`. v = 37.5 m
The screen should be placed at 37.5 cm in front of the mirror. The image is
real. Also,
Magnification
Solving for h' gives
h' = u = (37.5 (25.0cm) (6.0 cm) = 6.0 cm
Thus, the height of the image is - 6.0 cT. The negative sign implies that the
image is inverted and enlarged.
Lenses
Exercise 6.20
If you have ever used a microscope, telescope, binoculars, or a camera,
What is a lens?
you have worked with one or more lenses. A lens is a curved piece of
How does it bend
transparent material that is smooth and regularly shaped so that when
light rays?
light strikes it, the light refracts in a predictable and useful way.
A transparent material bound by two surfaces of which one or both are
spherical forms a lens. This means that a lens is bound by at least one
spherical surface. In such lenses, the other surface would be plane. A lens
216
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Exercise 6.21
Have you ever
may have two spherical surfaces bulging outwards. Such a lens is called
touched the
a double convex lens. It is simply called a convex lens. It is thicker at the
surface of a mag-
middle as compared to the edges. Convex lenses converge light rays, as
nifying glass with
shown in Figure 6.23 (a). Hence, convex lenses are also called converging
your hand? Is
lenses. Similarly, a double concave lens is bounded by two inwardly curved
it plane surface
spherical surfaces. It is thicker in the edges than at the middle. Such lenses
or curved? Is it
diverge light rays as shown in Figure 6.23 (b) and are also called diverging
thicker in the
lenses. A double concave lens is simply called a concave lens.
middle or at the
edges?
F
F
Axis
F
Key Concept
f
Concave lenses,
f
cause light to di-
Figure 6.23 (a) Converging action of a convex lens, (b) diverging
verge, and convex
action of a concave lens.
lenses cause light
A lens, either a convex lens or a concave lens, has two spherical surfaces.
to converge.
Each of these surfaces forms a part of a sphere. The centers of these
spheres are called the centers of curvature (C) of the lens. Since there
are two centers of curvature, you may represent them as C₁ and C₂. An
imaginary straight line passing through the two centers of curvature of
a lens is called its principal axis. The central point of a lens is its optical
Exercise 6.22
center (O). A ray of light through the optical center of a lens passes without
What happens
suffering any deviation. The effective diameter of the circular outline of a
when parallel
spherical lens is called its aperture.
rays of light are
incident on a
In order to look for the phenomenon that happens when parallel rays of
lens?
light are incident on a lens, try to do the following activity.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
217
Activity 6.6
Hold a convex lens in your hand. Direct it towards the Sun.
Focus the light from the Sun on a sheet of paper. Obtain a
sharp bright image of the Sun.
Hold the paper and the lens in the same position for a while.
Keep observing the paper. What happened? Why?
Caution: Do not look directly at the Sun or through a lens while
performing this activity as it may cause damage to your eyes.
The paper begins to burn producing a smoke. It may even catch fire after a
while. Why does this happen? The light from the Sun constitutes parallel
rays of light. These rays were converged by the lens at the sharp bright
spot formed on the paper. This caused the paper to burn.
In Figure 6.23 (a), several rays of light traveling parallel to the principal
axis are falling on a convex lens. These rays, after refraction from the lens,
are converging to a point on the principal axis. This point on the principal
axis is called the principal focus of the lens. On the other hand, in Figure
6.23 (b), several rays of light parallel to the principal axis are falling on a
concave lens. These rays, after refraction from the lens, are appearing to
diverge from a point on the principal axis. This point on the principal axis
is called the principal focus of the concave lens.
If you pass parallel rays from the opposite surface of the lens, you get
another principal focus on the opposite side. The letter F is usually used to
represent the principal focus. However, a lens has two principal foci. They
are represented by F₁ and F₂. The distance of the principal focus from the
optical center of a lens is called its focal length (f).
218
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Ray diagrams used to form image in lenses
You can represent image formation by lenses using ray diagrams. Ray
diagrams will also help us to study the nature, position and relative size of
the image formed by lenses. For drawing ray diagrams in lenses, like those
of spherical mirrors, you consider any two of the following rays:
1. A ray of light from the object, parallel to the principal axis, after
refraction from a convex lens, passes through the principal focus on
the other side of the lens as shown in Figure 6.24 (a). In the case of
a concave lens, the ray appears to diverge from the principal focus
located on the same side of the lens as shown in Figure 6.24 (b).
2. A ray of light passing through a principal focus, after refraction from
a convex lens, will emerge parallel to the principal axis. This is shown
in Figure 6.24 (a). A ray of light appearing to meet at the principal
focus of a concave lens, after refraction, will emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is shown in Figure 6.24 (b).
3. A ray of light passing through the optical center of a lens will emerge
without any deviation. This is illustrated in Figure 6.24 (a) and Figure
6.24 (b).
1
3
Image
Object
F
2
F
(a)
1
2
3
Object
Image
F
(b)
Figure 6.24 Ray diagram for (a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
219
(a) Image formation by convex lenses
Lenses form images by refracting light. Let us study this for a convex lens
Exercise 6.23
first by doing the following activity.
How do lenses
form images?
Activity 6.7
What is their
Take a convex lens of some focal length.
nature?
Draw five parallel straight lines, using chalk, on a long table
such that the distance between the successive lines is equal
to the focal length of the lens.
Place the lens on a lens stand. Place it on the central line such
that the optical center of the lens lies just over the line.
The two lines on either side of the lens correspond to F and
2F of the lens, respectively. Mark them with the appropriate
letters, for example, 2F₁, F₁, F₂ and 2F₂ respectively.
Place a burning candle, far beyond 2F₁ to the left. Obtain a
clear sharp image on the opposite side of the lens on a screen.
Note down the nature, position and relative size of the image.
Repeat this activity by placing the object just behind 2F₁, be-
tween F₁ and 2F₁ at F₁, between F₁ and O. Note down and
tabulate your observations.
What did you notice? Have you noticed that the nature, position, and
relative size of the image depend on the location of the object? The ray
diagrams for the image formation in a convex lens for a few positions of the
object are shown in Figure 6.25. Table 6.5 summarizes the nature, position,
and relative size of the image formed by a convex lens for various positions
of the object.
220
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Object
F2
2F₂
2F₁
F₁
o
F2
2F₂
2F₁
F₁
Image
Object
Object at infinity
Object beyond 2F
Object
O
F2
Object
2F₂
O
F₂
2F₂
2F₁
F1
2F₁
F₁
Image
Image
Object between F and 2F
Object at 2F
Object
O
Object
2F₁
F1
2F2
2F₁
F1
F2
2F₂
Object at F
Object between 0 and F
Figure 6.25 The position, size and nature of the image formed by a convex lens
for various positions of the object.
Table 6.5 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex
lens for various positions of the object
Position of the object
Position of the image
Size of the image
Nature of the image
At infinity
At the focus F₂
Highly
dimin-
Real and inverted
ished,
point-
sized
Beyond 2F₁
Between F₂ and 2F₂
Diminished
Real and inverted
At 2F₂
At 2F₂
Same size
Real and inverted
Between F₁ and 2F₁
Beyond 2F₂
Enlarged
Real and inverted
At Focus F₁
At infinity
Infinitely large
Real and inverted
or Highly en-
larged
Between focus F₁
On the same side of
Enlarged
Virtual and erect
and optical center O
the lens as the object
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
221
(b) Image formation by concave lenses
Let us now do an activity to study the nature, position and relative size of
the image formed by a concave lens.
Activity 6.8
Take a concave lens. Place it on a lens stand.
Place a burning candle on one side of the lens.
Look through the lens from the other side and observe the
image. Try to get the image on a screen, if possible. If not,
observe the image directly through the lens.
Note down the nature, relative size and approximate position
of the image.
Move the candle away from the lens. Note the change in the
size of the image. What happens to the size of the image when
the candle is placed too far away from the lens?
What conclusions can you draw from this activity? A concave lens will
always give a virtual, erect, and diminished image, irrespective of the
position of the object. The ray diagrams representing the image formation
in a concave lens for various positions of the object are shown in Figure
6.26.
2F,
F1
0
2F,
object
F1
image
0
Figure 6.26 Image formed by a concave lens.
The summary of the above activity is given in table 6.6 below.
222
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Table 6.6 Nature, position, and relative size of the image formed by a concave
lens for various positions of the object
Position of the object
Position of the image
Size of the image
Nature of the image
At infinity
At focus F₁
Highly
dimin-
Virtual and erect
ished, point-sized
Between infinity and
Between focus F₁,
Diminished
Virtual and erect
optical center O of
and optical center O
the lens
Lens formula and magnification
As there is an equation for spherical mirrors, there is also a similar equation
for lenses. This equation gives the relationship between object distance
(u), image distance (v) and the focal length (f). It is expressed as
и 1 + v 1 = f 1
(6.11)
h
O
Image
Object
F
h'
+
f
V
u
Figure 6.27 u, v and f in a lens.
The magnification produced by a lens, similar to that for spherical mirrors,
is defined as the ratio of the height of the image (h) and the height of the
object (h). Thus, the magnification (m) produced by the lens is given by,
m=h' m h
(6.12)
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
223
Table 6.7 Sign conventions for lenses
Quantity
Positive when
Negative when
Object location, и
object is in front of lens
object is in back of
(real object)
lens (virtual object)
Image location, v
image is in back of lens
image is in front of
(real image)
lens (virtual image)
Image height, h'
image is upright
image is inverted
Focal length, f
converging lens
diverging lens
R₁ and R₂
center of curvature is in
center of curvature is
back of lens
in front of lens
The magnification produced by a lens is also related to the object distance
u, and the image distance v. This relationship is given by
(6.13)
The above lens and magnification formula are general and is applicable to
any spherical lens in any situations. While putting numerical values for
solving problems relating to lenses into the above equations, you need to
be careful to use the sign conventions indicated in table 6.7.
Example 6.7
A concave lens has a focal length of 15 cT. At what distance from the lens
should the object be placed so that it forms an image at 10 cm from the
lens? Also, find the magnification produced by the lens.
Solution:
In this example, image distance v= 10 cm and focal length f = 15 cT.
You want to find the value for the object distance, и and magnification, m.
Since 1+1=1,
111
1
1
-2+3
1
=
=
=
=
u f v -15.0 -10.0 30 30
v = 30 cm
224
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Thus, the object distance is 30 cT.
Magnification +0.33
The positive sign shows that the image is erect and virtual. The image is
one-third the size of the object.
Thus, a concave lens always forms a virtual, erect image on the same side
of the object.
Example 6.8
A 2.0 cm tall object is placed perpendicular to the principal axis of a convex
lens of 10 cm focal length. The distance of the object from the lens is 15 cT.
Find the nature, position, and size of the image. Also find its magnification.
Solution:
You are given height of the object, h = + 2.0 cm, focal length, f = + 10 cm
and object distance, and u=+ 15 cT.
The required quantity is the value for the image distance, v and height of
the image, h'.
Since
111
v u =
1111 13-2
=
=
=
v f u 10 15 30
.`. v = +30cm
The positive sign of v shows that the image is formed at a distance of 30 cm
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
225
on the other side of the optical center. The image is real and inverted.
Magnification = и = (2) (30) (15) +30 = -6.0cm
Thus, the magnification is
The negative signs of m and h' show that the image formed is inverted and
real. It is formed below the principal axis. Thus, a real, inverted image, 4
cm tall is formed at a distance of 30 cm on the other side of the lens. The
image is two times enlarged.
Section summary
The image formed by a plane mirror is virtual, erect and of
the same size as that of the object such that the object and its
image appear to be equidistant from the mirror.
A convex mirror is a diverging mirror in which the reflective
surface bulges towards the light source. The image formed
by convex mirrors is smaller than the object but gets larger as
they approach the mirror.
A concave mirror has a reflective surface that is curved inward
and away from the light source. The image formed by a con-
cave mirror shows different image types depending on the
distance between the object and the mirror.
The lens which is thick in the middle and thin at the edges
is called a convex lens whereas the lens which is thin in the
middle and thick at the edges is called a concave lens.
Convex lens is also known as a converging lens as it converges
the parallel rays of light at a point after refraction.
226
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Concave lens is also known as diverging lens as it diverges the
parallel beam of light after refraction.
The type of image formed by a convex lens depends on the
position of the object that can be placed at different positions
in front of the lens. However, a concave lens always produces
a virtual, erect and diminished images.
The mirror as well as lens equation expresses the quantitative
relationship between the object distance, the image distance
and the focal length.
Review questions
1. List the five properties of an image created by reflection from
a plane mirror.
2. If a stool 0.5 m high is placed 2 m in front of a plane mirror,
how far behind the plane mirror will the image be and how
high will the image be?
3. Find the number of images formed by an object placed be-
tween two plane mirrors inclined at 30°.
4. Define the principal focus of a concave mirror.
5. The radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is 20 cm. What is
its focal length?
6. Name a mirror that can give an erect and enlarged image of
an object.
7. Why is a convex mirror preferred as a rear-view mirror in
automobiles?
8. So far, you have studied the image formation by a plane mirror,
a concave mirror, and a convex mirror. Which of these mirrors
will give the full image of a large object?
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
227
9. An object 1 cm high is placed 4 cm from a concave mirror. If
the focal length of the mirror is 2 cT, find the position and
size of the image. Is the image real or virtual? Calculate the
magnification.
10. An object 2 cm high is placed 4 cm from a convex mirror. If
the focal length of the mirror is 4 cT, find the position and
size of the image. Is the image real or virtual? Calculate the
magnification.
11. A concave mirror produces a three times magnified (enlarged)
real image of an object placed 10 cm in front of it. Where is
the image located?
12. In each case, state whether a real or virtual image is formed
by a convex lens:
(a) Much further than 2F₁
(b) Just further than 2F₁
(c) At 2F₁
(d) Between 2F₁ and F₁
(e) At F₁
(f) Between F₁ and O.
13. An object stands 50 mm away a convex lens (focal length 40
mm). Use ray diagrams to determine the position of the image.
Is it enlarged or minimized; upright or inverted?
14. An object 6 cm high is 10 cm from a concave lens. The image
formed is 3 cm high. Find the focal length of the lens and the
distance of the image from the lens.
15. An object is 20 cm from a concave lens. The virtual image
formed is three times smaller than the object. Find the focal
length of the lens.
228
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the human eye in relation to lenses;
list simple optical instrument in use in your locality;
explain the physics behind the operation of optical instruments.
The human eye
Exercise 6.24
How does a hu-
The human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs. It
enables us to see the wonderful world and the colors around us. Of all the
man eye form an
image?
sense organs, the human eye is the most significant one, as it enables us to
see the beautiful, colorful world around us.
Sclera
Retina
Iris
Optic nerve
Cornea
Pupil
Macula
Lens
Ciliary body
Retinal blood
and muscle
vessels
Conjunctiva
Vitreous body
Figure 6.28 Basic elements of human eye.
The human eye is like a camera. Its lens system forms an image on a
light-sensitive screen called the retina. Light enters the eye through a thin
membrane called the cornea. It forms the transparent bulge on the front
surface of the eyeball, as shown in Figure 6.28.
The eyeball is approximately spherical in shape with a diameter of about
2.3 cT. Most of the refraction of the light rays entering the eye occurs at
the outer surface of the cornea. The crystalline lens merely provides the
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
229
finer adjustment of the focal length required to focus objects at different
Key Concept
distances on the retina. You find a structure called the iris behind the
The human
cornea. Iris is a dark muscular diaphragm that controls the size of the
eye consists of a
pupil. The pupil regulates and controls the amount of light entering the
lens system that
eye. The eye lens forms an inverted real image of the object on the retina.
focuses images
The retina is a delicate membrane with an enormous number of light-
on the retina,
sensitive cells. The light-sensitive cells get activated upon illumination
where the optic
and generate electrical signals. These signals are sent to the brain via the
nerve transfers
optic nerves. The brain interprets these signals, and, finally, processes the
the messages to
information so that you perceive objects as they are.
the brain.
Power of accommodation
Exercise 6.25
The eye lens is composed of a fibrous, jelly-like material. The ciliary mus-
If you try to read
cles can modify to some extent its curvatures. The change in the curvature
a printed page
of the eye lens can thus change its focal length. When the muscles are re-
by holding it very
laxed, the lens becomes thin. Thus, its focal length increases. This enables
close to your eyes,
us to see distant objects clearly. When you are looking at objects closer
what happens to
to the eye, the ciliary muscles contract. This increases the curvature of
the image you
see?
the eye lens. The eye's lens then becomes thicker. Consequently, the focal
length of the eye lens decreases. This enables us to see nearby objects
Key Concept
clearly. The ability of the eye's lens to adjust its focal length is called accom-
The minimum
modation. However, the focal length of the eye's lens cannot be decreased
distance, at which
below a certain minimum limit.
objects can be
seen most clearly
If you try to read a printed page by holding it very close to your eyes, you
without strain, is
may see the image being blurred or feel strain in the eye. To see an object
called the least
comfortably and distinctly, you must hold it at about 25 cm from the eyes.
distance of dis-
For a young adult with normal vision, the near point is about 25 cT. The
tinct vision. It is
farthest point up to which the eye can see objects clearly is called the far
also called the
point of the eye. It is infinity for a normal eye. You may note here that a
near point of the
normal eye can see objects clearly that are between 25 cm and infinity.
eye.
230
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Defects of vision and their correction
Exercise 6.26
Sometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation. In
Have you encoun-
such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and comfort-
tered peoples who
ably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects of the eye.
have defects in
There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision.
their vision?
(a) Myopia/near-sightedness
A person with myopia can see nearby objects clearly but cannot see distant
objects distinctly. A person with this defect has the far point nearer than
infinity. Such a person may see clearly up to a distance of a few meters.
In a myopic eye, the image of a distant object is formed in front of the
retina and not at the retina itself (Figure 6.29 (a)) . This defect may arise
due to (i) excessive curvature of the eye lens, or (ii) elongation of the
eyeball. This defect can be corrected by using a concave lens of suitable
power. A concave lens of suitable power will bring the image back on to
the retina. This is illustrated in Figure 6.29 (b).
Relaxed Lens
Object
Far point
Image in
(a)
Front of
retina
Diverting lens
Object
Far point
Image
(b)
at retina
Figure 6.29 (a) Short-sightedness. (b) Short-sightedness corrected by
diverging lens.
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
231
(b) Hypermetropia/far-sightedness
A person with hypermetropia can see distant objects clearly but cannot see
nearby objects distinctly. The near point, for the person, is farther away
from the normal near point (25 cm). Such a person has to keep reading
material much beyond 25 cm from the eye for comfortable reading. This is
because the light rays from a close by object are focused at a point behind
the retina, as shown in Figure 6.30 (a). This defect arises either because (i)
the focal length of the eye lens is too long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too
small. This defect can be corrected by using a convex lens of appropriate
power. Eye glasses with converging lenses provide the additional focusing
power required for forming the image on the retina. This is illustrated in
Figure 6.30 (b).
Contracted Muscle
Key Concept
Myopia, hy-
permetropia and
presbyopia are
Near
Object
Point
(a)
Image behind
defects of vision.
retina
They can be cor-
Converging
rected with an
lens
appropriate lens.
Near
Object
Image
Point
(b)
at retina
Relaxed Lens
Figure 6.30 (a)Long-sightedness. (b) Long-sightedness corrected by
converging lens.
(c) Presbyopia
The power in accommodation of the eye usually decreases with age. For
most people, the near point gradually recedes. Without corrective eye-
glasses, they have difficulty seeing nearby objects comfortably and clearly.
This defect is called presbyopia. It arises due to the gradual weakening of
232
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
the ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the eye lens. Sometimes,
a person may suffer from both myopia and hypermetropia. Such people
often require bi-focal lenses. A common type of bi-focal lens consists of
both concave and convex lenses. The upper portion consists of a concave
lens. It facilitates distant vision. The lower part is a convex lens. It facili-
tates near vision. Nowadays, it is possible to correct the refractive defects
with contact lenses or through surgery.
Do you know that your eyes can live even after our death? By donating
your eyes after you die, you can light the life of a blind person.
Optical instruments
Activity 6.9
A number of optical devices and instruments have been designed utilizing
the reflecting and refracting properties of mirrors and lenses. Periscope,
In group, please
kaleidoscope, binoculars, camera, telescopes, and microscopes are some
try to list the dif-
examples of optical devices and instruments that are in common use. Our
ferent types of
eye is, of course, one of the most important optical devices that the nature
optical instru-
has endowed us with. You have already studied the human eye. You now
ments that you
go on to describe the principles of operation of the microscope and the
know.
telescope.
Simple microscope
Exercise 6.27
A simple magnifier or microscope is a converging lens of small focal length
(Figure 6.31). In order to use such a lens as a microscope, the lens is held
What do you
near the object, one focal length away or less, and the eye is positioned
think is a simple
close to the lens on the other side. The idea is to get an erect, magnified
microscope?
and virtual image of the object at a distance so that it can be viewed
comfortably, i.e., at 25 cm or more.
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
233
Key Concept
The image
formed by a mag-
nifying glass is
erect, magnified
and virtual.
Activity 6.10
In groups, try to
discuss how a
Figure 6.31 A simple microscope.
compound micro-
scope magnifies
Compound microscope
objects. Infer
how the image
A simple microscope has a limited maximum magnification for realistic
produced by a
focal lengths. For much larger magnifications, one has to use two lenses,
compound mi-
one compounding the effect of the other. This is known as a compound
croscope would
microscope.
be different if
the eyepiece lens
A compound microscope has, therefore, more than one objective lens,
were removed
from the micro-
each providing a different magnification. Figure 6.32 shows how a micro-
scope forms an image. An object, such as an insect, is placed close to a
scope.
convex lens called the objective lens. This lens produces an enlarged im-
Key Concept
age inside the microscope tube. The light rays from that image then pass
through a second convex lens called the eyepiece lens. This lens further
The objec-
tive lens in a
magnifies the image formed by the objective lens. By using two lenses, a
compound micro-
much larger image is formed than a single lens can produce.
scope forms an
enlarged image,
which is then
magnified by the
eyepiece lens.
234
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Telescopes
Exercise 6.28
Have you heard
Just as microscopes are used to magnify very small objects, telescopes are
about the func-
used to examine objects that are very far away. Much of what is known
tions of a tele-
about the Moon, the Solar system and the distant universe has come from
scope?
images and other information gathered by telescopes.
Two fundamentally different types of telescopes exist. The first type, the
refracting telescope, uses a combination of lenses to form an image. The
simplest refracting telescopes use two convex lenses to form an image of
a distant object. Just as in a compound microscope, light passes through
an objective lens that forms an image. That image is then magnified by
an eyepiece, as shown in Figure 6.33. Like the compound microscope,
the refracting telescope shown has an objective and an eyepiece. The two
Exercise 6.29
lenses are arranged so that the objective forms a real, inverted image of a
What do you think
are the differ-
EYEPIECE
COARSE
ADJUSTMENT
ences between
a telescope and
a compound mi-
BODY TUBE
croscope? Would
you please try
FINE
to think of how
ADJUSTMENT
telescopes make
distant objects
OBJECTIVE
visible?
LENS
STAGE
MIRROR
JOINT
Figure 6.32 A compound microscope.
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
235
distant object very near the focal point of the eyepiece.
An important difference between a telescope and a microscope is the size
Key Concept
of the objective lens. The main purpose of a telescope is not to magnify an
It
A refracting
image. A telescope's main purpose is to gather as much light as possible
telescope is made
from distant objects. The larger an objective lens is, the more light that
from an objec-
can enter it. This makes images of far away objects look brighter and more
tive lens and an
detailed when they are magnified by the eyepiece. With a large enough
eyepiece. The ob-
objective lens, it is possible to see stars and galaxies that are many trillions
jective lens forms
of kilometers away. Figure 6.33 shows a refracting telescope.
an image that is
magnified by the
The second type, the reflecting telescope, can be made much larger than
eyepiece.
refracting telescopes. Reflecting telescopes have a concave mirror instead
of a concave objective lens to gather the light from distant objects. As
shown in Figure 6.34, the large concave mirror focuses light onto a sec-
ondary mirror that directs it to the eyepiece, which magnifies the image.
Exercise 6.30
Explain why the
objective lens
of a refracting
telescope is much
larger than the
objective lens
of a compound
microscope.
Figure 6.33 Refracting telescope.
236
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Exercise 6.31
Explain why the
concave mirror
of a reflecting
telescope can be
made much larger
than the objective
Figure 6.34 Reflecting telescopes gather light by using a concave
mirror.
lens of a refracting
Because only the one reflecting surface on the mirror needs to be made
telescope.
carefully and kept clean, telescope mirrors are less expensive to make and
maintain than lenses of a similar size. Also, mirrors can be supported not
only at their edges but also on their backsides. They can be made much
larger without sagging under their own weight.
Key Concept:
Section summary
Light entering
The simple defects of vision, i.e., long and short sight, are
the telescope
attributed to the inability of the eye lens to focus images of
tube is reflected
near and far objects on the retina. Simple lenses enable these
by a concave
defects to be corrected.
mirror onto the
secondary mirror.
The function of optical instruments is to extend the perfor-
An eyepiece is
mance of the human eye in a variety of ways.
used to magnify
The magnifying glass creates an enlarged, erect and virtual
the image formed
image of an object placed closer to the lens than the focal
by the concave
mirror.
point.
The compound microscope is an instrument for looking at
very small objects by using an objective to produce an en-
larged real intermediate image which is then further enlarged
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
237
by an eyepiece used as a magnifying glass.
The telescope is an instrument for looking at distant objects.
A large objective lens (in the refracting telescope) or concave
mirror (in the reflecting telescope) collects light from the ob-
ject to form a reduced real intermediate image at the focus.
As in the microscope, this image is enlarged by an eyepiece
acting as a magnifying glass.
Review questions
1. What is meant by the power of accommodation of the eye?
2. A person with a myopic eye cannot see objects beyond 1.2
m clearly. What should be the type of corrective lens used to
restore proper vision?
3. What is the far and near points of the human eye with normal
vision?
4. A student has difficulty reading the blackboard while sitting
in the last row. What could be the defect the child is suffering
from? How can it be corrected?
5. List other optical instruments that you are familiar with and
discuss how they work.
6. Why is a normal eye not able to clearly see the objects placed
closer than 25 cm?
7. What is the difference between simple and compound micro-
scopes?
8. Distinguish between the refracting and reflecting telescope.
9. A person needs a lens of power -5.5 dioptres for correcting
his distant vision. For correcting his near vision, he needs a
238
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
lens of power +1.5 dioptre. What is the focal length of the lens
required for correcting (i) distant vision, and (ii) near vision?
10. What type of telescope is there in Entoto Observatory center?
What is its purpose?
6.7 Primary colors of light and human vision
Exercise 6.32
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Which of the col-
list the primary colors of light;
ors of visible light
describe the relation between primary color and human vision.
spectrum are
considered as the
Light travels into the eye to the retina, located on the back of the eye. The
primary colors of
retina is covered with millions of light receptive cells called cones (which
light?
are sensitive to color) and rods (which are more sensitive to intensity).
When these cells detect light, they send signals to the brain. Most people
have three kinds of cone cells, and every color stimulates more than one
cone. Their combined response produces a unique signal for each color,
and millions of different colors can be distinguished this way. These cells,
Sclera
Choroid
Retina
Cornea
Light
Pupil
Lens
Optic nerve
Iris
Cones
and Rods
Ciliary body
Figure 6.35 Rod and cone cells in the retina of the eye detect light
and send signals to the brain.
6.7 Primary colors of light and human vision
239
working in combination with connecting nerve cells, give the brain enough
information to interpret and name colors. You are able to "see" an object
when light from the object enters your eyes and strikes these photorecep-
tors.
Different wavelengths of light are perceived as different colors. For exam-
Key Concept
ple, light with a wavelength of about 400 nm is seen as violet, and light with
Light receptors
a wavelength of about 700 nm is seen as red. However, it is not typical to
within the eye
see light of a single wavelength. You are able to perceive all colors because
transmit mes-
there are three sets of cones in your eyes: one set that is most sensitive to
sages to the brain
red light, another that is most sensitive to green light, and a third that is
which produces
most sensitive to blue light.
the familiar sensa-
tions of color.
The colors of red, green, and blue light are classically considered the pri-
mary colors because they are fundamental to human vision. All other
colors of the visible light spectrum can be produced by properly adding
different combinations of these three colors. Moreover, adding equal
amounts of red, green, and blue light produces white light and, therefore,
these colors are also often described as the primary additive colors.
Key Concept
Section summary
Red, green
Red, green and blue are the primary colors of light.
and blue are the
primary colors.
Rods and cones are the two major types of light-sensing cells
(photoreceptors) in the retina.
Review questions
1. List the three primary colors of light.
2. What are the two types of photoreceptors found in the retina
of the human eye called, and which type is sensitive to colors?
240
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.8 Color addition of light
Exercise 6.33
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
What do you think
recognize how additive colors affect the color of light;
is the definition of
add primary colors.
color addition?
The additive color system reproduces colors by adding the primary col-
Yellow
ors of light: red, green, and blue. All the colors that can be produced by
a three-color additive system are combinations of these three primary
Red
Green
colors. When mixed together in various proportions, the additive color
White
primaries of red, green, and blue give us the range of colors that you see.
So red, green and blue are therefore called the additive primary colors.
Magenta
Blue
Cyan
The addition of the primary colors of light can be demonstrated using a
light box. The light box illuminates a screen with the three primary col-
Figure 6.36 The different com-
binations of colors produced by
ors: red, green and blue. The lights are often in the shape of circles. The
the primary colors of light.
result of adding two primary colors of light is easily seen by viewing the
overlap of the two or more circles of primary light. The different combi-
nations of colors produced by red, green and blue are shown in Figure 6.36.
Key Concept
In the areas where two primary colors overlap, a secondary color appears.
Combinations
When overlapped, green and blue create cyan. Blue and red produce
of two of the pri-
magenta. Red and green produce yellow. Thus,
mary colors follow
the rules of addi-
Red + Green = Yellow
tive color mixing
Red+ Blue = Magenta
so as to produce
Blue + Green = Cyan
the secondary
colors of light:
Yellow, magenta and cyan are sometimes referred to as secondary colors
cyan, magenta,
of light since they can be produced by the addition of equal intensities of
and yellow.
two primary colors of light. When added in equal proportions, red, green,
and blue result in white light. The absence of all three colors results in
black.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
241
The addition of these three primary colors of light with varying degrees
of intensity will result in the countless other colors that you are familiar
(or unfamiliar) with. So, all the other colors can be produced by different
combinations of red, green and blue.
Color addition principles have important applications to color television,
color computer monitors and on-stage lighting at the theaters. A digital
projector also works using the additive systems. Each of these applications
involves the mixing or addition of colors of light to produce a desired ap-
pearance.
Section summary
The combination of the three primary colors of light with
equal proportions produce white light.
All the other colors of light can be produced by different com-
binations of red, green and blue.
Review questions
1. What colors did you get when you added red and blue, red
and green, green and blue lights?
2. What type of applications did color addition of light have?
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
Exercise 6.34
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
What do you think
is the definition of
describe color subtraction of light using filters.
color subtraction?
The previous lesson focused on the principle of color addition. In this
section, you will learn about color subtraction. The colors that are ab-
sorbed are 'subtracted' from the reflected light that is seen by the eye. A
black objects absorbs all colors where as a white object reflects all colors.
242
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
A blue objects reflects blue and absorbs all other colors. The primary and
secondary colors of light for the substractive colors are opposite to the
colors addition as shown in Figure 6.37. The following illustrates color
subtraction.
Yellow
Cyan - Blue = (Green + Blue) - Blue = Green
Yellow - Green = (Red + Green) - Green = Red
Red
Green
Magneta - Red = (Red + Blue) - Red = Blue
Black
Magenta
Yellow, magenta and cyan are considered as the subtractive primary colors
Cyan
Blue
while red, green and blue are the secondary subtractive colors. On the
other hand, the complimentary colors are the colors that are absorbed by
the subtractive primaries. Cyan's complement is red; magenta's comple-
Figure 6.37 Color subtraction.
ment is green; and yellow's compliment is blue.
Pigments are substances which give an object its color by absorbing certain
frequencies of light and reflecting other frequencies. For example, a red
pigment absorbs all colors of light except red which it reflects. Paints and
inks contain pigments which give the paints and inks different colors. A
filter is also defined as a substance or device that prevents certain things
from passing through it while allowing certain other things to pass. Color
Key Concept
filters allow only certain colors of light to pass through them by absorbing
all the rest. When white light shines on a red filter, for example, the orange,
It The subtractive
yellow, green, blue, and violet components of the light are absorbed by the
primary colors
filter allowing only the red component of the light to pass through to the
are obtained by
other side of the filter.
subtracting one of
the three additive
primary colors
The following shows the color subtraction of light using filters or pigments.
from white light.
i. Yellow filter (or a pigment) absorbs blue light and transmits red and
green light. Red and green light together are seen as yellow.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
243
red
red
blue
White Light
Yellow Light
green
green
Yellow filter
Figure 6.38 Color subtraction using yellow filter.
ii. Magenta filter (or a pigment) absorbs green light and transmits red
and blue light. Blue and red light together are seen as magenta.
red
red
blue
blue
White Light
Magenta Light
green
Magenta filter
Figure 6.39 Color subtraction using magneta filter.
iii. Cyan filter (or pigment) absorbs red light and transmits blue and
green light. Blue and green light together are seen as cyan.
red
blue
blue
White Light
=
Cyan Light
green
green
Cyan filter
Figure 6.40 Color subtraction using cyan filter.
iv. Yellow filter (or a pigment) absorbs blue and Magenta filter (or a
pigment) absorbs green and reflect the red light.
244
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
red
red
blue
Red Light
White Light
green
green
Yellow filter
Magenta filter
Figure 6.41 Color subtraction using yellow and magneta filters.
V. Yellow filter (or a pigment) absorbs blue and cyan filter (or a pigment)
absorbs red and reflect the green light.
red
red
blue
Green Light
White Light
green
green
Yellow filter
Cyan filter
Figure 6.42 Color subtraction using yellow and cyan filters.
vi. Magenta filter (or a pigment) absorbs green and cyan filter (or a
pigment) absorbs red and reflect the blue light.
red
red
Blue Light
blue
blue
White Light
green
Magenta filter
Cyan filter
Figure 6.43 Subtraction using magneta and cyan filters.
When you mix colors using paint, or through the printing process, you are
using the subtractive color method. Subtractive color mixing means that
one begins with white and ends with black; as one adds color, the result
gets darker and tends to black.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
245
Section summary
Subtractive primary colors filter out all light when combined.
Review questions
1. What colors of light are absorbed by a green pigment?
2. Which combination of colors of light gives magenta?
3. Which combination of colors of light gives cyan?
4. If yellow light falls on an object whose pigment absorbs green
light, what color will the object appear?
5. If yellow light falls on a blue pigment, what color will appear?
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on electromagnetic waves and geomet-
rical optics unit under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Geometric Optics PhET Experiment.
2. Bending Light PhET Experiment.
3. Color Vision PhET Experiment.
4. Radio Waves & Electromagnetic Fields PhET Experiment.
Unit summary
The ray model of light describes the path of light as straight
lines.
The speed of light in a vacuum is 2.99792458 X 10⁸ ml s = 3.00 X
246
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
10⁸ m/s. The speed of light is different in different materials.
Like all forms of electromagnetic waves, light can travel
through vacuum as well as through matter.
EM spectrum, the entire distribution of EM radiation accord-
ing to frequency or wavelength. The entire EM spectrum, from
the lowest to the highest frequency (longest to shortest wave-
length), includes all radio waves (e.g., commercial radio and
television, microwaves, radar), infrared radiation, visible light,
ultraviolet radiation, X-rays, and gamma rays.
Reflecting surfaces obey the laws of reflection. The refracting
surfaces obey the laws of refraction.
A light ray travelling obliquely from a denser medium to a
rarer medium bends away from the normal. A light ray bends
towards the normal when it travels obliquely from a rarer to a
denser medium.
The refractive index of a transparent medium is the ratio of
the speed of light in a vacuum to that in the medium.
Mirrors and lenses form images of objects. Images can be
either real or virtual, depending on the position of the object.
The focal length of a spherical mirror is equal to half its radius
of curvature.
A compound microscope uses a convex objective lens to form
an enlarged image that is further enlarged by an eyepiece.
A refracting telescope uses a large objective lens and an eye-
piece lens to form an image of a distant object.
A reflecting telescope uses a large concave mirror that gathers
light and an eyepiece lens to form an image of a distant object.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
247
The human eye mainly senses red, green and blue, and the
brain interprets combinations of these into all the colors you
see.
The most common set of primary colors is red, green and blue.
When red, green and blue light are mixed or added together
with the proper intensity, white light is obtained.
Additive color synthesis occurs when three light zones (red,
green, and blue) are mixed with optimum intensity and then
white light is generated. Additive color synthesis: green + red
= yellow, blue + red = magenta, blue + green = cyan.
Subtractive synthesis occurs by mixing the basic material col-
ors (cyan, magenta and yellow). If all three colors are mixed, a
black color is created. They are mixed with: yellow + magenta
= red, yellow + cyan = green, magenta + cyan = blue.
End Unit questions
1. You are looking at a burning candle. Draw the path of light
that enables you to see that candle.
2. Explain why you need to protect yourselves from ultraviolet
radiation from the Sun.
3. List some advantages and disadvantages of using X-rays.
4. Write a short essay on a type of electromagnetic waves. You
should look at the uses, advantages and disadvantages of your
chosen radiation.
5. List the EM spectrum in order of increasing wavelength.
6. Do the reflected rays that contribute to forming the image
from a plane mirror obey the law of reflection?
248
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
7. Copy and complete the following concept map.
Light
is an
is reflected by
is refracted by
that can
that can
that can
travel in
be
be
8. The image formed by a concave mirror is observed to be vir-
tual, erect and larger than the object. Where should be the
position of the object?
9. You wish to obtain an erect image of an object, using a concave
mirror of 15 cm focal length. What should be the range of
distance of the object from the mirror? What is the nature
of the image? Is the image larger or smaller than the object?
Draw a ray diagram to show the image formation in this case.
10. Name the type of mirror used in the following situations.
(a) Headlights of a car.
(b) Side/rear-view mirror of an automobile.
(c) Solar furnace. Support your answer with reason.
11. A concave lens of focal length 15 cm forms an image 10 cm
from the lens. How far is the object placed from the lens?
Draw the ray diagram.
12. An object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex mirror
of 15 cm focal length. Find the position and nature of the
image.
13. The magnification produced by a plane mirror is +1. What
does this mean?
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
249
14. An object 5.0 cm in length is placed at a distance of 20 cm in
front of a convex mirror of radius of curvature 30 cT. Find the
position of the image, its nature, and its size.
15. An object of size 7.0 cm is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave
mirror of 18 cm focal length. At what distance from the mirror
should a screen be placed, so that a sharp focused image can
be obtained? Find the size and the nature of the image.
16. One-half of a convex lens is covered with a black paper. Will
this lens produce a complete image of the object? Verify your
answer experimentally. Explain your observations.
17. An object 5 cm in length is held 25 cm away from a converging
lens of focal length 10 cT. Draw the ray diagram and find the
position, size and nature of the image formed.
18. A convex lens produces a virtual image which is four times
larger than the object. The image is 15 cm from the lens. What
is the focal length of the lens?
19. Compare and contrast primary light colors and primary pig-
ment colors.
20. Determine the colors that are reflected from an object that
appears black.
21. What color do the following shirts appear to the human eye
when the lights in a room are turned off and the room is com-
pletely dark? A) red shirt B) blue shirt C) green shirt.
22. The cover of a book appears to have a magenta color. What
colors of light does it reflect and what colors does it absorb?