Unit 4
Static and Current Electricity
Introduction
Physical phenomenon associated with the presence and flow of electric
charge is known as electricity. In Ethiopia and elsewhere around the world,
people depend on electricity to provide power for most appliances in the
home, at work and out in the world in general. For example, lights, electric
heating and electric stoves that you use in your home all depend on elec-
Brain storm-
tricity to work. To realize just how big impact electricity has on our daily
ing question
lives, just think about what happens when there is a power failure. Thus,
What constitutes
electricity has an important place in modern society. It is a controllable
electricity?
and convenient form of energy for a variety of uses in homes, schools,
industries and so on. In this unit, you will learn topics related to electricity.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
understand the basic properties of electric charge;
explain the charging and discharging processes;
have a conceptual understanding of an electrical force;
understand the concept of an electric field;
understand the relationship among voltage, current and resistance;
describe arrangement of resistors in a circuit;
apply the concept of electricity in solving real life problems.
91
92
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.1 Charges in Nature
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
distinguish between the two types of electric charges;
show that the total electric charge in an isolated system is conserved;
use conservation of charge to calculate quantities of charge trans-
ferred between objects.
Objects surrounding us (including people) contain large amounts of elec-
tric charge. There are two types of electric charge: positive charge and
negative charge. Protons have a positive charge, and electrons have a
negative charge. If the same amounts of negative and positive charge are
brought together, they neutralize each other and there is no net charge.
Positive and negative charges are present in neutral objects, but their num-
bers are equal. However, if there is a little bit more of one type of charge
than the other, then the object is said to be electrically charged.
Exercise 4.1
When do you
Unit of Charge
say that a body
The SI unit of electric charge is Coulomb (C). One coulomb (1 C) of charge
is charged posi-
is carried by 6.25 X 10¹⁸ electrons. An electron possesses a negative charge
tively?
of 1.6 X 10⁻¹⁹ C. In electrostatics, you often work with charge in micro
Coulombs = X 10⁻⁶ C) and nano coulombs (1nC = 1 X 10⁻⁹ C).
Key Concept
Conservation of Charge
It If an object
gains electrons,
During electrification, electric charges are neither created nor destroyed,
it becomes nega-
but are transferred from one material to another. This is called the law
tively charged; if
of conservation of charge. There are some practical examples of charge
it loses electrons,
transfer from one material to another. For example, have you ever seen
it becomes posi-
the old comb and hair trick where your hair rises and sticks to the comb?
tively charged.
This arises because of the simple conservation of charge, i.e., the transfer
of charge either from the comb to the hair or vice versa. Thus, the total
4.1 Charges in Nature
93
charge in an isolated system never changes. By isolated, you mean that no
particles are allowed to cross the boundary of the system.
Exercise 4.2
Quantization of charge
A conductor
The smallest charge that is possible to obtain is that of an electron or
possesses a pos-
itive charge of
proton. The magnitude of this charge is denoted by e. Charge is said to
3.2
X
10⁻¹⁹ C.
be quantized when it occurs as the integral multiples of e. This is true for
How many elec-
both negative and positive charges and is expressed as;
trons does it
have in excess
q = ne where n is positive or negative integer.
(4.1)
or deficit (use:
e = 1.60 X 10⁻¹⁹
Section summary
C)?
There are two types of electric charges: positive and negative.
Neutral objects have equal number of positive and negative
charges.
The total electric charge in an isolated system, that is, the
algebraic sum of the positive and negative charges present at
any time, does not change.
Electric charges are quantized, occurring only in discrete
amounts.
Review questions
1. What are the different types of charges that exist in nature?
2. When do you say that a body is negatively charged?
3. What does the law of conservation of charges say?
4. What does it mean by quantization of a charge?
5. Write the properties of electric charges.
94
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.2 Methods of Charging a Body
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
demonstrate different charging processes;
explain the results of different charging processes.
In the previous section, you discussed that charges are transferred from
one body to another by a process known as charging. Charging is the
process of electrifying bodies, by removing or adding charges.
Activity 4.1
The following are the different methods of charging a body:
In groups, try
i Charging by rubbing
to think of the
different ways of
ii Charging by conduction
charging a body?
iii Charging by induction
Charging by rubbing
Charging by rubbing occurs when two different neutral materials are
rubbed together and electric charges are transferred from one object to
(a)
the other. Some materials, such as silk are more likely to attract extra
electrons and become negatively charged, where as others, such as glass
and ebonite rod, are more likely to give electrons and become positively
(b)
charged. This is because some kinds of atoms are more strongly attracted
Figure 4.1 (a) The comb and
to electrons than others. For example, in Figure 4.1 (a), the hair and the
the hair are both neutral. (b) Af-
comb are both neutral. When they are rubbed together, the atoms in the
ter being rubbed together, the
comb gain electrons and the atoms in the hair lose electrons (Figure 4.1
comb is negatively charged and
the hair is positively charged.
(b)). Due to this, the comb attracts tiny pieces of paper.
4.2 Methods of Charging a Body
95
Activity 4.2
Exercise 4.3
Tear a piece of paper into several small pieces. Charge a plastic pen
Charge an object
and two other objects by rubbing them on your hair or on some
by friction and
fabric. Bring each charged object near the pieces of paper.
bring it near a
(a) Describe what you observe, listing the three materials you
stream of smoke
charged.
rising from a
(b) Why are the pieces of paper attracted to the charged object?
wooden splint.
(c) Why do some pieces of paper fall off your charged objects after a
What do you see?
short while?
Explain why it
(d) When using a conducting sphere with a large charge, the paper
happens.
"jumps" off instead of falling. Explain why this happens.
Key Concept
Charging by
Charging by Conduction
rubbing leaves the
two bodies with
Charging by conduction occurs when a charged object make contact with a
an opposite sign
neutral object. Figure 4.2 depicts the use of a positively charged aluminum
of charges.
plate being touched by a neutral metal sphere. A positively charged alu-
minum plate has an excess of protons. When looked at from an electron
perspective, a positively charged aluminum plate has a shortage of elec-
trons. So when the positively charged aluminum plate is touched to the
neutral metal sphere (Figure 4.2 (b)), countless electrons on the metal
sphere migrate towards the aluminum plate. There is a mass migration of
Key Concept
electrons until the positive charge on the aluminum plate-metal sphere
system becomes redistributed. Having lost electrons to the positively
Charging
charged aluminum plate, there is a shortage of electrons on the sphere
by conduction
leaves the charged
body and the
uncharged body
+
with the same
sign of charge but
a weaker strength
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
than the original
object.
Figure 4.2 Charging by conduction.
96
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
and an overall positive charge as shown in Figure 4.2 (c). The aluminum
plate is still charged positively; only it now has less excess positive charge
than it had before the charging process began. This process is called
charging by conduction, or "by contact" and the two rods end up with the
same sign on charge.
Charging by Induction
Charging by induction is a process where the charged object is held near to
an uncharged conductive material that is grounded on a neutrally charged
material. When a charge flows between two objects and the uncharged
conductive material develops a charge with the opposite polarity.
Ebonite rod
Metal
sphere
Grounding
+
wire
Insulated
stand
(a)
(b)
Connecting to
(c)
the ground
Figure 4.3 Charging by induction.
In Figure 4.3, a negatively charged ebonite rod is brought close to, but does
not touch a neutral metal sphere. In the sphere, the free electrons closest
to the rod move to the other side, as part (a) of the drawing indicates.
Key Concept
As a result, the part of the sphere closer to the rod becomes positively
Charging by in-
charged and the opposite part becomes negatively charged. If the rod were
duction leaves the
removed, the free electrons would return to their original places, and the
charged body and
charged regions would disappear. Under most conditions the earth is a
the uncharged
good electrical conductor. So when a metal wire is attached between the
body with the
sphere and the ground, as in Figure 4.3 (b), some of the free electrons leave
opposite sign of
the sphere and distribute themselves over the much larger earth. If the
charge.
grounding wire is then removed, followed by the ebonite rod, the sphere is
left with a positive net charge, as part (c) of the picture shows.
4.3 The electroscope
97
Section summary
Charging is the process of supplying the electric charge (elec-
trons) to an object or losing the electric charge (electrons)
from an object.
An uncharged object can be charged in different ways: charg-
ing by rubbing, conduction and induction.
Review questions
1. State the three methods of charging a body.
2. Describe how uncharged objects can be charged by contact
and rubbing.
4.3 The electroscope
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 4.4
describe the function of an electroscope;
What do you
think about the
use a simple electroscope to detect charges;
purpose of an
make a simple electroscope out of locally available materials.
electroscope?
The electroscope is a very sensitive instrument which can be used to de-
Key Concept
tect the type of electric charge, to identify whether an object is charged
For detecting
or not, to measure the quantity of charge and to know whether an object
the presence of
is conductor or insulator. It consists of a glass container with a metal rod
a charge on the
inside that has two thin pieces of gold foil attached. The other end of the
body, you use
metal rod has a metal plate attached to it outside the glass container. A
the collapsing
diagram of a gold leaf electroscope is shown in Figure 4.4.
or diverging of
the leaf of the
When a charged object, like the positively charged rod in Figure 4.4 is
electroscope.
brought close to (but not touching), the neutral metal plate of the elec-
98
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Metal pan
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Metal rod
Plastic or glass
Glass
+
+
Foil
+
+
Plastic or glass
Neutral electroscope
Electroscope
Electroscope
Approached with a
Approached with a
negative rod like
positive rod like
charge foils repel
charge foils repel
Figure 4.4 Charging an electroscope.
troscope, the negative charge in the gold foil, metal rod, and metal plate
would be attracted to the positively charged rod. The charge can move
freely from the foil up the metal rod and onto the metal plate because the
metal (gold is a metal too) is a conductor. There is now more negative
charge on the plate and more positive charge on the gold foil leaves. This
is called inducing a charge on the metal plate. It is important to remember
that the electroscope is still neutral; the charges have just been induced to
move to different parts of the instrument. The induced positive charge on
the gold leaves forces them apart since like charges repel. This is how you
can tell that the rod is charged.
When the rod is now moved away from the metal plate, the charge in the
electroscope spreads out evenly again, and the leaves will fall down again
because there is no longer an induced charge on them.
4.4 Electrical Discharge
99
Activity 4.3
Section summary
Based on what
An electroscope is a device that is used to detect the presence
you have learnt
of an electric charge on a body.
here, try to design
or construct a sim-
Review questions
ple electroscope
in groups using
1. What is the function of an electroscope?
easily available
2. How do you know that whether or not an electroscope is
materials.
charged?
Exercise 4.5
Can a charged
4.4 Electrical Discharge
object become
neutral again?
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
explain the nature of electric discharge;
describe how lightning happens;
Key Concept
list the importance of grounding.
it
Once an ob-
ject is charged,
So far, you have learnt about the techniques of charging a material. There is
the charges are
also a technique for removing the excess electric charges from the charged
trapped on it
objects. This process of removing electric charges from a charged body
until they are
is called discharging. A charged body can be made to lose its charges
given a path to
by touching it with a conductor. When a body is discharged, it becomes
escape. When
neutral.
electric charges
are transferred
Lightning
very quickly, the
process is called
Lightning is a very large electrical discharge caused by induction. In a
an electrical dis-
thunderstorm, a charged area, usually negative, builds up at the base of a
charge. Sparks
cloud (Figure 4.5 (a)). The negative charge at the base of the cloud creates
are an example
a temporary positively charged area on the ground through the induc-
of electrical dis-
tion process (Figure 4.5 (b)). When enough charge has built up, a path of
charge.
charged particles is formed (Figure 4.5 (c)). The cloud then discharges its
100
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
excess electrons along the temporary path to the ground, creating a huge
spark (Figure 4.5 (d)). This discharge also causes a rapid expansion of the
air around it, causing thunder.
Activity 4.4
Air is normally an insulator. If it were not, lightning would occur every
time that cloud formed. For lightning to happen, charges in the clouds
Lightning are a
must build up to the point where the air cannot keep them separated from
common expe-
the ground. Then, the air stops being an insulator and becomes a fair
rience during
rainy season. But,
conductor, resulting in a lightning strike.
how it is formed?
Discuss in groups.
One way to avoid the damage caused by electric discharges is to make
the excess charges flow harmlessly into the Earth's surface. The Earth is a
donator or receiver of charge and is so large that, overall it is not affected
by the electron transfer of huge lightning strikes. So, it can absorb an
Activity 4.5
enormous quantity of excess charge. As a result, the ground is always
considered neutral.
In your commu-
nity, what did
The process of providing a pathway to drain excess charge into the earth
people do when
they encountered
is called grounding. The pathway is usually a conductor such as a wire
a person struck by
or a pipe. You might have noticed lightning rods at the top of buildings
lightning? Have
and towers. A lightning conductor is often fitted to the top of a building
you observed
that they bury
some parts of the
person's (usually
below the neck) i
the ground?
electron
electron
Figure 4.5 Lightning is an atmospheric electrical discharge.
4.4 Electrical Discharge
101
to help discharge the clouds safely. These rods are made of metal and are
connected to metal cables that conduct electric charge into the ground if
the rod is struck by lightning. The idea is that it should get struck before
Exercise 4.6
the building and conduct the surge of charge harmlessly into the Earth's
Have you ever
surface.
heard of someone
being killed by
Most lightning deaths and injuries occur outdoors. If you are outside and
lightning?
can see lightning or hear thunder, take shelter indoors immediately. If you
cannot go indoors, you should take these precautions: avoid high places
and open fields; stay away from tall objects such as trees, flag poles, or light
towers; and avoid objects that conduct current such as bodies of water,
metal fences, picnic shelters, and metal bleachers.
It is very rare that people are struck by lightning, and certainly you will
Exercise 4.7
not be struck while you are inside a car or in an airplane. The metal shell
Would you please
around you would divert charges away.
add any other
mechanisms that
Section summary
you know to make
peoples safe from
Lightning is a gigantic (very large) discharge between clouds
lightning?
and the earth, or between the charges in the atmosphere and
the earth.
Review questions
1. Describe the terms "charging" and "discharging".
2. Explain what causes the lightning that is associated with a
thunderstorm.
3. What is grounding?
102
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Exercise 4.8
4.5 Coulomb's law of electrostatics
You might already
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
know that like
charges repel
state Coulomb's laws of electrostatics;
each other and
find the magnitude of electric force between two charges using
unlike charges
Coulomb's law.
attract each other.
But have you
The magnitude of the forces between charged spheres was first investi-
taken a minute
gated quantitatively in 1785 by Charles Coulomb (1736-1806), a French
to wonder how
scientist. He observed that the electrostatic force between the two charges
strong these
is proportional to the product of the charges and is inversely proportional
forces are?
to the square of their distance apart.
+F
Coulomb's law can be stated in mathematical terms as
-F
q₁
+
q₂
r
(a)
F α | q₁|q₂|,
F x 1/2
(4.2)
-F
+
q₁
q₂
+F
+
r
(b)
F x Fα 91/92
Figure 4.6 (a) Attractive and
where F is the magnitude of the electric force between the two charges q₁
(b) repulsive electrostatic force
and q2, and r is the distance between the two charges.
between two charges.
You can convert the above proportionality expression to an equation by
Key Concept
writing
It The electro-
static force ex-
F = k r²
(4.3)
erted by a point
where, k = 1 ≈ 9 10⁹ Nm² is the electrostatic constant;
charge on a test
= 8.85 X 10 Nm² is called permittivity of free space.
charge at a dis-
tance r depends
The SI unit of force is the Newton. The electrostatic force is directed along
on the charge of
the line joining the charges, and it is attractive if the charges have unlike
both charges, as
signs and repulsive if the charges have like signs. Figure 4.6 shows the
well as the dis-
attractive and repulsive electrostatic forces.
tance between the
two.
4.5 Coulomb's law of electrostatics
103
Example 4.1
Charges q₁ = 5.0µC and q₂ = - 12.0µC are separated by 30 cm on the x-axis.
What is the magnitude of the force exerted by the two charges?
Solution:
You are given q₁ = 5.0µC, q₂ = 12.0µC and r = 30 cm.
You want to find the magnitude of the force F.
Using Coulomb's law,
(0.3m)²
Since the two charges are of opposite sign, the force between the charges is
an attractive force.
Section summary
The force between two point charges is
directly proportional to the magnitude of each charge.
inversely proportional to square of the separation between
their centers.
directed along the line joining their centers.
Review questions
1. Two charges 1 C and - 4C exist in the air. What is the direction
of the force between them?
2. Two charges q₁ = 2 X 10⁻⁶ C and q₁ = -4 X 10⁻³ C are placed
30 cm apart. Determine the magnitude and direction of the
force that one charge exerts on the other.
104
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.6 The electric field
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
state the meaning of an electric field;
distinguish the elements that determine the strength of the electric
field at a given location;
Exercise 4.9
What do you think
show electric field lines diagrammatically;
is the definition
calculate the strength of an electric field.
for an electric
field?
An electric field is a region where an electric charge experiences a force,
just as a football field is an area where the game is played. Electric field
lines are an excellent way of visualizing electric fields. They were first
introduced by Michael Faraday.
The space around a charge or an arrangement of charges differ from space
in which no charges are present. You can test whether a space has an
electric field by bringing a small, point positive charge q₀ into the space. If
q₀ experiences an electric force, then there is an electric field. If no force
is experienced, then there is no electric field. For this reason, the small
charge is called a test charge: it tests for the existence of electric fields. It
has to be small so that its presence does not disturb the electric field it is
Key Concept
trying to detect. Figure 4.7 shows the electric field lines of a positively and
negatively charged body.
It A test charge is
a positive electric
charge whose
charge is so small
that it does not
significantly dis-
turb the charges
that create the
electric field.
Figure 4.7 Electric field lines from positive and negative charges.
4.6 The electric field
105
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8 Electric field lines between (a) similar charges (b) opposite charges.
Properties of electric field lines
The field lines never intersect or cross each other.
The field lines are perpendicular to the surface of the charge.
The magnitude of the charge and the number of field lines are pro-
portional to each other.
Field lines originate at a positive charge and terminate at a negative
charge.
The lines of force bend together when particles with unlike charges
attract each other. The lines bend apart when particles with like
Key Concept
charges repel each other. This is clearly indicated in Figure 4.8
The magnitude
of È is the force
per unit charge
Electric Field Strength
and its direction
is that of È (i.e.,
The strength of the electric field, E, at any point in space is equal to the
the direction of
force per unit charge exerted on a positive test charge. Mathematically,
the force which
acts on a positive
E=F E F / q F q or F = Eq
(4.4)
charge).
106
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Thus, È is a vector. If q is positive, the electric field È has the same direction
as the force acting on the charge. If q is negative, the direction of È is
opposite to that of the force F. On the other hand, the SI unit of electric
field is Newton per Coulomb (C).
Electric field strength due to a point charge
In order to measure the electric field in a given region, you introduce a test
charge and measure the force on it. However, you should realize that the
test charge q₀ exerts forces on the charge that produce the field, so it may
change the configuration of the charges.
+q
+q₀
Since the electric field is force per unit charge, you divide the force by the
F
+
+
charge q₀ to obtain the field due to q at the location of q₀. That is
r
Figure 4.9 Electric field at a
q₀ where F=k9oq
(4.5)
distance r from a charge.
The above equation gives the field arising due to the charge q at any
Exercise 4.10
location which is at a distance r from q. The direction of the field is taken
as the direction of the force that is exerted on the positive charge. Thus,
It
What is the
direction of the
the electric field extends radially from a positive charge and inwards from
electric field due
a negative point charge.
to a positive pont
charge?
Example 4.2
Calculate the strength and direction of the electric field E due to a point
charge of 2.0 nC at a distance of 5.0 mm from the charge.
Solution:
In this example q = 2.00 X 10⁻⁹ C and r = 5.00 X 10⁻³ m.
You want to find the magnitude and direction of the electric field.
You can find the electric field created by a point charge using the equation
E = k
4.7 Electric circuits
107
Substituting those values into the above equation gives
This electric field strength is the same at any point 5.00 mm away from the
charge q that creates the field. It is positive, meaning that it has a direction
pointing away from the charge q.
Section summary
A test charge is a positive electric charge whose charge is so
small that it does not significantly disturb the charges that
create the electric field.
Electric field lines are directed radially outward from a positive
charge and directed radially inward towards a negative charge.
Review questions
1. What is an electric field line?
2. What is the magnitude and direction of the force exerted on a
3.50µ C charge by a 250 N/C electric field that points due East?
3. Calculate the magnitude of the electric field 2.00 m from a
point charge of 5.00 mC.
4.7 Electric circuits
Activity 4.6
What do you think
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
are the differences
define what an electric circuit is;
between an open
and closed cir-
describe the components of a simple circuit;
cuits? Discuss in
sketch an electric circuit diagram.
groups.
108
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
When a wire connects the terminals of the battery to the light bulb, as
shown in Figure 4.10, charges built up on one terminal of the battery have
a path to follow to reach the opposite charges on the other terminal. The
charge that flows around a circuit is carried by electrons. The charges
moving through the wire cause the filament to heat up and then give off
light.
Together, the bulb, battery, switch, and wire form an electric circuit. Thus,
an electric circuit is a path through which charges can flow. A schematic
diagram for a circuit is sometimes called a circuit diagram.
Light bulb
Switch
wire
Any element or group of elements in a circuit that dissipates energy is
BATTERY
called a load. A simple circuit consists of a source of potential difference
and electrical energy, such as a battery, and a load like a bulb or group of
Figure 4.10 Simple electric
bulbs. Because the connecting wire and switch have negligible resistance,
circuit.
you will not consider these elements as part of the load.
For the simple circuit shown in Figure 4.11 (a), a closed path is formed by
wires connected to a light bulb and to a battery. As long as there is a closed
path for electrons to follow, electrons can flow in a circuit. They move away
from the negative battery terminal and toward the positive terminal. Thus,
electric charge flows in the circuit as long as none of the wires, including
(a)
(b)
the glowing filament wire in the light bulb, are disconnected or broken.
Figure 4.11 (a) Closed circuit
Such a circuit is called a closed circuit.
(b) open circuit.
If the circuit is broken anywhere (or the switch is turned off), the charge
Key Concept
stops flowing and the bulb does not glow. Thus, without a complete path,
A physical cir-
there is no charge flow and therefore no current. This situation is an open
cuit is the electric
circuit. If the switch in Figure 4.11 were open, as shown in Figure 4.11(b),
circuit you create
the circuit would be open, the current would be zero, and the bulb would
with real compo-
not light up.
nents. It consists
of a battery, wire,
Electric circuits are incorporated into our lives in many different ways.
switch, and load.
They are used in nearly every type of item that uses electricity, from a
4.7 Electric circuits
109
phone to a lamp.
Components of electrical circuits
As you studied earlier, some common elements (components) that can be
found in electrical circuits include light bulbs, batteries, connecting wires,
switches, resistors, voltmeters, and ammeters. You will learn more about
these items in later sections, but it is important to know what their symbols
are and how to represent them in circuit diagrams. Table 4.1 summarizes
the symbols of electrical components.
Exercise 4.11
Table 4.1 Names of electrical components and their circuit symbols
What would hap-
pen to the lamp if
Components
Symbol
Usage
the circuit is bro-
ken somewhere?
Bulb or lump
bulb glows when charge moves
through it
+
Battery
provides energy for charge to
move
Open
Switch
Closed
allows a circuit to be open or
closed
Resistor
resists the flow of charge
V
Voltmeter
measures potential difference
A
Ammeter
measures current in a circuit
connecting lead
connects circuit elements to-
gether
110
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Section summary
The simplest electric circuit contains a source of electrical
energy (such as a battery), an electric conductor (such as a
wire connected to the battery) and a load (like lamps). Charges
flow through a circuit.
A closed path, or closed circuit, is needed for making electric
charge to flow through the circuit.
Review questions
1. What does an electric circuit mean?
2. What is the name of the unbroken path that current follows?
3. What is the difference between an open electric circuit and a
closed electric circuit?
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define current, voltage, and resistance;
state Ohm's Law;
calculate current, and solve problems involving Ohm's Law.
Exercise 4.12
Dear students, if the electric charge flows through a conductor (for exam-
How would you
ple, through a metallic wire), you say that there is an electric current in the
explain what an
conductor. In a torch, you know that the cells (or a battery, when placed in
electric current is?
proper order) provide flow of charges or an electric current that makes the
torch bulb to glow.
The flow of charge particles or the rate of flow of electric charge through
a point in a conducting medium is called electric current. The charge
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
111
particles can be negative or positive. Since electrons were not known at
the time when the phenomenon of electricity was first observed, electric
current was assumed to be the flow of positively charged particles. The
current produced due to the flow of positively charged particles is called
conventional current (or simply current) and it flows out from the positive
terminal of the battery into the negative terminal. This was the convention
chosen during the discovery of electricity. But this assumption was found
to be wrong once the electron was discovered. So, in practice, the electric
current is the flow of electrons (negatively charged particles). Electron cur-
rent is the flow of negatively charged particles from the negative terminal
of the battery to the positive terminal, as shown in Figure 4.12. However,
the direction of the current does not affect the properties of the circuit as
long as you keep it consistent. Therefore, the conventional current is taken
as the standard current direction.
If a net charge Q, flows across any cross-section of a conductor in time
Key Concept
t, then the current I, through the cross-section is
Electric cur-
I=AQ
rent is defined as
(4.6)
the rate at which
electric charges
The SI unit for electric current is the ampere (A), named after the French
flow.
scientist Andre-Marie Ampere (1775-1836). One ampere is constituted
by the flow of one coulomb of charge per second, that is, 1 A = 1 C/s. Small
quantities of current are expressed in milliampere (1mA = 10⁻³ A) or in
Conventional current
Switch
Light bulb
Electron current
wire
BATTERY
+
Figure 4.12 Conventional current and electron current.
112
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
microampere (1µA = 10⁻⁶ A). An instrument used to measure electric
current is called the ammeter.
Example 4.3
A current of 0.5 A is drawn by a filament of an electric bulb for 10 minutes.
Find the amount of electric charge that flows through the circuit.
Solution:
You are given I = 0.5 A, and t = 10 minutes = 600 s.
You want to find the net charge, Q.
From the equation for current, you have
QQ = I X = 0.5 A X 600 s = 300 C
Potential Difference
Exercise 4.13
Charges do not flow in a copper wire by themselves, just as water in a
What makes elec-
perfectly horizontal tube does not flow. If one end of the tube is connected
tric charges to
to a tank of water kept at a higher level, such that there is a pressure differ-
flow?
ence between the two ends of the tube, water flows out of the other end
of the tube. Thus, in a water circuit, a pump increases the gravitational
potential energy of the water by raising the water from a lower level to a
higher level.
For the flow of charges in a conducting metallic wire, the electrons move
only if there is a difference of electric pressure called the potential differ-
ence along the conductor. This difference of potential may be produced
by a battery, consisting of one or more electric cells. A battery supplies
energy to an electric circuit. When the positive and negative terminals of
a battery are connected in a circuit, the electric potential energy of the
electrons in the circuit is increased. As these electrons move toward the
positive battery terminal, this electric potential energy is transformed into
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
113
other forms of energy, just as gravitational potential energy is converted
into kinetic energy as water falls.
A battery supplies energy to an electric circuit by converting chemical
Key Concept
energy to electric potential energy. The chemical action within a cell gen-
The voltage or
erates the potential difference across the terminals of the cell, even when
potential differ-
no current is drawn from it. When the cell is connected to a conducting
ence in a circuit is
circuit element, the potential difference sets the charges in motion in the
a measure of the
conductor and produces an electric current. In order to maintain the cur-
electrical poten-
rent in a given electric circuit, the cell has to expend its chemical energy
tial energy of the
stored in it.
electrons in the
circuit. A battery
The electric potential difference (V) between two points in an electric
supplies energy
circuit carrying some current is defined as the work done to move a unit
to an electric cir-
charge from one point to the other.
cuit by increasing
the electric po-
V= Work Charge done (Q) (W) W Q
tential energy of
electrons in the
circuit.
The SI unit of electric potential difference is the volt (V), named after
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827), an Italian physicist. One volt (1 V) is the
potential difference between two points in a current-carrying conductor
when 1 Joule (1 J) of work is done to move a charge of 1 coulomb (1 C) from
one point to the other. Therefore, 1 V = 1 On the other hand, potential
difference is measured by means of an instrument called the voltmeter.
You might have seen birds sitting and even running along electric line
Exercise 4.14
wires high in the air. There are times when these wires can be filled with
How can birds
dozens of birds. Since birds are not good conductors, that is one reason
sit on those wires
they don't get shocked when they sit on electrical wires. The energy by-
in Figure 4.13 and
passes the birds and keeps flowing along the wire instead.
not get an electric
shock?
There is another reason why birds can sit on a wire without getting shocked.
There is no voltage difference on a single wire. There must be a difference
114
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Figure 4.13 Birds on an electric cable.
in electrical potential for electrons to move. For example, energy flows
from areas of high voltage to areas of low voltage. If it flows through a
Activity 4.7
single power line at 35,000 volts, it will continue along the path of least
resistance. That means it will bypass birds because there is no difference
Would you be
in electrical potential.
harmed if you
touch one of the
wires of a high-
It would be a different story if a bird is connected to the ground through
voltage transmis-
some means (like a tree) while sitting on the wire. That would cause it to
sion line just like
get shocked. This would also happen if a bird touched another wire with a
birds without
different voltage. In these cases, the bird's body would become a path for
having contact
electricity. It would move through the bird to reach either the ground or
with the ground?
another place with a different voltage. This is why power lines tend to be
If yes, then how
high in the air with plenty of space between the wires.
can birds not die
when they sit on
Example 4.4
such lines?
How much work is done in moving a charge of 2 C across two points having
a potential difference 12 V?
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
115
Solution:
In this example, you are given with V = 12 V and q = 2C.
What you want to find is the work done.
The amount of work W, done in moving the charge is
W=VQ=12 V x2 C =24J
Ohm's Law
In an electric circuit, charges do not flow freely. So the electrical current in
Exercise 4.15
a wire can be reduced by many factors including impurities in the metal of
Is there a rela-
the wire that increases the resistance of the wire or collisions between the
tionship between
electrons and nuclei in the material. These factors create a resistance to
the potential dif-
the electrical current. Resistance is a description of how much a wire or
ference across
other electrical component opposes the flow of charge through it.
a conductor
and the current
In the 19th century, the German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787-1854)
through it?
found experimentally that current through a conductor is proportional to
the voltage drop across a current-carrying conductor.
In other words,
V α I
In an equation form,
Exercise 4.16
V I = R or V = IR
(4.7)
Describe how
the current in a
This relationship is called Ohm's law. It can be viewed as a cause-and-
circuit changes
effect relationship, with voltage being the cause and the current being the
if the resistance
effect. Ohm's law is an empirical law like that for friction, which means
increases and the
that it is an experimentally observed phenomenon.
voltage remains
constant.
In the above expression, R is a constant for the given metallic wire at a
116
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
given temperature and is called its resistance. It is the property of a conduc-
tor to resist the flow of charges through it. Thus, the motion of electrons
through a conductor is retarded by its resistance. The units of resistance
are volts per ampere, or V/A. You call a V/A an "ohm", which is represented by
the uppercase Greek letter omega (Ω). Thus, 1 Ω = 1 V/A.
In many practical cases, it is necessary to increase or decrease the current
in an electric circuit. In an electric circuit, a device called a rheostat is
Key Concept
often used to change the resistance in the circuit.
It Resistance
Ohm's law is an empirical relationship valid only for certain materials.
is a measure of
how difficult it is
Materials that obey Ohm's law and hence have a constant resistance over
for electrons to
a wide range of voltage, are said to be ohmic materials. Ohmic materi-
flow through a
als include good conductors like copper, aluminum, and silver. Ohmic
material.
materials have a linear current-voltage relationship over a large range of
applied voltages (Figure 4.14 (a)). Non-ohmic materials have a nonlinear
current-voltage relationship (Figure 4.14 (b)).
I
I
V
Exercise 4.17
V
(a)
(b)
Would you please
Figure 4.14 The current-voltage characteristics of (a) ohmic materi-
think of an anal-
als and (b) non-ohmic materials.
ogy for current,
The magnitude of the electric current depends on the material of the
voltage and resis-
wire, length of the wire, area of cross section, and etc. The resistance of
tance?
an ohmic conductor increases with length, which makes sense because
the electrons going through it must undergo more collisions in a longer
conductor. A smaller cross-sectional area also increases the resistance of a
conductor, just as a smaller pipe slows the fluid moving through it. The
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
117
resistance, then, is proportional to the conductor's length, and is inversely
proportional to its cross sectional area A. Thus,
R α L/A
R=p- =
(4.8)
A = area
L = length
P = resistivity
Figure 4.15 A uniform conductor of length L, and cross-sectional
area A.
Exercise 4.18
where the constant of proportionality, p, is called the resistivity of the ma-
For the same
terial. Resistivity is the electrical resistance of a conducting material per
crossection of
unit length. In other words, it is the degree to which a conductor opposes
a wire, describe
the flow of electricity through itself, instead allowing the energy to flow
how the electric
out of the electrical circuit, most often as heat. The SI unit of resistivity is
resistance of a
Ωm. It is a characteristic property of the material.
wire changes as
the wire becomes
On the other hand, conductivity is resistivity's reciprocal. So a high resis-
longer. How does
tivity means a low conductivity, and a low resistivity means a high conduc-
the resistance
tivity.
change as the
wire becomes
thicker for the
Example 4.5
same length of a
How much current will an electric bulb draw from a 220 V source, if the
wire?
resistance of the bulb filament is 1200 Ω?
Solution:
You are given V = 220 V and R = 1200 Ω.
You want to find the value for the current, I.
118
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
From Ohm's law, current can be calculated by:
I 1200 0.18 A
Example 4.6
The potential difference between the terminals of an electric heater is 60 V
when it draws a current of 4A from the source. What current will the heater
draw if the potential difference is increased to 120 V?
Solution:
You are given V = 60 V and I = 4 A.
What you want to find is the resistance, R.
According to Ohm's law,
R=V=60V=15Ω Ω
When the potential difference is increased to 120 V, the current is given by
15 Ω 8A
The current through the heater becomes 8 A.
Example 4.7
The resistance of a metal wire of length 1 m is 26 Ω at 20 °C. If the diam-
eter of the wire is 0.3 mm, what will be the resistivity of the metal at that
temperature?
Solution:
You are given the resistance R of the wire = 26 Ω, Ω, the diameter d = 0.3 mm =
3 X 10⁻⁴ m, and the length L of the wire = 1 m. You want to find the resistivity.
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
119
From the expression of the resistance, the resistivity of the given metallic
wire is
THE
Substitution of values in the above expression gives
The resistivity of the metal at 20 °C is 1.84 X 10⁻⁶ Ωm. This is the resistivity
of manganese.
Section summary
Resistance is a property that resists the flow of electrons in a
conductor. It controls the magnitude of the current. The SI
unit of resistance is ohm (Ω).
The potential difference, also referred to as voltage difference
between two given points is the work in joules required to
move one coulomb of charge from one point to the other.
According to Ohm's law, the potential difference across the
ends of a resistor is directly proportional to the current
through it, provided its temperature remains the same.
The resistance of a conductor depends directly on its length,
inversely to its cross-sectional area, and also on the material
of the conductor.
Review questions
1. What is the term used to state the flow of an electric charge
per unit time?
2. What is the relationship among voltage, current, and resis-
tance in a circuit?
120
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
3. What is meant by the potential difference between two points
is 1 V?
4. What are the factors that determine the resistance of a con-
ductor?
5. Will current flow more easily through a thick wire or a thin wire
of the same material, when connected to the same source?
Why ?
6. Let the resistance of an electrical component remains con-
stant while the potential difference across the two ends of the
component decreases to half of its former value. What change
will occur in the current through it?
Exercise 4.19
4.9
Combination of resistors in a circuit
How many dif-
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
ferent paths can
electric current
draw a diagram that shows series and parallel connections of resis-
follow in a series
tors;
circuit?
describe what happens to the current and potential difference when
the resistors are connected in series and in parallel;
Exercise 4.20
If a series cir-
calculate the equivalent resistance for a circuit of resistors in series
cuit containing
or in parallel;
mini-light bulbs is
opened and some
calculate the current and potential difference across resistors con-
of the light bulbs
nected in series and parallel.
are removed,
what happens
In this section, you consider simple circuits containing only resistors and
when the circuit is
batteries. Such circuits often contain a number of resistors connected in
closed?
series or in parallel.
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
121
Resistors in Series
Key Concept
Students, what if you wanted to watch TV and had to turn on all the lights,
$ A series dcir-
a refrigerator, and every other electrical appliance in the house to do so?
cuit describes two
That is what it would be like if all the electrical appliances in your house
or more compo-
were connected in a series circuit.
nents of a circuit
that provide a
A series circuit is a circuit that has only one path for the electric current to
single path for
follow, as shown in Figure 4.16. If this path is broken, then the current will
current.
no longer flow and all the devices in the circuit will stop working. As an
example, if the entire string of lights went out when only one bulb burned
out, then the lights in the string were wired as a series circuit.
Exercise 4.21
R₁
I₁
What happens
A
A
to the value
V₁
+
of the current
AV
V2
R₂
+
V
Req
V3
when a number
B
I₂
of resistors are
I₃
B
R₃
(a) Three resistors in a serious
(b) Equivalent resistance has same current
connected in
series circuit?
Figure 4.16 Series connection of three resistors.
What would be
Since charge is conserved, charges cannot build up or disappear at one
their equivalent
point. As there is only one path for a charge to flow, the amount of charge
resistance?
entering and exiting the first resistor must equal the amount of charge that
enters and exits the second resistor in the same time interval. Because the
Key Concept
current is the amount of charge moving past a point per unit of time, the
In a series
current in the first resistor must equal the current in the second resistor.
combination of
This is true for any number of resistors arranged in series. When many
resistors, the cur-
resistors are connected in series, the current in each resistor is the same.
rent is the same
in every part of
The potential difference across the battery, V, must equal the sum of the
the circuit or the
potential differences across the load, V₁ + V₂ + V₃, where V₁, V₂, and V₃
same current
are the potential differences across R₁, R₂, and R₃ respectively. That is,
through each
resistor.
V = V₁ + V₂ + V₃
(4.9)
122
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Let I be the current through the circuit. The current through each resistor
is also I. It is possible to replace the three resistors joined in series by an
equivalent single resistor of resistance Rₑ₉ such that the potential differ-
ence V across it, and the current I through the circuit remain the same.
Applying Ohm's law to the entire circuit, you have
V = IRₑq
By making use of equation 4.9,
Since V₁ = IR₁,V₂ = IR₂, V₃ = IR₃,
Key Concept
IRₑq= IR₁ + IR₂+ IR₃
JET The equivalent
resistance in a
series circuit is
(4.10)
the sum of the cir-
cuit's resistances.
Thus, when several resistors are joined in series, the resistance of the
combination Rₑ₉ equals the sum of their individual resistances, R₁, R₂, R₃,
and is thus greater than any individual resistance.
Resistors in Parallel
Exercise 4.22
As discussed above, when a single bulb in a series light set burns out, the
Explain why build-
entire string of lights goes dark because the circuit is no longer closed. A
ings are wired
wiring arrangement that provides alternative pathways for the movement
using parallel cir-
of a charge is a parallel circuit. A parallel circuit is a circuit that has more
cuits rather than
than one path for the electric current to follow, as shown in Figure 4.17.
series circuits.
The figure shows the arrangement of three resistors joined in parallel with
a combination of cells (or a battery). The current branches so that elec-
trons flow through each of the paths.
The bulbs of the decorative light set that you use in your home are arranged
in parallel with each other. Thus, if one path is broken, electrons continue
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
123
to flow through the other paths. Adding or removing additional devices in
one branch does not break the current path in the other branches, so the
devices on those branches continue to work normally. Houses, schools,
and other buildings are wired using parallel circuits.
I
A
A
I
Exercise 4.23
AV
R₁
R₂
R3
V
Req
How does con-
I₁
I2
II₃
B
B
necting devices in
(a) Three resistors in a parallel
(b) Equivalent resistance has same current
parallel affect the
electric current in
Figure 4.17 Parallel connections of three resistors.
a circuit?
Because charge is conserved, the sum of the currents in each bulb equals
the current I delivered by the battery. This is true for all resistors in parallel.
I = I₁ + I₂ +
(4.11)
Key Concept
JF
Parallel de-
Therefore, the total current I is equal to the sum of the separate currents
scribes two or
through each branch of the combination.
more components
of a circuit that
Let Rₑ₉ be the equivalent resistance of the parallel combination of resistors.
provide sepa-
By applying Ohm's law to the parallel combination of resistors, you have
rate conducting
paths for cur-
I V V
rent because the
components are
Since I = I₁ + I₂ + I₃, applying Ohm's law to each resistor gives you
connected across
common points
Rₑ₉ V = R₁ V₁ + R₂ V₂ + R₃ V₃
or junctions. A
parallel circuit
has more than
Because the potential difference across each bulb in a parallel arrangement
one path for the
equals the terminal voltage V = V₁ = V₂ = V₃, you can divide each side of
current to follow.
the equation by V to get the following equation.
11
124
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Thus, the reciprocal of the equivalent resistance of a group of resistances
joined in parallel is equal to the sum of the reciprocals of the individual
resistances. An extension of this analysis shows that the equivalent re-
sistance of two or more resistors connected in parallel can be calculated
using the following equation.
(4.12)
Example 4.8
In the circuit shown in Figure 4.18, find:
a) the equivalent resistance,
b) the current through each resistor.
Solution:
You are given R₁ = 12 Ω, Ω, R₂ = 3.0 Ω, R₃ = 4.0 Ω, Ω, R₄ = 5.0 Ω and V = 12 V.
The required quantities are Rₑ₉ and I.
5Ω
12Ω
3Ω
4Ω
a) Since all the four resistors are in series combination,
I]
I
Rₑ₉ = R₁ + R₂ + R₃ + R₄ = 12 Ω + 3.0 Ω + 4.0 Ω + 4.0 Ω = 24 Ω.
12v
b) The current through all resistors in a series circuit is the same. Thus,
Figure 4.18 Circuit diagram
using Ohm's law,
for four resistors connected in
series.
Example 4.9
12v
6Ω
12Ω
120
In the circuit shown in Figure 4.19, find:
a) the equivalent resistance,
Figure 4.19 Circuit diagram for
b) the current through the battery and each resistor.
three resistors connected in
parallel.
Solution:
The given quantities are R₁ = 12 Ω, R₂ = 12 Ω, R₃ = 6.0 Ω and V = 12 V.
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
125
The required quantities are Rₑ₉ and I.
a) The three resistors are in a parallel combination. So
Rₑ₉ 1 = R₁ 1 + R₂ 1 + R₃ 1 = 12 Ω 1 + 12 Ω 1 + 6.0 Ω 1 = 3.0 Ω 1
Rₑ₉ = 3.0Ω
Therefore, the equivalent resistance should be less than the smallest resis-
tance as expected.
b) From Ohm's law,
3.0 Ω
Since the voltage is constant in a parallel connection,
12 Ω
6.0 Ω A
On the other hand, resistors in a circuit may be connected in a variety of
series-parallel combinations. The general procedure for analyzing circuits
with different series-parallel combinations of resistors is to find the voltage
across and the current through the various resistors as follows:
Start from the resistor combination farthest from the voltage source,
find the equivalent series and parallel resistances.
Reduce the current until there is a single loop with one total equiva-
lent resistance.
Find the total current delivered to the reduced circuit using Ohm's
law.
126
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Expand the reduced circuit in the reverse order of the above steps to
find the currents and voltages for the resistors in each step.
Example 4.10
Find the equivalent resistance and the current across the 4.0 Ω resistor
shown in Figure 4.20.
Solution:
You are given R₁ = 4.0 Ω, Ω, R₂ = 5.0 Ω, R₃ = 9.0 Ω, and V = 6 V.
You want to find the value for Rₑ₉ and I.
5.0 Ω
Since the 5.0 Ω and 9.0 Ω resistors are connected in parallel,
4.0 Ω
1 = 1 + 1 = 1 + 1 = 14
Rparallel R₂ R₃ 5Ω 9Ω 45 Ω Ω
9.0 Ω
Rparallel = 3.21 Ω
6.0 V
Now the 4.0 Ω and Rparallel resistors are connected in parallel. Therefore,
Figure 4.20 Circuit diagram for
Rₑ₉ = 4.0 Ω + Rparallel = 4.0 Ω + 3.21 Ω = 7.21 Ω.
series-parallel combination of
resistors.
The current through the circuit can be calculated by
I = V R = Rₑ₉ V = 7.21 Ω 6V = 0.830 A.
This is equivalent to the value of the current across the 4.0 Ω resistor as
the 4.0 Ω resistor is connected in parallel with Rparallel.
Section summary
The formulae made about both series and parallel circuits are
summarized in Table 4.2.
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
127
Table 4.2 Summary for a series and parallel circuits
Resistors in
Series
Parallel
Current
I = I₁ = I₂ = I₃ = = same I = I₁ + I₂ + I₃ + sum of
for each resistor
currents.
Potential
V = V₁ + V₂ + V₃ + = sum
=
difference
of potential differences
same for each resistor.
Equivalent
Rₑ₉ = R₂ + R₃ = sum
resistance
of individual resistances
reciprocal sum of resis-
tances.
Review questions
1. Which type of circuit has more than one path for electrons to
follow?
2. A 4.0 Ω resistor, an 8.0 Ω resistor, and a 12.0 Ω resistor are
connected in series with a 24.0 V battery.
a. Calculate the equivalent resistance.
b. Calculate the current in the circuit.
c. What is the current in each resistors?
3. A length of wire is cut into five equal pieces. The five pieces
are then connected in parallel, with the resulting resistance
being 2.00 Ω. What was the resistance of the original length of
wire before it was cut up?
4. How can you tell that the headlights of the car are wired in
parallel rather than in series? How would the brightness of the
bulbs differ if they were wired in series across the same 12 V
battery instead of in parallel?
128
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.10 Voltmeter and ammeter connection in a cir-
cuit
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
list the devices used for measuring current and voltage;
use voltmeter and ammeter to measure the voltage and current in
an electric circuit, respectively;
explain why an ammeter is connected in series and voltmeter is
connected in parallel.
As you have seen in previous sections, an electric circuit is made up of
a number of different components such as batteries, resistors and light
bulbs. There are devices that are used to measure the properties of these
components. These devices are called meters. Meters are of two types:
analog and digital. Analog meters have a needle that swivels to point at
numbers on a scale as opposed to digital meters, which have numerical
readouts similar to a hand-held calculator.
Battery
Voltmeter
Ammeter
<
Switch
A
R
Voltmeter
Ammeter
Light bulb
@@@@@@@@@@
Resistor
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.21 (a) Ammeter and voltmeter connection in a circuit. (b) Circuit
diagram with ammeter and voltmeter.
4.10 Voltmeter and ammeter connection in a circuit
129
Voltmeter
A voltmeter is a device that is used to measure potential differences across
a resistor or any other component of a circuit that has a voltage drop. In
Key Concept
analogy with a water circuit, a voltmeter is like a meter designed to mea-
Voltmeters
sure pressure differences.
are connected
in parallel with
To measure the potential difference between two points in a circuit, a
whatever device's
voltmeter must be connected in parallel with the portion of the circuit on
voltage is to be
which the measurement is made. A parallel connection is used because
measured.
objects in parallel experience the same potential difference. Since the
resistance of a voltmeter is high, it draws minimum current from the main
circuit and, thus, the potential difference of the component that is going
to be measured is not affected. If a voltmeter is connected in series, it
would increase the equivalence resistance of the circuit and no current
Exercise 4.24
would flow through it. Hence, it should be connected in parallel. Figure
4.21 shows a voltmeter is connected in parallel with a resistor. One lead of
How do we con-
the voltmeter is connected to one end of the battery and the other lead is
nect the ammeter
and voltmeter
connected to the opposite end.
in an electrical
circuit? Draw a
VOLTS
8
12.00
VOLTMETER
circuit diagram
-5472-
in order to jus-
V
tify your answer.
What will be
happening if the
(a)
(b)
(c)
positions of these
instruments are
Figure 4.22 (a) Analog voltmeter (b) Digital voltmeter (c) Voltmeter
symbol.
interchanged?
Specify the rea-
Ammeter
sons.
An ammeter is a device that is used to measure the the flow of electric
current in amperes. To measure the current of a circuit, the ammeter
shown in Figure 4.23 is connected in series in the circuit so that the same
current that is in the circuit flows through it and gets measured. Ammeter
130
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
has low (nearly zero) resistance because you do not want to change the
current that is flowing through the circuit. So its inclusion in series in the
circuit does not change the resistance and hence the main current in the
circuit. A series connection is used because objects in a series have the
same current passing through them. All of the current in this circuit flows
through the meter.
DIGITAL AMMETER
A
(b)
(c)
(a)
Figure 4.23 (a) Analog ammeter (b) A digital ammeter (c) Ammeter
symbol.
If an ammeter is connected in parallel, it would draw most of the current
and get damaged. Hence, it must be connected in series.
Key Concept
Table 4.3 summarizes the use of each measuring instrument that you
discussed and the way it should be connected to a circuit component.
It
Ammeters are
connected in se-
Table 4.3 Summary of the use and connection of an ammeter and a voltmeter
ries with whatever
device's current is
Instrument
Measured Quantity
Proper Connection
to be measured.
Voltmeter
Voltage
In Parallel
Ammeter
Current
In Series
On the other hand, multimeter is a measuring instrument that can mea-
sure multiple electrical properties. Figure 4.24 shows a digital multimeter,
a convenient device with a digital readout that can be used to measure
voltage, current, or resistance.
4.10 Voltmeter and ammeter connection in a circuit
131
09.38
Figure 4.24 Multimeter used for measuring electrical properties.
Section summary
Voltmeters measure voltage and ammeters measures current.
Voltmeter is connected in parallel with the voltage source to
receive full voltage and must have a large resistance to limit
its effect on the circuit.
An ammeter is connected in series to get the full current flow-
ing through a branch and must have a small resistance to limit
its effect on the circuit.
Review questions
1. Explain why a voltmeter is connected in parallel with a resis-
tor.
2. Explain why an ammeter is connected in series with a resistor.
3. What will happen when you connect an ammeter in parallel
and a voltmeter in a series circuit?
3
4
+
4. In Figure 4.25, there are four positions available for the place-
1
2
ment of meters.
Figure 4.25 Ammeter and volt-
a) Which position(s) would be appropriate for placement of
meter connection in a circuit.
an ammeter?
b) Which position(s) would be appropriate for placement of a
voltmeter?
132
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
c) Which position could hold an ammeter that would read the
total current through the circuit?
d) Which position could hold a voltmeter that would read the
total voltage drop through the circuit?
5. Suppose you are using a multimeter to measure current in a
circuit and you inadvertently leave it in voltmeter mode. What
effect will the meter have on the circuit? What would happen
if you were measuring voltage but accidentally put the meter
in ammeter mode?
Exercise 4.25
4.11 Electrical safety in general and local context
Have you ever had
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
a mild electric
shock?
state the safety measures to be taken to protect us from electrical
accidents or shocks.
Key Concept
You probably felt only a mild tingling sensation from the electric shock,
JE The first pre-
but electricity can have much more dangerous effects. In some ways your
caution to take for
body is like a piece of insulated wire. The fluids inside your body are good
personal safety
conductors of current. The electrical resistance of dry skin is much higher.
is to avoid com-
Skin insulates the body like the plastic insulation around a copper wire.
ing into contact
with an electrical
conductor that
Your skin helps keep electric current from entering your body. A current
might cause a
can enter your body when you accidentally become part of an electric
voltage across a
circuit. If direct body contact is made with an electrically energized part
human body or
while a similar contact is made simultaneously with another conductive
part of it, thus
surface that is maintained at a different electrical potential, a current will
causing a current
flow, entering the body at one contact point, traversing the body, and then
through the body
exiting at the other contact point, usually the ground.
that could be
dangerous.
A person can be electrocuted by touching a live wire while in contact with
4.11 Electrical safety in general and local context
133
the ground. Such a hazard is often due to frayed insulation that exposes
the conducting wire. The ground contact might be made by touching a
water pipe (which is normally at ground potential) or by standing on the
Exercise 4.26
ground with wet feet because impure water is a good conductor. Obviously,
Try to identify
such situations should be avoided at all costs.
what determines
the damage
Electric shock can result in fatal burns or cause the muscles of vital organs,
caused to the
such as the heart, to malfunction. The degree of damage to the body
human body by
depends on the magnitude of the current, the length of time it acts, and
an electric shock.
the part of the body through which it passes. Currents of 5 mA or less can
cause a sensation of shock, but ordinarily do little or no damage. If the
current is larger than about 10 mA, the hand muscles contract, and the
person may be unable to let go of the live wire. If a current of about 100 mA
passes through the body for just a few seconds, it can be fatal. Such large
currents paralyze the respiratory muscles. The current that flows through
the wires connected to a 60 W light bulb is about 0.5 A. This amount of
current entering your body could be deadly. In some cases, currents of
about 1 A through the body produce serious (and sometimes fatal) burns.
A fuse is the cheapest protection device in an electrical circuit against short
circuits and overloading of circuits. A fuse is a metal wire or thin metal
strip that has the property of having low melting point which is inserted
Figure 4.26 A Fuse.
into the electrical circuit as protective device. A fuse provides protection
against excessive currents which can flow in circuit during short circuits.
Under normal working conditions, the current flowing through the circuit
is within safe limits, but when fault occurs, such as a short circuit occurs,
or when load greater than the circuit capacity is connected to it, the cur-
rent exceeds the limiting value, resulting in a fuse wire that gets heated up,
AVR-1000VA
melts, and breaks the current. Thus, fuse protects the machine or electrical
FULL
AUTOMATIC
equipment against excessive currents. An automatic voltage regulator or
stabilizer device that you use in your home uses a fuse to operate.
As an additional safety feature for consumers, electrical equipment man-
Figure 4.27 Voltage stabilizer.
ufacturers now use electrical cords that have a third wire, called a case
134
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
ground. To understand how this works, consider the drill being used in
Figure 4.28. A two-wire device that has one wire, called the "phase" (or
"hot" or "live") wire is connected to the high-potential (220 V) side of the
input power line, and the second wire is connected to ground (0 V). If the
high-voltage wire comes in contact with the case of the drill (Figure 4.28
(a)), a short circuit occurs. In this undesirable circumstance, the pathway
for the current is from the high-voltage wire through the person holding
the drill and to Earth, a pathway that can be fatal. Protection is provided by
a third wire, connected to the case of the drill (Figure 4.28 (b)). In this case,
if a short occurs, the path of least resistance for the current is from the
"Ouch!"
Motor
"Neutral"
120 V
I
Wall
Circuit
outlet
breaker
"Live"
I
Ground
(a)
"Neutral"
Motor
"Ground"
I
I
120 V
3-wire
Circuit
outlet
breaker
"Live"
I
Ground
(b)
Figure 4.28 The "phase" wire, at 220 V, always includes a circuit breaker for
safety. (a) When the drill is operated with two wires, the normal current path
is from the "phase" wire, through the motor connections, and back to ground
through the "neutral" wire. (b) Shock can be prevented by a third wire running
from the drill case to the ground.
4.11 Electrical safety in general and local context
135
high-voltage wire through the case and back to ground through the third
wire. The resulting high current will blow a fuse or trip a circuit breaker
before the consumer is injured.
Note: The color of wires represents electrical standards. In Ethiopia,
the "phase" wire is red, yellow, or blue, and the ground wire is greenish-
yellowish, and the neutral wire is black.
Key Concept
A grounding
Special power outlets called ground-fault interrupters (GFIs) or residual
plug (a three-
current devices (RCDs) are now being used in kitchens, bathrooms, base-
prong plug) uses a
ments, and other hazardous areas of new homes. They are designed to
dedicated ground-
protect people from electrical shock by sensing small currents (approx-
ing wire to ground
imately 5 mA and greater) leaking to ground. When current above this
objects that may
level is detected, the device shuts off (interrupts) the current in less than a
become conduc-
millisecond.
tors and thus
dangerous. A
In addition to these, the following are important safety tips to prevent
polarized plug
electrical accidents or shocks.
identifies the
ground side of the
Never use appliances with frayed or damaged electric cords.
line for use as a
grounding safety
Unplug appliances before working on them, such as when prying
feature.
toast out of a jammed toaster.
Avoid all water when using plugged-in appliances.
Never touch power lines with anything, including kite string and
ladders.
Always respect warning signs and labels.
136
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Section summary
Safety of an electrical installation could be ensured by proper
insulation, good earthling system and adopting adequate pro-
tection and control systems.
Electrical hazards can cause burns, shocks and electrocution
(death). You should follow proper rules and regulations to
avoid accident.
Qualified electricians are recommended to inspect electrical
equipments. In damp locations, inspect electric cords and
equipment in order to ensure they are in good condition; use
a ground-fault circuit interrupter (GFCI).
Review questions
1. Identify the factors that determine the damage caused to the
human body by an electric shock.
2. You are often advised not to flick electric switches with wet
hands; you have to dry your hands first. You are also advised
to never throw water on an electric fire. Why is this so?
4.12 Electric projects
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
draw an electric circuit diagram consisting of a battery, connecting
wires, resistors, a switch, and a bulb using their symbols;
construct an electric circuit using wires, resistors, switch and bulb.
You use electricity every day, but the electronic devices around you (like
electric motors that move things including lifts and escalators, washing
machines, food mixers and other home appliances) largely operate with-
4.12 Electric projects
137
out your being aware of how they do so. The "how" of these electronic
devices working is answered by electrical circuits.
As you already discussed in the previous sections, electrical circuits allow
Exercise 4.27
current to flow through our electronic devices to produce light, sound,
Did you remem-
and a variety of other effects. Of course, that is an easy statement to make
ber any electrical
but one that is much harder to explain or demonstrate. That is where
projects that you
classroom projects and lessons come in.
have undertaken?
Is there any tips
Thus, the best way to learn about circuits is through hands-on projects in
that you can share
which circuits are built and used. In this section, you will try to perform
us from your
some simple electrical projects using the concepts that you have learnt
experience?
earlier.
Project 4.1: A series lamp circuit
As you discussed earlier, in a series connection, components are connected
end to end, so that current flows first through one lamp and then through
the other. The lamps are strung together, end to end.
One drawback of series connections is that if one component fails in a
way that results in an open circuit, the entire circuit is broken and none
of the components will work. So, if either one of the lamps in the series
circuit burns out, neither lamp will work. That is because current must
flow through both lamps for the circuit to be complete.
In this project, you will build a simple circuit that connects two lamps
in series, like the one shown in Figure 4.29. The lamps are powered by a
pair of AA batteries. Then, you will use your multimeter to measure the
voltages at various points in the circuit.
Equipment and materials:
A small head screw driver
138
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
ON
Switch
Battery
OFF
Battery
+
H
+
Figure 4.29 (a) Series circuit (b) Series circuit diagram.
Wire cutters
Wire strippers
A multimeter
Two AA batteries
One battery holder
Two lamp holders
Two 3 V flashlight lamps
One 6-inch length of 22-gauge stranded wires.
Steps
1. Cut a 6 inch length of wire and strip 0.5 inch of insulation from each
end.
2. Attach the red lead from the battery holder to one end of the termi-
nals on one of the lamp holders.
4.12 Electric projects
139
3. Attach the black lead to one of the terminals on the other lamp
holder.
4. Use the 6 inch wire to connect the unused terminal of the first lamp
holder to the unused terminal of the second lamp holder.
5. Insert the batteries. This makes both lamps to lit. Notice that the
lamps are dim. This is because in a series circuit made with two
identical lamps, each of the two lamps sees only half the total voltage.
6. Remove one of the lamps from its holder. This makes the other lamp
goes out. This is because in a series circuit, a failure in any one
component breaks the circuit so that none of the other components
will work.
7. Replace the lamp you removed in step 6.
8. Set your multimeter to a DC voltage range that can read at least 3 V.
Note that you can measure the voltage seen by any component in a
circuit by setting your multimeter to an appropriate voltage range
and then touching the leads to both sides of the component.
9. Touch the leads to the two terminals on the first lamp holder. The
mutlimeter should read approximately 1.5 V (If you are using an
analog meter and the needle moves backwards, just reverse the
leads).
10. Touch the leads to the terminals on the other lamp holder. Again the
multimeter should read approximately 1.5 V.
11. Touch the red lead of the meter to the terminal that the red lead from
the battery is connected to and touch the black meter lead to the
terminal that the black battery lead is connected to. This measure
the voltage across both lamps combined. The meter will indicate 3
V.
140
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Project 4.2: A parallel lamp circuit
In the parallel connection, each lamp has its own direct connection to the
battery. This arrangement avoids the if one fails they all fail nature of series
connections. In a parallel connection, the components do not depend on
each other for their connection to the battery. Thus, if one lamp burns out,
the other will continue to light.
In this project, you will build a circuit that connects two lamps in parallel
like the one shown in Figure 4.30. The lamps are powered by a pair of
AA batteries. You will use your multimeter to measure voltages at various
points in the circuit.
Equipments and materials:
A small head screw driver
Wire cutters
Wire strippers
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
ON
Switch
Switch
OFF
Battery
Battery
H
+
+
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.30 a) Parallel Circuit b) Parallel circuit diagram.
4.12 Electric projects
141
A multimeter
Two AA batteries
One battery holder
Two lamp holders
Two 3 V flashlight lamps
Two 6 inch length 22-gauge stranded wires
Steps:
1. Cut two 6 inch lengths of wire and strip of 0.5 inch of insulation from
each end.
2. Attach the red lead from the battery holder to one end of the termi-
nals on the first lamp holder.
3. Attach the black lead to the other terminals on the first lamp holder.
4. Use the two wires to connect each of the terminals on the first lamp
holder to the terminals on the second lamp holder. This wiring
connects the two lamp holders in parallel.
5. Insert the batteries. This makes the lamps light brighter than when
you connected them in series in Project 4.1.
6. Remove one end of the lamps. Notice that the other lamp remains
lit.
7. Replace the lamp you removed in step 6.
8. Set your multimeter to a DC voltage range that can read at least 3 V.
9. Touch the leads of your multimeter to the two terminals on the first
lamp holder. Make sure you touch the red meter lead to the terminal
that the red battery lead is connected to and the black meter lead to
the terminal that the black battery lead is attached to. Note that the
voltage reads a full 3 V.
142
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
10. Touch the meter, which leads to the terminals on the second lamp
stand. Note that the voltage again reads 3 V. When components
are connected in parallel, the voltage is not divided among them.
Instead, each component sees the same voltage. That is why the
lamps light at full intensity in the parallel circuit.
Project 4.3: Electric house project
In this project, in groups, you will construct and wire a model house
according to the requirements given below. You can use materials that are
available in your area.
The Building:
Your group will design and construct an electric house with separate
series, parallel, and complex circuits.
The house you build will contain at least the following areas: one
bedroom, one bathroom, a kitchen, a front door, and a living room/-
dining room area.
Each individual room will be illuminated by its own light.
Decorating
Your building is to be decorated neatly and should reflect the purpose of
the room.
Wiring:
To earn a full point, each circuit below must be completed. Each house
will be wired with 4-hour different circuits as follows:
A single outside light with a switch.
The living room area must have a "chandelier" with at least two
lights in a series circuit with a switch.
4.12 Electric projects
143
The house must have one parallel circuit consisting of a switch and
at least three lights.
The house must have one combination circuit consisting of two
switches and at least three lights.
Specifics:
Switches can be made from brads and paper clips.
Your house will be powered by AAA, AA, D, or 9 V batteries, so make
two obvious leads to attach your battery to during testing if you do
not supply your own batteries. You will need to use the AA, D, and 9
V in at least one circuit of your house. (You may not use the same
battery for every circuit in your house.)
Each circuit must be able to work independently from the others.
Insulated wire and lights will be provided.
You will have access to scissors, wire cutters and wire strippers.
The Circuit Diagram:
You must provide one diagram for the complete circuit in your building. It
must:
be labeled and be complete including all electrical parts for each
circuit;
use accurate circuit symbols;
be neat and drawn with a straight edge ruler;
fill an entire piece of paper.
144
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on static and current electricity unit
under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Coulomb's Law PhET Experiment.
2. Circuit Construction Kit: DC - Virtual Lab PhET Experiment.
3. Circuit Construction Kit: DC PhET Experiment.
4. Charges and Fields PhET Experiment.
5. Balloons and Static Electricity PhET Experiment.
6. Ohm's Law PhET Experiment.
7. Resistance in a Wire PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
There are two types of charges in nature and they are called
positive and negative charges.
Charges with the same sign repel each other. Charges with
opposite signs attract each other.
Charging is the process of electrifying bodies, that is removing
from or adding charges to a body.
Electric charges can neither be created nor destroyed, but can
be transferred from one material to the other.
Charging by rubbing, charging by conduction, and charging
by induction are the different methods of charging a body.
An electroscope is a simple device used to study the properties
of electric charges. It enables us to determine both the sign
4.12 Electric projects
145
of the charge and the magnitude of the charge on a body.
It can also be used to identify whether a given material is a
conductor or an insulator.
Lightning is formed when charged water drops of one sign
(positive or negative) collect in one part of the cloud. There
is electrostatic discharge (in the form of sparks) which jumps
often from one cloud region to another, but sometimes from
the cloud to earth.
The magnitude of the force between two charges is given
by Coulomb's law, which states that the force between two
point charges is directly proportional to the product of the
two charges and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between the two.
The electric field defines the force per unit charge in the space
around a charge distribution.
Electric field lines start at positive charges and point away
from positive charges. They end in negative charges and point
toward negative charges.
Electric field lines never cross each other.
Open circuits do not allow an electrical current to flow through
the circuit. Closed circuits are complete and allow electricity
to flow through them.
The current through a given area of a conductor is the net
charge passing per unit time through the area.
To maintain a constant current, you must have a closed circuit
in which an external force moves electric charge from lower
to higher potential energy. The work done per unit charge by
the source in taking the charge from lower to higher potential
146
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
energy (i.e., from one terminal of the source to the other) is
called the voltage difference between the two terminals of a
source in a closed circuit.
Ohm's law: The electric current I flowing through a substance
is proportional to the voltage V across its ends, i.e., VαI or
V = RI, where R is called the resistance of the substance.
The resistance R of a conductor depends on its length L and
cross-sectional area A through the relation, R = p¹₄; where
p called resistivity which is a property of the material and
depends on temperature and pressure.
The equivalent resistance R of n resistors connected in series
is given by R=R₁+R₂+...+Rₙ
The equivalent resistance R of n resistors connected in parallel
is given +
An ammeter is a device used to measure the current in a cir-
cuit. It is connected in series to the element through which
the current flows.
A voltmeter is a device used to measure the potential differ-
ence in the circuit. It is connected in parallel to the element
through which potential drop is to be measured.
Precaution must be taken when working near electricity or
electrical equipments.
End of unit questions and problems
1. Describe how you can know charged bodies attract or repel
each other.
2. Why the inside of a car or building is a safe place to shelter
during storm?
4.12 Electric projects
147
3. State Coulomb's law.
4. What are essential parts of an electroscope? Draw an electro-
scope and label it.
5. State the law of conservation of charge
6. Explain about the different methods of charging a body.
7. List electric safety rules.
8. Two charges q₁ = 2 µC and q₂ = -4 µC are placed 20 cm apart.
Determine the magnitude and direction of the force that one
charge exerts over the other.
9. Two spheres; 4.0 cm apart, attract each other with a force of
1.2 X 10⁹ N. Determine the magnitude of the charge on each
to see if one has twice the charge (of the opposite sign) as the
other.
10. Two equal charges of magnitude 1.1 X 10⁷ C experience an
electrostatic force of 4.2 X 10⁴ N. How far apart are the centres
of the two charges?
11. Discuss the use of a lightning conductor that is often fitted to
the top of a building.
12. Why is not a bird sitting on a high-voltage power line electro-
cuted? Compare this with the situation in which a large bird
hits two wires simultaneously with its wings.
13. How is a voltmeter connected in the circuit to measure the
potential difference between two points?
14. List one way electric current is similar to water current and
one way it is different.
15. How does the current in a circuit change if the voltage is dou-
bled and the resistance remains unchanged?
148
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
16. A copper wire has diameter 0.5 mm and resistivity of 1.6 X
10⁻⁸ Ω m. What will be the length of this wire to make its
resistance 10 Ω? How much does the resistance change if the
diameter is doubled?
17. If aluminium and copper wires of the same length have the
same resistance, which has the larger diameter? Why?
18. The values of current I flowing in a given resistor for the corre-
sponding values of potential difference V across the resistor
are given below.
I (amperes)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
V (volts)
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
Plot a graph between V and I, and calculate the resistance of
that resistor.
19. When a 12 V battery is connected across an unknown resistor,
there is a current of 2.5 mA in the circuit. Find the value of the
resistance of the resistor.
20. A battery of 9 V is connected in series with resistors of 0.2 Ω,
0.3 Ω, 0.4 Ω, 0.5 Ω, and 12 Ω. How much current would flow
through the 12 Ω resistor?
21. How many 176 Ω, resistors (in parallel) are required to carry 5
A on a 220 V line?
22. Show how you would connect three resistors, each having a
resistance 6 Ω, so that the combination has a resistance of (i)
9 Ω, (ii) 4 Ω.
23. Why is the series arrangement not used for domestic circuits?
24. How does the resistance of a wire vary with its area of cross-
section?
4.12 Electric projects
149
25. Why copper and aluminium wires are usually employed for
electricity transmission?
26. You are often advised to not flick electric switches with wet
hands, dry your hand first. You are also advised to never throw
water on an electric fire. Why is this so?
27. Why is the resistance of wet skin so much smaller than dry, and
why do blood and other bodily fluids have low resistances?
28. What determines the severity of a shock? Can you say that a
certain voltage is hazardous without further information?
29. In view of the small currents that cause shock hazards and the
larger currents that circuit breakers and fuses interrupt, how
do they play a role in preventing shock hazards?
30. Suppose you plug an electric heater into the wall outlet. As
soon as you turn it on, all the lights in the room go out. Explain
what must have happened.
31. Why is it dangerous to use a fuse that is rated 30 A in a circuit
calling for a 15 A fuse?
dio
