Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
describe the general properties of metals and nonmetals;
describe the extraction, chemical properties and uses of aluminium, iron,
copper, nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen, sulphur, and chlorine;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, classifying, communicating, and
asking questions, applying concepts and problem solving.
Metals and Nonmetals
Start-up Activity
Discuss in your group and explain your ideas to the
class.
1. What properties did you consider when classifying
elements as metalic or non metalic? How are this
properties related to the uses of the elements?
2. Which elements, metals or non metals, are
a. mostly used in electrical wires, cooking utensils,
and boilers?
b. used for breathing, purifying water, and
fertilizers?
3. List at least eight metals and eight non metals
used in our daily lives?
4. How do metals and nonmetals exist in nature?
5.1
Introduction
By the end of this unit, you will be able to
describe the source of metals and non-metals;
explain the natural occurrence of metals and nonmetals.
Natural resources are resources that exist without any actions of human kind such
as sunlight, land, fossil fuels (crude oil, coal, and natural gas), crops, water and air.
Natural resources can be classified as renewable and non-renewable resources.
Renewable resources are resources that can be replenished (replaced) by natural
processes. Examples are water, air and plant materials (biomass). Non-renewable
resources are resources that are found in a fixed amount in nature and cannot be
replenished. Fossil fuels, nuclear energy, metallic and non metallic minerals are
examples of non-renewable resources. Metallic minerals are minerals which contain
one or more metallic elements. Non-metallic minerals are the minerals that do not
contain metals. Metallic minerals occur in rare, naturally formed concentrations known
as mineral deposits.
The principal source of metallic and nonmetallic minerals is the planet Earth. The
majority of metals and non-metals are extracted from their minerals. Minerals such
as iron haematite (Fe₂O₃) or aluminum bauxite (AI₂O₃.2H₂O), sulphides such as zinc
blende (ZnS), or carbonates such as malachite (Cu(OH),.CuCO₃) are examples of
metallic minerals. Diamond, gravel, and mica are examples of nonmetallic minerals.
Metals and non-metals can also be found in seawater. Some non-metallic elements,
such as oxygen and nitrogen, are found in the atmosphere.
199
Chemistry Grade 10
5.2 General Properties of Metals and Production of Some
Metals
At the end of this section, students should be able to
mention general properties of metals;
describe the uses of some common metals.
In this section, you will study the general characteristics and extraction of metals, uses
of some common metals, alloys and production of Aluminium, Copper and Iron.
5.2.1 Properties and Extraction of Metals
Discuss in your group the following metal properties
using an example and present your conclusion to the
class.
a. A metal which is liquid at room temperature. Is
?
there any metal that exists in the gaseous state at
room temperature?
b. A metal which is the best conductor of heat
C. A metal which is the poorest conductor of heat
d. A metal which can be cut with a knife
Activity 5.1
About 80 % of the known elements are metals. These metals have some common
properties
A. Some physical properties of metals
They have a shining appearance( lustrous) and can be polished. Gold is shining
yellow and copper is brown. Iron, aluminum, zinc and silver are lustrous grey or
silvery.
They are malleable, (can be beaten into thin sheets). Aluminum foils, which are
used to wrap cigarettes, medicines, etc., gold and silver ornaments of different
designs, are due to the malleability of these metals.
They are ductile, i.e. they can be drawn into wires. For example copper, gold, iron
and silver are ductile.
They are hard and have tensile strength except lithium, potassium, sodium.
They generally have a high density except lithium, potassium, sodium.
They are usually sonorous-produce metallic sound when struck (e.g. school bell)
B. Chemical properties of metals
Metals possess positive valency and have a tendency to lose electrons.
M(g)
Mⁿ⁺(g) + ne⁻
200
Metals and Nonmetals
They have 1, 2, or 3 valence electrons.
They are oxidized by losing electrons and act as reducing agents
They mostly form basic oxides and some amphoteric oxides ( refer to Unit 3)
They form chlorides that are true salts and electrovalent.
They form hydrides which are ionic, unstable and reactive.
They usually replace hydrogen from dilute non-oxidising acids like HCI and H₂SO₄.
Exceptions are copper, silver and gold.
C. Reactivity series of metals
If we take solution of different metals and place other metals in these solutions, we
can compare the reactivity of metals with respect to each other. The arrangement
of metals in the decreasing order of their activity is known as activity or reactivity
series. The most active metal is at the top and the least active metal is at the bottom
of the reactivity series. The hydrogen, a nonmetal, has been included in the series
only for the comparison of the activity of the metals. The metals above hydrogen like
potassium, sodium, calcium and magnesium in the reactivity series liberate hydrogen
gas when treated with dilute acids. The metals below hydrogen in the reactivity series
like copper, silver, and gold do not liberate hydrogen when treated with dilute acids.
A less reactive metal (low in reactivity series) can be displaced from its compound
or from its salt solution by a more reactive metal (high in reactivity series). Thus,
potassium can displace all the metals from their salt solution
(Most active metal)
Potasium (K)
Sodium (Na)
Calcium (Ca)
Magnesium (Mg)
These metal are
Aluminum (Al)
more reactive
Zine (Zn)
Decreasing
than hydrogen
Iron (Fe)
chemical
Tin (Sn)
reactivity
Lead (Pb)
[Hydrogen] [H] (nonmetal)
Copper (Cu)
These metal are
less reactive
Mercury (Hg)
than hydrogen
Silver (Ag)
Gold (Au)
(Least active metal)
Figure 5.1 Reactivity series of metals.
Metals at the top of the reactivity series are strong reducing agents. Metals at the
bottom in the reactivity series are weak reducing agents. Hence, potassium is the
strongest reducing agent whereas gold is the weakest reducing agent in the above
reactivity series.
201
Chemistry Grade 10
D. Natural occurrence and extraction of metals
Noble metals Ag, Au, Bi, Cu, Pd, Pt exist in nature as uncombined or free state. More
active metals like alkali and alkaline earth metals never exist in uncombined state.
They always exist in compounds. Active metals may exist in the form of carbonates,
halides, oxides, phosphates, silicates, sulphides and sulphates.
The constituents of the earth's crust which contain these metals or their compounds are
known as minerals. For example, sodium exist as the mineral halite (NaCI), potasium
as sylvite (KCI), magnesium as magnesite (MgCO₃), calcium as lime stone (CaCO₃).
At some places minerals contain a high percentage of particular metals and the metal
can be profitably extracted from it, such minerals are called ores. An ore taken out
from the earth contains a lot of impurities in the form of sand and other undesirable
materials called gangue. In fact, metals exist in these ores in the form of compounds.
The science and technology of extracting metals from their ores and of compounding
alloys is called metallurgy.
The three principal steps in the extraction of a metal from its ore are (1) preparation
(concentration) of the ore, example : oil floatation, magnetic separation, (2) production
of the metal. Example: roasting, calcination, and (3) purification of the metal ( last
step), example: chemical reduction, electrolytic reduction, as shown in Figure 5.2.
Metal ore
Concentration of ore
Metals of high reactivity Metals of medium reactivity Metals of low reactivity
Electrolysis
carbonate ore
sulphide ore
Sulphide ores
of pure molten ore
calcination
roasting
Roasting
Pure metal
Oxides of metals
Metal
Reduction to metals
Metal refining
Purification of metal
Figure 5.2 General metallurgical processes of metals.
The most active metals such as K, Na, Ca. Mg are extracted from their compounds
only by electrolysis because there is no economic reducing agent that can reduce them
from their compounds. It is only using electricity (electrolysis) that these metals are
extracted or reduced.
202
Metals and Nonmetals
Project
Read from a reliable source about the uses of some common metals (sodium, potasium,
magnsium, calcium and tantalum) and their common compounds. Submit to your teacher
and discuss in class.
5.2.2 Alloys
Alloys are mixtures of two or more metals or metals and nonmetals when molten and
do not separate when solidified. The constituent elements are melted together and
then allowed to cool to form a solid material called alloy.
The different sized atoms of
other metals stop the layers
sliding over one another.
Pure metal
Alloy
Force
Force
In a pure metal the layers
The addition of the second
can slide over one another
atom makes this sliding difficult
Pure metal atom
Second element
Figure 5.3 Arrangement of metal atoms in pure metal and alloy.
Alloying of metals increases the hardness and strength, modify the color and melting
point, decreases the electrical conductivity and increase the resistance to corrosion of
metals. For example, amalgam is an alloy of mercury and another metal. Gun metal
is an alloy of copper (87 %), tin ( 10 %) and zinc (3 %).
Solder is called fuse metal. Its composition is 67 % tin and 33% lead. It melts at 183
°C which is lower than the melting points of tin (Sn melts at 232 °C). Solder is used to
join wires and electrical resistances, etc.
Gold alloys: Gold is a very soft metal and therefore hardened by alloying it with
copper and silver. The quantity of gold in an alloy is called its gold content. The gold
content of the alloy is expressed either in carats or as mass percent. A carat is equal
to the mass unit of gold in 24 mass units of the alloy. Thus, 24 carat represents pure
gold. It doesn't contain any other metal.
22 carat gold contains 22 parts of pure gold by mass in 24 carats of the alloy.
203
Chemistry Grade 10
Nowadays 22 carat gold is used to make jewelry. 18 carat contains 18 parts of pure
gold by mass in 24 parts of alloy. Thus, the mass percent of gold in different types of
alloys can be calculated as follows:
Mass % of gold in 24 carat gold = 24 X 100/24 = 100.00 (pure gold, no Cu or Ag)
Mass % of gold in 22 carat gold = 22 X 100/24 = 91.67 (alloy, 8.33 % Cu or Ag)
5.2.3 Production of Aluminum, Iron and Copper
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain Occurrence and extraction of Aluminum, Iron and Copper;
describe the the applications of Aluminum, Iron and Copper.
A. Aluminum
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, Occurrence and extraction of Aluminum;
describe the the applications of Aluminum.
Occurrence and extraction
Aluminum is the most abundant metal in the earth's crust and the third abundant element
after oxygen and silicon. Approximately eight percent of the earth's crust is aluminum.
In terms of consumption, it is the second most important metal after iron. Aluminum
does not occur in uncombined or free metal state in nature. Its main mineral is bauxite
(AI₂O₃.2H₂O). Other minerals containing aluminum are orthoclase (KAISi₃O₈), cryolite
(Na₃AIF₆), corundum (AI₂O₃), beryl (Be₃Al₂Si₆O) and china clay (AI₂Si₂O₂.,2H₂O).
1. What properties of aluminum make it useful for
packaging cigarettes and medicines?
2. Steel-cored aluminum cables are used for conducting
high-voltage electricity over long distances.
a. give two reasons why aluminum is used for these
cables.
?
b. what is the purpose of the steel core?
3. Can you mention materials, in your home or outside,
that are made of aluminum? What are their
properties for example weight, rusting, shape etc.?
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class
Activity 5.2
Industrially, aluminum is extracted from bauxite, AI₂O₃ 2H₂O, mainly by the Hall-
Héroult process or simply the Hall process. In this process, the bauxite must be purified
first, because it is often contaminated by silicon dioxide (SiO₂), iron oxide, and titanium
(IV) oxide. To separate the pure AI2O3 from the bauxite, the powdered ore is first
heated with a sodium hydroxide solution to convert the silica to soluble silicate.
204
Metals and Nonmetals
SiO₂ (s) + 2NaOH (aq)
Na2SiO3 (aq) + H2O (I)
Insoluble
soluble
At the same time aluminum oxide is converted to soluble sodium aluminate.
AI2O3 (s) + 2NaOH (aq)
NaAlO₂ (aq) + H2O (I)
Insoluble
soluble
The impurities like iron oxides and titanium (IV) oxide remain unaffected by the base
and are filtered off. Why they are not affected?
Then the solution is treated with acid to precipitate aluminium hydroxide.
AlO²⁻ (aq) + H₃O⁺ (aq)
AI(OH)3 (s)
Aluminum hydroxide is collected by filtration, washed, dried, and then heated strongly
in a furnace to get AI2O₃.
2AI(OH)₃ (s) Heat AI2O3 (s) + 3H2O (g)
Pure aluminum oxide is mixed with some cryolite, Na₃AIF₆, and then melted. Cryolite
is added to AI2O₃ to reduce its melting point from 2045°C to 1000°C. The molten
cryolite also provides a good conducting medium for the electrolysis process. The
molten mixture is then electrolyzed to obtain pure aluminum. The electrolytic cell, in
which the molten mass is electrolyzed, contains graphite electrodes as both anode and
cathode (See Figure 5.4).
e:
+
Anodes (Graphite)
e-
Cathode
(Graphite lining)
Steel tank
Mixture of
alumina, cryolite
and fluorspar
Molten
aluminium
Outlet for
molten
aluminium
Figure 5.4 Electrolytic reduction of aluminum based on the Hall's process.
AI2O₃ is converted to Al, by electrolysis. The reactions at the graphite (carbon)
electrodes are:
Anode reaction:
3C(s) (graphite electrode) + 60²-
3CO2(g) + 12e
Cathode reaction:
4AI³⁺(I) + 12e
4AI(I)
Over all reaction:
4AI³⁺(I) + 60²⁻(I) + 3C(s)
4AI(I) + 3CO2(g)
Or
2AI₂O₃(I) + 3C(s)
4AI(I) + 3CO2(g)
205
Chemistry Grade 10
Note that under the prevailing conditions in the electrolytic cell, the anode (graphite
electrode) will gradually oxidize to carbon dioxide and must be replaced regularly.
Molten aluminum is siphoned or drawn from the bottom of the electrolytic cell. We do
not use reducing agents for reduction of aluminum from aluminum oxide; why do you
think?
Physical Properties: Aluminum is a soft silvery-white and light metal having a density
of 2.7 g/cm³. It melts at 660°C. It can be shaped into wires, rolled, pressed or cast
into different shapes. It is a good conductor of heat and electricity.
Chemical Properties: Aluminum is a reactive metal, even though its reactions are not
vigorous in comparison with those of sodium, potassium, calcium and other metals of
group IA and IIA. It undergoes the following reactions:
i. Reaction with Oxygen
Aluminum has affinity for oxygen and reacts with atmospheric oxygen to form a thin
film of aluminum oxide on its surface.
4AI (s) + 302 (g)
2AI2O3 (s)
This thin film of oxide inhibits further reaction with oxygen. The thin film can be removed
by rubbing with mercury or mercury (II) chloride solution. What type of oxide is AI2O3?
ii. Aluminum burns in Nitrogen gas to form Aluminum Nitride.
2AI (s) + N2 (g)
2AIN (s)
iii. Reaction with dilute acids
Aluminum reacts with dilute acids like HCI and H2SO4, forming salts and liberating
hydrogen gas.
2AI (s) + 3H2SO₄ (aq)
AI₂(SO₄)₃ (aq) + 3H2 (g)
2AI (s) + 6HCI (aq)
2AICI₃ (s) + 3H2 (g)
Aluminum does not react with dilute or concentrated HNO3 due to the formation of a
protective oxide layer on its surface. Therefore, materials made of Al may be used
to transport HNO3.
iv. Aluminum burns in chlorine gas to form aluminum chloride
2AI (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2AICI₃ (s)
V. Aluminum reacts with sodium hydroxide solution
2AI (s) + 2NaOH (aq) + 6H2O (I)
2NaAI(OH)₄ (aq) + 3H2 (g)
206
Metals and Nonmetals
Uses of Aluminum
Discuss in your group and present your conclusion to
?
class.
1. Why should the food containing iron salts are not
cooked in aluminum utensils?
2. Aluminum is a highly reactive metal, however, still it
Activity 5.3
is used to make utensils for cooking.
Aluminum is a lightweight metal and resistant to corrosion, which is why it is used to
make the light alloys, such as duralumin (a mixture of AI, Cu, and Mg). Aluminum
alloy is widely used in the transportation industry to make airplanes, ships, and
automobiles. Due to its high thermal conductivity and corrosion resistance, it is used
to make household cookwares. It is also used in the manufacture of door and window
frames and building roofs, as a packaging material in the food industry, and for
power transmission lines. Al is also used in the thermite welding process.
Thermite Welding
Thermite welding is useful in welding rails, propeller shaft and other steel parts of
machinery that are difficult to repair by any other method. The process is explained
as follows:
Aluminum is more reactive than iron, therefore it displaces iron from iron oxide. In the
thermite welding process, powdered aluminum when mixed with iron (III) oxide and
ignited, produces a temperature of about 3000°C. This temperature is quite sufficient
for welding metals. The reaction in this process is as follows:
2AI (s) +
Fe2O3 (s)
2Fe (I) +
AI2O3 (s)
Aluminum
Iron oxide
Iron
Aluminum oxide
The mixture of powdered aluminum and iron oxide is called thermite. Similar reactions
are used to insulate other metals such as Chromium:
Al(s)
+
Cr2O3
2
Cr
(I)
+
AI2O3 (s)
Exercise 5.1
1. Aluminum is the most abundant metal but it is of the secondary importance
next to iron, in terms of consumption. Why?
2. Cryolite, Na₃AIF₆ is added to AI2O3 to reduce its melting point from 2045°C
to 1000°C. Explain why it is required to reduce the melting point of AI2O3?
207
Chemistry Grade 10
3. Write the balanced chemical equation for the dissociation of AI2O3 in the
molten state.
4. Identify the ions that move to the cathode and the anode during the electrolysis
of molten aluminum oxide? Write the half-reactions at the anode, cathode
and overall cell reactions
5. At which electrode will aluminum be produced during the process?
6. Why aluminum is preferred to copper for high voltage wires such as the line
from Koka Dam to Addis Ababa?
Project
Perform the following project activities referring to reliable resources and submit to
your teacher.
1. Make a list of materials made of aluminum you encounter at home, and in the
city or town where you live.
2. What property of aluminum makes it useful in the construction of cook wares?
3. Regarding the manufacturing of aluminum by electrolysis, answer the following
questions.
A. The electrolyte does not need heating to keep it in its molten state; why?
B. The graphite anode gradually disappears during the electrolysis. How? (Think
about the product that is given off at the anode).
Present your findings to the class
B. Iron
1. Iron is the cheapest among all metals. Give reasons
for this.
?
2. What is the difference between stainless steel and
wrought iron?
3. What do you understand by the term alloy? Is
stainless steel an alloy?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Activity 5.4
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Iron;
describe the the applications of Iron.
Iron is the second most abundant metal in the earth's crust after aluminum, and the
fourth most abundant element. It accounts for about 4.7% of the weight of the earth's
208
Metals and Nonmetals
crust. It has never been found as a free metal in nature. It exists only in the form of
compounds in nature, such as oxides, carbonates and sulphides. The chief ores of iron
are hematite (Fe₂O₃), limonite (Fe₂O₃.H₂O), magnetite (Fe₃O₄), and siderite (FeCO₃).
It is also found in the form of iron pyrites (FeS₂) which is commonly called fool's gold.
Iron is generally extracted from hematite (Fe₂O₃), magnetite (Fe₃O₄) and siderite
(FeCO₃).
Producing pig iron (impure iron)
The extraction of iron from its ores is carried out in a blast furnace. The raw materials
for the extraction of iron are iron ore, coke, limestone and hot air. The furnace is
charged with a mixture of iron ore, limestone and coke at the top and a blast of hot
air is blown at the bottom. The coke burns to form carbon dioxide and the temperature
approaches 2000°C near the bottom. As the carbon dioxide rises up, the coke reduces
it to carbon monoxide. The carbon monoxide then reduces the iron oxide to iron metal.
The reactions taking place in the blast furnace can be summarized as follows:
i. Oxidation of coke to carbon dioxide:
C (s) + O2 (g)
CO2 (g) + Heat
ii. Reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide: CO2 (g) + C (s)
2CO (g)
iii. Reduction of iron oxides to metallic iron by carbon monoxide:
3Fe2O₃ (s) + CO (g)
2Fe3O₄ (s) + CO₂(g)
Fe3O₄ (s) + CO (g)
3FeO (s) + CO2 (g)
FeO (s) + CO (g)
Fe (I) + CO₂(g)
iv. Decomposition of the limestone by heat in the blast furnace serves as a flux to
remove impurities: CaCO3 (s)
CaO (s) + CO2 (g)
The Blast Furnace
Charge: Iron ore, coke, limestone
Hot waste gases
Hot waste gases
250°C
Reducing iron ore:
700°C
3CO(g) + Fe₂O₃(g)
2Fe(I) + 3CO₂(g)
Carbon dioxide reacts with
coke:
Limestone decomposes and
CO₂(g) + 2C(s)
2CO(g)
slag forms:
850°C
CaCO₃(s)
CaO(s) + CO₂(g)
Hot air reacts with coke:
CaO(s) + SiO₂(s)
CaSiO₃(I)
C(s) + O₂(g)
CO2 (g)
1500°C
Sand
Slag
Hot air blast
Hot air blast
Molten
slag
Molten iron
Figure 5.5 Production of pig iron from iron ore in the blast furnace.
209
Chemistry Grade 10
v.
Calcium oxide (CaO) removes the impurities like sand or silica (SiO₂) to form
calcium silicate which is a glass-like material called slag.
CaO
+
SiO₂
CaSiO3
Lime
+
sand
calcium silicate
(Flux)
(Impurity)
(Slag)
The molten slag is lighter than the molten metal. Therefore, it floats over the molten
metal and thus the two can be easily separated. The slag is used mostly for the
manufacture of cement.
The iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron. It is impure and
contains about 2 % silicon, up to 1% phosphorus and manganese, and traces of
sulphur. These impurities make pig iron brittle. Pig iron, also known as crude iron, is an
intermediate product of the iron industry in the production of steel. When pig iron is
re-melted with scrap iron and cast in to moulds, it forms cast iron. Pig iron contains at
least 92% Fe and has very high carbon content, typically 3.5 - 4.5%. Along with silica
and other constituents of dross, which makes it very brittle and not useful directly as a
material except for limited applications.
1. Explain the principle of blast furnace
?
2. Why calcium carbonate is used in the blast furnace
in the production of pig iron ?
3. What is the composition and uses of slag?
Discuss in your group and present your conclusions to
the class.
Activity 5.5
The purest form of commercial iron is called wrought iron. It is obtained by removing
most of the impurities from pig iron. It is manufactured by heating impure iron with
hematite and limestone in a furnace. This increases the purity of the iron to 99.5%.
Wrought iron is a tough, malleable and ductile form of iron.
Steel making from pig iron (purification of pig iron)
The relatively high carbon-content of the iron recovered from the blast furnace (pig
iron) makes it very hard and brittle. The conversion of pig iron to steel is essentially
a purification process in which impurities are eliminated through oxidation. This
purification process is carried out in a furnace at high temperatures. Three distinctive
techniques are used to convert pig iron into steel. These are the Bessemer converter,
Open-hearth Furnace and the Basic Oxygen Process.
i. The Bessemer Converter: In the process of converting pig iron to steel, molten
pig iron from the blast furnace is transferred to a cylindrical vessel containing a
refractory lining of MgCO₃ and CaCO₃. A blast of hot air is blown through the
210
Metals and Nonmetals
molten metal from a set of small holes at the bottom of the vessel. The oxygen
passing through the molten metal converts silicon, phosphorus and sulphur to their
oxides, which then react with the lining to form a slag. The carbon in the pig
iron is also oxidized to carbon monoxide, so its concentration is also reduced.
The conversion of the pig iron to steel by this process requires only 15 minutes.
However, the reaction is difficult to control and the quality of the steel produced
can be quite variable.
ii. The Open-hearth Furnace: It has a large, shallow hearth, which is usually lined
with a basic oxide refractory (MgO and CaO). The furnace is charged with a
mixture of pig iron, Fe2O₃, scrap iron and limestone. A blast of hot air and burning
fuel is directed over the surface of the charge to maintain it in the molten state.
Impurities in the pig iron are oxidized by the Fe2O₃ and air. Carbon dioxide, and
sulphur dioxide formed by the oxidation of the carbon and sulphur, respectively,
in the pig iron bubble out of the mixture as waste gases.
The SiO₂ and other acidic oxides like P₄O₁₀ combine with CaO (from limestone) and
the refractory lining to form a slag.
The impurities in pig iron are oxidized in the following way:
C +
CO2
S
+
2
SO2
12P
+
3
3P₄O₁₀
20Fe
2
3Si + 2Fe2O3
3SiO₂ + 4Fe
Calcium oxide, formed by the decomposition of limestone, reacts with oxides of silicon
and phosphorus to form slag.
P4O10 + 6CaO
2Ca₃(PO₄)₂
SiO₂ + CaO
CaSiO3
Impurities manganese and silicon form
respective oxides and removed asslag.
2C + 2
2CO
2Mn + 2
2MnO
Carbon
Carbon monoxide
Manganese
Manganese dioxide
Si + O2
SiO₂
Silcon
Silcon dioxide
2MnO + SiO₂
MnSiO
(slag)
slag
molten tray
tuyeres
(a)
air in
211
Chemistry Grade 10
Gas liquid fuel
Burner
Alternate
Molten metal
burner
Hearth
Tap hole
Checker
Slag
Steel
Checker
Chamber
pot
ladle
Chamber
(b)
Figure 5.6 Bessemer converter (a) and Open-hearth furnace (b)
This entire process takes 8 to 10 hours to complete and the quality of the steel is much
more easily controlled. A calculated amount of various elements can be added to the
steel to form steel alloys with desired properties
iii. Basic Oxygen Process: This newer procedure has largely replaced the open
hearth, because of its high speed. It involves forcing a mixture of powdered
calcium oxide, CaO, and oxygen gas directly into the surface of the molten pig
iron. The oxygen reacts exothermically with carbon, sulphur, silicon, phosphorus and
impurity metals. Carbon and sulphur are oxidized to CO2 and SO₂, respectively,
and are released as exhaust gases. The oxides of silicon (SiO₂), phosphorus,
(P₄O₁₀) and impurity metals combine with lime (CaO), forming slag. The charge
in the converter is maintained in the molten state by the energy released in these
oxidation reactions. The converter is tilted to remove the slag. After a second blow
of oxygen, the converter is tilted once again and the molten steel is poured out.
This process takes only about 20 to 25 minutes.
Molten iron (70 -75% +
steel scrapes (25 - 30%) +
lime dolmite
Refractory lining
Oxygen
lance
Tap hole
Pure O2
Slag
Steel
Steel
Slag
Figure 5.7 The basic oxygen converter
212
Metals and Nonmetals
Tempering of steel: is a process by which steel is conditioned to a desired hardness
by heating and controlled rate of cooling. Some of the carbon, in steel is present as a
compound called cementite (FeC₃). It reduces the hardness of steel. Cementite can be
removed by tempering which is difficult to remove by the above methods.
?
1. Which form of iron is the purest: wrought iron, pig
iron, steel?
2. Prepare a list of materials which are made of steel
and describe their uses. Discuss in groups and give
Activity 5.6
a presentation to the class.
Physical Properties of Iron
Do you remember physical properties of iron? Can you mention some of them?
Iron is a gray lustrous, malleable and ductile metal. It is a good conductor of heat and
electricity. It has a high melting point (1580°C) and a high density (7.87 g/cm³). It is
a ferromagnetic metal, which means it can be permanently magnetized.
Chemical Properties of Iron
Have you ever noticed the formation of a reddish thin film on the surface of an iron
object? Do you know the chemical nature of this thin film? From your observations,
what do you conclude about the reactivity of iron?
Iron is a reactive metal. Its reactivity is very slow, compared to group IA and IIA metals.
Iron rusts in the presence of air and moisture to form hydrated iron (III) oxide.
Moisture
4Fe(s)
+
302(g)
2Fe₂O₃.xH₂O(s)(rust)
Iron reacts with dilute acids, like HCI and H2SO₄, forming iron (II) salts and liberating
hydrogen gas
Fe (s) + 2HCI (aq)
FeCl₂ (aq) + H2 (g)
Fe (s) + H2SO4 (aq)
FeSO₄ (aq) + H2 (g)
Like other transition metals, iron also exhibits different oxidation states. It commonly
exists as the ferrous (Fe²⁺) and ferric (Fe⁺³) ions. Iron (II) and iron (III) compounds are
coloured.
Aqueous solutions of iron (II) compounds are pale-green and solutions of iron (III)
compounds are yellowish brown.
Aqueous solutions of some iron (II) compounds are rapidly oxidized to the corresponding
iron (III) compounds. For example, iron (II) hydroxide, Fe(OH)₂, on exposure to air,
oxidizes to iron (III) hydroxide
213
Chemistry Grade 10
4Fe(OH)₂ (s) + O2 (g) + 2H2O (I)
4Fe(OH)3 (s)
Heated iron reacts with hydrogen chloride gas, forming iron (II) chloride and hydrogen
gas.
Fe (s) + 2HCI (g)
FeCl₂ (g) + H2 (g)
Heated iron reacts with chlorine and sulphur to form the chloride and sulphide,
respectively
2Fe (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2FeCI₃ (s)
Fe (s) + S (s)
FeS (s)
Iron has the ability to displace less active metals from solutions of their salts. For
example, when a piece of iron is placed in a solution of CuSO₄, it is oxidized to Fe²⁺
and a reddish brown deposit of copper metal forms on the surface of the iron.
Fe (s) + Cu²⁺ (aq)
Fe2⁺ (aq) + Cu (s)
Uses of Iron
Iron is the most widely used metal and takes first position in worldwide consumption.
It is used as a structural metal in the construction of buildings and bridges. In the
form of pig iron, it is used to make domestic boilers, hot-water radiators, railings,
water pipes, castings, and moldings. As wrought iron, it is used in making nails, sheets,
horseshoes, ornamental gates, door knockers, farm machinery etc. Iron is also used in
the manufacture of alloys such as carbon steels and alloy steels.
Table 5.1 Types and uses of carbon steels.
Type
% of carbon
Use
Mild steel
Up to 0.2
Making screws, motors, car batteries, railway
lines, ships, nuts and bolts
Medium steel
0.3 - 0.6
Making springs and chains
High carbon steel
0.6 - 1.5
Making drill bits, knives, hammers and chisels
Stainless steel
Fe = 73, C = =1,
For making knife blades, kitchen pots, pans,
Cr = 18, Ni = 8
food machinery, automobile parts, laundry
machines
Alloy Steel: contains iron and a relatively higher percentage of other metals. For
example, stainless steel contains chromium (14 -18%) and nickel (7 - 9%). Tool steels
include tungsten steel and manganese steel. These metals give the alloy hardness,
toughness and heat resistance. They are used in rock drills, cutting edges and parts of
machinery that are subjected to heavy wear.
214
Metals and Nonmetals
C. Copper
Discuss in a group the subsequent questions and
present your response to the class.
1. What common items are made of copper?
2. Copper is used in electrical appliances. Give
two reasons based on its physical properties
?
3. A solution of copper sulphate cannot be stored
in a vessel made of iron. Give a reason and
justify it by a balanced ionic equation.
4. Why is copper so important in our technological
Activity 5.7
society?
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, occurrence and extraction of Copper;
describe the the applications of Copper.
Copper is occasionally found as native copper. However, it is found mainly in compounds
such as sulphides, oxides and the carbonates. The most important sulphide ores are
chalcopyrite (CuFeS₂), chalcocite (Cu₂S), covellite (CuS) and bornite (Cu₅FeS₄). The
principal oxide ores are cuprite (Cu₂O) and tenorite (CuO). In the carbonate form, it
exists as malachite (CuCO₃.Cu(OH)₂).
Copper is principally extracted from chalcopyrite. Since the amount of copper in the
ore is very small, the crushed and ground sulphide ore is first concentrated by froth
flotation. This treatment changes the concentration of the ore from 2% copper to as
high as 30% copper. The concentrated ore is then roasted with a limited supply of air
(oxygen).
2CuFeS₂ (s) + 402 (g)
Cu2S (s) + 2FeO(s) + 3SO2 (g)
The roasted mixture is smelted by adding limestone and sand to form a molten slag
that removes many of the impurities. FeO present in the roasted mixture can also be
removed as slag in the form of iron silicate (FeSiO₃), and silica in the form of calcium
silicate (CaSiO₃).
CaCO3 (s) + SiO₂ (s)
CaSiO3 (I) + CO2 (g)
FeO (s) + SiO₂ (s)
FeSiO3 (I)
The Cu₂S obtained by roasting chalcopyrite is then reduced by heating it in a limited
supply of oxygen.
Cu2S (s) + O2 (g)
2Cu (I) + SO2 (g)
215
Chemistry Grade 10
The copper produced by the above process is called blister copper and it has 98.5
- 99.5 % purity. Blister copper contains iron, silver, gold and sometimes zinc as
impurities. So it is refined further by electrolysis as shown in Figure 5.8.
Electrolytic refining of copper
The main parts of the electrolytic cell are:
Anode: A thick block of impure copper
Cathode: A thin strip of pure copper
Electrolyte: An aqueous solution of copper sulphate, Small quantity of dilute sulphuric
acid is also added to the salt solution to prevent hydrolysis.
When electric current is passed, the copper of the anode is oxidized to Cu²⁺ ions. The
Cu²⁺ ions pass in to solution.
Cu (impure metal)
Cu²⁺(aq) + 2e
oxidation at anode
At the same time an equal number of Cu²⁺ ions of the solution move towards cathode
where they are reduced and deposited as metallic copper.
Cu²⁺(aq) + 2e
Cu ( metal)
reduction at cathode
The process of oxidation at anode and reduction at cathode continues as long as
current is passed. Thus, the cathode becomes thicker and the anode becomes thinner.
Pure copper deposited at cathode is removed and used. Copper obtained by
electrolytic refining is 99.99% pure.
Battrey
+
Anode
Cathode
(impure copper)
(pure copper)
Cu2+
CuSO
solution
Cu²⁺
Anode
mud
Cu
Cu²⁺+2e
Cu²⁺+2e
Cu
Figure 5.8 Electrolytic refining /purification/ of copper.
Physical Properties of Copper
Copper is a soft, ductile, malleable, reddish-brown metal with a density of 8.96 g/
cm³. It is second to silver in electrical conductivity. It melts at 1086°C and boils at
2310°C.
216
Metals and Nonmetals
Chemical Properties of Copper
Copper is less reactive metal that is why it is found in the native state. Although it is not
very reactive, it undergoes the following reactions:
Powdered copper, when heated in air forms a black powder of copper (II) oxide,
CuO.
2Cu (s) + O2 (g)
2CuO (s)
Copper does not react with dilute acids like HCI and H₂SO₄. It cannot displace
hydrogen from acids. However, it can be oxidized by oxidizing acids such as dilute
and concentrated nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid, H₂SO₄.
dilute
3Cu(s) + 8HNO3 (aq)
3Cu(NO)₃)₂ (aq) + 2NO (g) + 4H2O (I)
concentrated
Cu(s) + 8HNO3 (aq)
Cu(NO)₃)₂ (aq) + 2NO2 (g) + 2H2O (I)
Hot and concentrated
Cu(s) + 2H2SO₄ (aq)
CuSO₄(aq) + SO₂ (g) + 2H2O (I)
Copper corrodes in moist air over a long period of time as a result of oxidation
caused by a mixture of water, oxygen and carbon dioxide. It turns green, due to the
formation of verdigris: a basic copper carbonate (CuCO₃.Cu(OH)₂) or Cu2(OH)₂CO₃.
2Cu (s) + H2O (I) + O2 (g) + CO2 (g)
CuCO3.Cu(OH)2
Basic copper carbonate is responsible for the green layer that forms on the surface of
copper and bronze objects. This layer adheres to the surface and protects the metal
from further corrosion. Copper is a transition metal and exhibits different oxidation
states. It exists as cuprous (Cu+) and cupric (Cu²⁺) ions. Compounds containing copper
in the +2 oxidation state are stable. Cu¹⁺ is unstable and cannot exist in aqueous
solution since it reduces and oxidizes (disproportionates) itself as follows:
2Cu+ (aq)
Cu²⁺ (aq) + Cu (s)
Soluble compounds containing Cu+, such as CuCl, Cul and CuBr, are all colourless solids.
The most stable oxidation state of copper is +2. Aqueous solutions of many copper
(II) compounds are blue, thus copper forms coloured compounds in the oxidation state
of +2. For example, hydrated copper sulphate, CuSO .5H2O, consists of blue crystals,
and its aqueous solution is also blue.
Uses of Copper
Copper is used to manufacture alloys. For example, bronze is an alloy of copper and
tin, and it is used to make coins, medals, bells, machinery parts, etc. Brass is an alloy of
copper and zinc, and it is used for hardware tops, terminals and pipes. Copper is
widely used in the electrical industry in the form of electric wires, cables etc. Copper
217
Chemistry Grade 10
compounds, such as copper chloride, copper carbonate and copper hydroxide, are
used as pesticides
Exercise 5.2
1. Classify the following as naturally available and made by humans: water,
sunlight, land, minerals, statues, concrete, plastics, buildings, fossil fuels (crude
oil, coal, and natural gas)
2. Categorize the following as renewable and nonrenewable resources: rocks,
metal ores, soil, wood, air, water, crops, fossil fuels, biofuels
3. Describe the occurrence and extraction of the following metals; aluminium,
iron, and copper.
4. Which of the three metals, Al, Fe and Cu is produced by electrochemical
reduction?
5. Explain how Al, Fe and Cu behave in dry air, moisture and acidic solutions.
6. Why is limestone used in steel?
7. Discuss the main areas of applications of Al, Fe and Cu in home and industry.
8. The kitchen utensils used for cooking foods are made of metals like aluminum,
iron, copper or the alloys of some metals. Give a reason.
9. Why are wires employed in electrical appliances made of copper and (or)
aluminum?
5.3 Production of Some Important Nonmetals
5.3.1 General Properties of Nonmetals and Common Uses of Some
Nonmetallic Compounds
At the end of this section, students should be able to
mention the general properties of non-metals and their uses;
describe some common uses of compounds of nonmetals such as CO2, Na2CO₃,
NH3, HNO3, H3PO4, Ca₃(PO₄)₂, SO₂ & H2SO4 i
describe the occurrence, extraction and uses of nitrogen, phosphorous, oxygen,
sulphur and chlorine.
Nonmetals have opposite characteristics to that of metals.
A. Physical properties
Nonmetals are
Solids, liquids, gases
Non-lustrous
218
Metals and Nonmetals
Nonmalleable and non-ductile
Varying hardness and have low density
Low melting and boiling points
do not show any metallic luster.
are soft in comparison to metals
are non-sonorous
Poor conductors of heat and electricity
B. Chemical properties of non-metals
Nonmetals react with oxygen on heating or burning to form their oxides
Do not displace hydrogen on reaction with dilute acids
React with oxygen to form acidic or neutral oxides
Combine with hydrogen to form stable hydrides
Do not react with water
Electronegative i.e for negative ions by gaining electrons
Oxidizing agents
5.3.2 Production of Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Oxygen, Sulphur and
Chlorine
A. Nitrogen
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Nitrogen;
describe the the applications of Nitrogen.
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
1. Draw the structure of a nitrogen molecule. How
many bonds are present in it?
2. Why does nitrogen form triple bond?
3. Which form of nitrogen is absorbed by green
Activity 5.8
plants?
Occurrence and Production
Nitrogen occurs in nature in the elemental form. It also exists in the form of compounds.
In the elemental state, it exists as a diatomic molecule, N2, in atmospheric air. It
constitutes about 80% by volume of the atmosphere. In the form of compounds, it
exists as sodium nitrate (Chile salt peter, NaNO₃) and potassium nitrate (KNO₃) also
called saltpetre. It is also found in DNA molecules and proteins of all living things.
In the industrial production of nitrogen, the first step is to remove impurities like dust
and other particles from air. The air is then compressed under high pressure and
low temperature to remove carbon dioxide and water vapor since they solidify at a
219
Chemistry Grade 10
relatively high temperature compared to nitrogen and oxygen. As the temperature
continues to decrease, the air containing mainly nitrogen and oxygen condenses to
give a pale-blue liquid. Nitrogen is thus separated on an industrial scale by fractional
distillation of liquid air. When liquid air is fractionally distilled, nitrogen is collected
and stored in steel cylinders under pressure.
The second fraction consists of argon, which distills off the mixture at -186°C, leaving
behind a blue liquid of oxygen that boils at -183°C. In the laboratory, nitrogen is
prepared by warming an aqueous solution containing ammonium chloride and sodium
nitrite
NH₄CI (aq) + NaNO₂ (aq)
NaCl (aq) + N2 (g) + 2H2O (I)
Physical Properties of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is colorless, odorless and tasteless gas. It is inert under ordinary conditions,
and that is why it is found in atmospheric air as N2. The inertness of nitrogen at low
temperatures is directly related to the strength of the triple bond, which requires high
energy to break.
Chemical Properties of Nitrogen
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
?
1. Why nitrogen is the most abundant gas in the
atmosphere?
2. Why nitrogen exists mostly in the elemental state?
3. What is the purpose of running a reaction under
Activity 5.9
an inert atmosphere such as nitrogen gas?
Though nitrogen is inert at low temperatures, it reacts with metals of group IA and
IIA as well as oxygen at higher temperatures. When heated with reactive metals like
lithium, calcium and magnesium, it forms compounds, known as nitrides.
6Li (s) + N2 (g)
2Li3N (s)
3Ca (s) + N2 (g)
Ca3N2 (s)
3Mg (s) + N2 (g)
Mg3N₂ (s)
Nitrogen combines with oxygen at elevated temperatures or in an electric arc to form
oxides.
N2 (g) + O2 (g)
2NO (g)
N2 (g) + 202 (g)
2NO2 (g)
Nitric oxide, also called nitrogen monoxide, NO, is a colorless and reactive gas. It
forms nitrogen dioxide (NO₂), a reddish brown gas, when it comes into contact with
oxygen. This reddish brown gas dimerizes at low temperatures to give a colorless gas
of dinitrogen tetraoxide, N₂O₄.
220
Metals and Nonmetals
2NO2 (g)
N2O4 (g)
Nitrogen also forms oxides, like dinitrogen monoxide, N₂O, (commonly called laughing
gas), dinitrogen trioxide (N₂O₃) and dinitrogen pentoxide (N₂O₅). Nitrogen reacts
directly with hydrogen in the Haber process to form ammonia. In this process, a mixture
of N2 and H2 gas, at a pressure of 200 - 300 atm and a temperature of 400 - 600°C,
is passed over a catalyst of finely divided iron.
Fe/200 - 300atm
N₂(g) + 3H₂(g)
2NH₃(g)
400-600°C
The ammonia produced by this method is primarily used in the manufacture of
fertilizers. It is also used for the production of nitric acid (HNO₃).
Uses of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is used in food packaging to prevent oxidation, and to create an inert
atmosphere in the production of semiconductors. Liquid nitrogen is used as a refrigerant
to preserve bulls' semen and blood. Its major use is in the production of ammonia.
B. Phosphorus
?
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
Have you ever observed glowing worms? Why do they
glow? Anyone who has observed them should explain
to the class.
Activity 5.10
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Phosphorous;
describe the the applications of Phosphorous.
Does phosphorus exist in the pure form (elemental state) as does nitrogen? If not,
why? Phosphorus is a relatively abundant element, ranking 12th in the earth's crust.
It exists naturally only in the combined state, such as in rock phosphate, Ca₃(PO₄)₂,
fluoroapatite, Ca₁₀(PO₄)₆F₂ or 3Ca₃(PO₄),,CaF₂. It is also found in teeth, bones and
DNA.
What is allotropy? What are the two common allotropes of phosphorus?
Allotropes are different forms of the same element with the same physical state but
with different physical properties. This is due to the difference in the arrangement of
atoms. The two common allotropic forms of phosphorus are white phosphorus and red
phosphorus.
221
Chemistry Grade 10
Physical Properties of Phosphorus
White phosphorus is a very poisonous, white waxy-looking substance that melts at
44.1°C and boils at 287°C. Its density is 1.8 g/cm³. It consists of individual tetra-
atomic (P₄) molecules and is an unstable form of phosphorus
Red phosphorus is denser (2.16 g/cm³) and is much less reactive than white phosphorus
at normal temperatures. It consists of P₄ molecules linked together to form a polymer
(large molecule) as shown below.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
The white phosphorus molecule The arrangement of atoms in red phosphorus
Industrially, white phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of crushed rock
phosphate, Ca₃(PO₄),, silica, SiO₂, and coke in an electric furnace. The reaction in the
furnace is:
2Ca₃(PO₄)₂ (s) + 6SiO2 (s) + 10C (s)
6CaSiO 3 (I) + P₄(g) + 10CO (g)
The vaporized phosphorus (P₄) is condensed, collected and stored under water. Red
phosphorus is prepared by heating white phosphorus in sunlight for several days.
White phosphorus is stored under water because it spontaneously ignites (bursts into
flames) in the presence of oxygen. Red phosphorus is much less reactive than white
phosphorus and does not need to be stored under water. Although red phosphorous
is insoluble in water, it is very soluble in carbon disulphide. Solutions of P₄ in CS2 are
reasonably stable. As soon as CS2 evaporates, however, the phosphorous bursts in to
flame.
?
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
Use reference books available in your school library
and write down the main properties of white and red
phosphorus.
Activity 5.11
Chemical Properties of Phosphorus
Phosphorus exhibits the following common chemical reactions. Phosphorus reacts with
limited and excess supplies of oxygen to form tetraphosphorus hexoxide (P₄O₆) and
tetraphosphorus decoxide (P₄O₁₀) respectively
P4 (s) + 302 (g)
P₄O₆(s)
P4 (s) + 502 (g)
P₄O₁₀(s)
222
Metals and Nonmetals
P₄O₆ and P₄O₁₀ dissolve in water to form phosphorous acid, H3PO3, an orthophsophoric
acid, H3PO4 respectively.
P₄O₆ (s) + 6H2O (I)
4H3PO3 (aq)
P4O10 (s) + 6H2O (I)
4H3PO4 (aq)
Phosphorus also reacts with limited and excess supplies of chlorine to form phosphorus
(III) chloride (PCI₃) and phosphorus (V) chloride (PCI₅) respectively
P4 (s) + 6CI2 (g)
4PCI₃ (s)
P4 (s) + 10Cl2 (g)
4PCI₅ (s)
Uses of Phosphorus
Red phosphorous is used to make matches. Most of the white phosphorous produced
is used to make phosphoric acid or other phosphorous compounds. Phosphorous is also
used in making fireworks, smoke bombs, rat-poisons, and tracer bullets. Phosphorous is
essential for plant growth. Large quantities of phosphorous compounds are converted
into acids and salts to be used as fertilizers, in baking powder in the chemical industries.
C. Oxygen
Discuss the following questions in groups and give a
presentation to the class.
?
1. Write the chemical reactions for photosynthesis
and respiration. What are the products formed in
photosynthesis and respiration?
2. What are the uses of oxygen in hospitals?
Activity 5.12
3. How do astronauts breathe while in space?
Occurrence and Production
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties ,Occurrence and extraction of Oxygen;
describe the the applications of Oxygen.
Oxygen is the most abundant element on earth. It constitutes about 46.6% by weight
of the earth's crust in the form of compounds such as oxides, silicates, carbonates,
phosphates etc. It exists in nature in the elemental state in atmospheric air constituting
about 20% by volume. Oxygen is manufactured industrially by the fractional
distillation of liquid air in a way similar to that of nitrogen. Oxygen has two allotropic
forms, diatomic (O₂) and triatomic (O₃), ozone.
223
Chemistry Grade 10
+
+
Ö
:O:
Structure of O2 molecule
Resonance structures of O₃ molecule
Ozone is naturally produced in the stratosphere by a two- step reactive process. In
the first step, solar ultraviolet radiation (sunlight) breaks apart an oxygen molecule
to form two separate oxygen atoms. In the overall process, three oxygen molecules
plus sunlight react to form two ozone molecules according to the equation:
30₂ UV - light 203
Occurrence of this process in the upper atmosphere removes radiation that would be
harmful to life on the surface of the Earth.
Physical Properties
Oxygen is a colorless, odorless, tasteless gas. It changes from a gas to a liquid at a
temperature of -182.96°C. The liquid formed has a slightly bluish color to it. Liquid
oxygen can then be solidified or frozen at a temperature of -218.4°C. The density of
oxygen is 1.429 grams per liter. By comparison, It is denser than air. The density of
air is about 1.29 grams per liter
Chemical Properties of Oxygen
Oxygen is relatively reactive and combines directly with most elements to form oxides.
Oxygen combines with metal to form metal oxides (basic oxides). For example,
2Mg (s) + O2 (g)
MgO (s)
2Ca (s) + O2 (s)
2CaO (s)
Oxygen combines with non-metals to form acidic oxides; for example:
S₈ (s) + 802 (g)
8SO2 (g)
P4 (s) + 502 (g)
P₄O₁₀ (g)
Oxygen supports combustion and is necessary for the burning of substances like
charcoal, hydrocarbon fuel, etc.
C (s) + O2 (g)
CO2 (g)
CH₄ (g) + 202 (g)
CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g)
224
Metals and Nonmetals
D. Sulphur
?
Discuss the following in groups and give a presentation
to the class.
Have you observed the color of sulphur? What is the
use of sulphur in your area?
Activity 5.13
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, occurrence and extraction of Sulphur;
describe the the applications of Sulphur.
Sulphur is found in nature and in the form of compounds such as galena (PbS), pyrites
(FeS₂) (fool's gold ), cinnabar (HgS), sphalerite (ZnS), gypsum (CaSO₄.2H₂O), barite
(BaSO₄), and as hydrogen sulphide (H₂S) in natural gas and crude oil.
Sulphur is extracted from underground deposits of elemental sulphur by the Frasch
process (Figure 5.9). In this process, three concentric pipes are sent down to the sulphur
deposit.
Compressed air
Aerated molten sulphur
Super - heated water
Crap rock
Hot water
Melted sulphur
Solid sulphur
Figure 5.9 Frasch process- extraction of sulphur.
Superheated water at about 170°C is pumped through the outermost pipes. Hot air
is compressed in the innermost tube. A froth of sulphur, air and water come out to
the surface of the earth forced by hot compressed air in the middle tube. The molten
sulphur is then cooled and solidified.
225
Chemistry Grade 10
Uses of Sulphur
Nearly one-half of the sulphur needed by chemical industries is obtained as a waste
product of other industrial processes. For example, sulphur can be obtained in the form
of hydrogen sulphide (H₂S) from natural gas and during the purification of crude oil. It
can also be obtained in the form of sulphur dioxide from the roasting of sulphide ores
during the manufacture of metals. The use of sulphur obtained from waste products of
other industries reduces the demand for the element from natural deposits. This also
reduces the pollution of atmospheric air and the formation of acid rain.
Allotropic Forms of Sulphur
Sulphur exhibits allotropy. The most important allotropes of sulphur are rhombic and
monoclinic sulphur. Rhombic sulphur is the most stable form of sulphur consisting of S₈
molecules.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Crown shape of S₈ molecules
Rhombic Sulphur (α-sulphur): rhombic sulphur is crystalline in nature and has
octahedral shape. On heating the solution of roll sulphur in CS2 we get rhombic sulphur.
It is yellow with a melting point of 385.8K and specific gravity 2.06. Rhombic sulphur
cannot be dissolved in water but can be dissolved in benzene, ether, alcohol etc.
Rhombic sulphur is the most stable form of sulphur consisting of S₈ molecules.
Monoclinic Sulphur (ß-sulphur): ß-Sulphur is a yellow solid with a monoclinic crystal
form and is less dense than α-sulphur. Like the α- form it contains puckered S₈ rings and
only differs from it in the way the rings are packed in the crystal. It is unusual because
it is only stable above 95.3 °C; below this temperature it converts to α-sulphur.
Physical Properties of Sulphur
Pure sulphur is a tasteless, odourless, brittle solid that is pale yellow in colour, a poor
conductor of electricity, and insoluble in water
Chemical Properties of Sulphur
Sulphur is relatively stable and unreactive at room temperature. However, it reacts
with metals and non-metals when heated.
Sulphur combines with metals when heated to form sulphides.
8Fe (s) + S₈ (s)
8FeS (s)
Sulphur burns in oxygen to form oxides.
S₈ (s) + 802 (g)
8SO2 (g)
Sulphur is the raw material for the production of sulphuric acid (H₂SO₄) by the Contact
Process. This process of sulphuric acid production involves the following steps
226
Metals and Nonmetals
Step 1: Sulphur is first oxidized to produce sulphur dioxide:
S₈ (s) + 802 (g)
8SO2 (g)
Step 2: Sulphur dioxide is converted to sulphur trioxide at high temperatures in the
presence of a catalyst:
2SO2 (g) + O2
2SO3 (g)
Step 3: Sulphur trioxide is absorbed into concentrated sulphuric acid to produce oleum
(H₂S₂O₇).
SO₃ (g) + H2SO4 (I)
H₂S₂O₇(I)
Step 4: The oleum is then diluted with water to produce the desired concentration of
sulphuric acid. Commercially used concentrated sulphuric acid is 98% H2SO ₄.
H2S2O7 (I) + H2O (I)
2H2SO₄ (aq)
E. Chlorine
Discuss the following in groups and give a presentation
to the class.
1. When we turn on the water tap, the water coming
out of the tap sometimes appears white and turns
?
normal after a few minutes. Many people say that
the white colour we see is due to chlorine. Do you
agree? Discuss in group and present your opinion
to the class.
2. What is the purpose of adding chlorine to drinking
Activity 5.14
water?
Occurrence and Extraction
At the end of this section, students should be able to
explain properties, occurrence and extraction of Chlorine;
describe the the applications of Chlorine.
Chlorine belongs to group VIIA, known as the halogens. It is the most abundant element
among the halogens. It is found in nature in the form of compounds only. Chlorine is
found in nature chiefly in the form of chlorides of sodium, potassium, calcium and
magnesium. Sodium chloride is the chief source of chlorine, and it is obtained from
seawater or as deposits of rock salt. Commercially, chlorine is manufactured by the
electrolysis of a concentrated aqueous solution of sodium chloride. During electrolysis
of the concentrated solution, chlorine is formed at the anode and the reduction of
water occurs at the cathode, producing hydrogen gas and hydroxide ions (OH⁻). The
electrode and the overall cell reactions are as follows;
227
Chemistry Grade 10
Oxidation at anode:
2CI- (aq)
CI2 (g) + 2e⁻
Reduction at cathode:
2H2O (I) + 2e⁻
H2 (g) + 20H- (aq)
Cell reaction:
2NaCl (aq) + 2H2O (I)
2NaOH (aq) + Cl2 (g) + H2 (g)
Although NaOH forms at the cathode compartment and Cl₂ at the anode, the two
substances must be kept apart from one another. This is because, if they come into
contact with each other, they can react according to the following equation.
NaOH (aq) + Cl2 (g)
NaOCI (aq) + HCI (aq)
What is the oxidation number of chlorine in NaOCl?
Physical Properties of Chlorine
?
Discuss the following in groups and give a presentation
to the class.
In urban area, tap water possesses a peculiar smell,
which disappears after a few minutes. Many people
say that the smell is due to chlorine. Do you agree?
Activity 5.15
Some of its physical properties are the following:
Chlorine is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature.
It melts at -102°C and boils at -34°C.
It is fairly soluble in water.
It is extremely poisonous, causing inflammation of the lungs and mucous membranes
if inhaled, even in very small amounts. It is fatal if inhaled in higher amounts.
Chemical Properties of Chlorine
Chlorine is a highly reactive non-metal. It reacts directly with almost all elements
except the noble gases, carbon and nitrogen.
It is a powerful oxidizing agent and oxidizes most of the elements with which it reacts.
The following are the main reactions of chlorine.
Chlorine reacts with heated metals to form chloride salts
2Fe (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2FeCl₃ (s)
2AI (s) + 3CI₂ (g)
2AICI₃ (s)
Chlorine reacts smoothly with hydrogen, in the presence of a charcoal as a catalyst,
at room temperature to form hydrogen chloride.
H2 (g) + CI2 (g)
2HCI (g)
Chlorine displaces less reactive halogens (Br₂ and I₂) from aqueous solutions of their
compounds.
228
Metals and Nonmetals
CI2 (g) + 2KBr (aq)
2KCI (aq) + Br₂ (I)
CI2 (g) + 2KI (aq)
2KCI (aq) + I2 (aq)
Can bromine displace chlorine in a chemical reaction?
Chlorine dissolves in water and reacts with it, forming an acidic solution containing
hydrochloric acid (HCI) and hypochlorous acid (HOCI).
CI2 (g) + H2O (I)
HCI (aq) + HOCI (aq)
This type of reaction is called a disproportionation reaction, where chlorine is itself
reduced and oxidized.
Uses of Chlorine
Chlorine is commercially used as a bleaching agent and disinfectant (kills germs). As
elemental chlorine or as chlorine water, it is strong enough to oxidize dyes and to
bleach coloured materials. For example, it can be used to remove yellow or brown
colors from wood pulp, paper and cotton.
Exercise 5.3
1. What are the main natural sources of N, P, O, S, and Cl?
2. Describe the main processes involved in the production (extraction) of N, P, O,
S and Cl.
3. How do N, P, and S behave when heated in air?
4. Write an equation for the reaction of chlorine with water.
5. Describe and discuss the common uses of CO2, Na2CO₃, NH3, HNO3, H3PO4,
Ca₃(PO₄), SO₂, H2SO4
A Checklist for Review
Allotrope
Contact process
Ore
Alloy
Electrolytic reduction
Open - hearth fumace
Basic - oxygen process
Fractional distillation
Red phosphorus
Bauxite
Flotation
Roasting
Bessmer converter
Fluoroapatite
Rock phosphate
Blast furnace
Frasch process
Sulphur
Blister coppe
Haber process
Slag
Cryolite
Hall process
Steel
Chlorine
Mineral
Thermite process
Cacination
Metallurgy
White phosphorus
Chemical reduction
Nitrogen
229
Chemistry Grade 10
Unit Summary
About 80% of the elements are metals. They have common physical and chemical
properties. Metals are ductile, malleable, sonorous, conductors of heat and
electricity. Metals are reducing agents and mostly form basic oxides. The specific
properties of metals vary widely from one metal to the other. Active metals always
occur in compounds in the form of minerals. The most active metals are extracted
from their compounds only by electrolysis because there is no stronger reducing
agent that can reduce them from their compounds. The reactivity series is a useful
guide to predict the relative reactivity of metals.
Aluminum is the most abundant metal in the earth's crust. It is manufactured by the
electrolysis of molten aluminum oxide mixed with cryolite using the Hall's process.
Aluminum is used to make light-weight alloys that can be used for aircraft and
similar constructions. Aluminum resists corrosion due to the formation of a thin film
of an oxide on its surface.
Iron is the second-most abundant metal in the earth's crust. Iron is extracted in a
blast furnace. The furnace is charged with iron ore, coke and limestone, and hot
air is blown up from the bottom. Limestone is used in the blast furnace to remove
impurities like sand (silica) in the form of slag. The type of iron obtained directly
from the blast furnace is called pig iron and it is impure. Wrought iron is the purest
form of iron obtained from pig-iron by removing most of the impurities. Steel
is an alloy of iron containing definite amounts of carbon and other metals like
chromium, nickel, tungsten, vanadium, manganese etc. Steel is manufactured from
the pig iron by the Bessemer converter, Open-Hearth Furnace and Basic Oxygen
Processes.
Copper is extracted by roasting chalcopyrites (CuFeS₂). Copper that is obtained
by roasting chalcopyrites is called blister copper. It is impure, and it is refined
further by electrolysis. Copper is malleable and ductile, a good conductor of heat
and electricity and is used to make electric wires and in the manufacture of alloys.
The properties of nonmetals are opposite to that of metals. Some examples of
nonmetals are nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorous and chlorine.
Nitrogen constitutes about 80% by volume of atmospheric air. Nitrogen is
manufactured by the fractional distillation of liquefied air. Nitrogen is relatively
inert. However, its reactivity increases when heated and combined with metals of
group IA and IIA to form nitrides and with oxygen to form oxides like NO and
NO₂.
Phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of rock phosphate, coke (carbon)
and silica in an electric furnace. Phosphorus has two common allotropes, white and
red phosphorus. White phosphorus is highly reactive, while red phosphorous is
230
Metals and Nonmetals
relatively stable. White phosphorus is stored under water. Phosphorus reacts with
oxygen and chlorine.
Oxygen makes up about 20% by volume of air. It is manufactured by the fractional
distillation of liquid air. Oxygen is the most abundant element in the earth's crust.
Sulphur exists in the elemental state in underground deposits from which it is
extracted by the Frasch process. Sulphur reacts with oxygen to form sulphur
dioxide and sulphur trioxide. Sulphur is used for the manufacture of sulphuric acid
by the Contact Process.
Chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of brine. Chlorine is a powerful
oxidizing agent and reacts with heated metals to form chlorides. Chlorine and
chlorine water are used to bleach colored materials and as disinfectant.
Review Exercises
Part I: Multiple choice questions. Choose the best answer from the given
alternatives
1.
Which one of the following metals is the most ductile?
a.
Aluminum
b. Copper
C.
Gold
d. Silver
2.
Which one of the following is the least dense?
a. Mercury
b. Gold
C. Sodium
d. Aluminum
3.
Which one of the following metals will not liberate hydrogen gas when treated
with dilute hydrochloric acid ?
a. Magnesium
b. Zinc
C. Copper
d. Iron
4.
Which one of the following metallic elements is most likely to be found as the
free metal in nature ?
a.
Ca
b. Au
C.
Al
d.
Fe
5.
What is the purpose of a converter in steel production?
a.
to reduce the iron in the ore to elemental iron
b.
to allow the addition of nitrogen for increased strength
C.
to allow slow solidification of the molten metal so it will purify as it
crystallizes
d.
to remove impurity elements by oxidation
6.
Which of the following is a non-renewable resource:
a.
soil
C.
petroleum
b.
water
d. plants
7.
Which of the following elements possess allotropes?
a. carbon
b. phosphorus
C. sulphur
d. all
8.
Which one is used as anode in the electrolytic refining of copper?
a.
Pure copper
C.
Impure copper
b.
Graphite rod
d.
Pure iron rod
231
Chemistry Grade 10
9.
Which of the following is not a use of nitrogen:
a.
making matches
C.
making fertilizers
b. production of ammonia
d.
as a refrigerant
10. The most abundant element in the earth's crust is:
a. Silicon
b. Iron
C. Oxygen
d. Aluminium
11. Which of the following elements is not found as a free element in nature:
a. Sulphur
b. Oxygen
C. Copper
d. Chlorine
12. Which of the statements about the extraction of iron in the blast furnace is true?
a.
limestone is added to combine with excess carbon dioxide
b.
a slag of iron oxide forms at the bottom of the furnace
C.
hot air is blown in at the top of the furnace
d.
carbon monoxide reduces iron (III) oxide to iron
13. Calcium oxide is added to a steel making furnace to:
a. oxidize basic oxides
b.
oxidize carbon to carbon dioxide
C.
react with acid impurities
d.
react with silicon to form silicon dioxide
Part II: Short answer questions.
Answer the following appropriately
14. You are given, a hammer, a battery, wires, bulb and a switch.
a.
How will you use them to distinguish between samples of metals and non-
metals
b.
Assess the usefulness of these tests to distinguish between metals and
nonmetals
15. In the electrolytic refining of a metal M what would you take as cathode, as the
anode and as the electrolyte ?
16. State two ways to prevent the rusting of iron.
17. Give reason for the following:
a.
Aluminum is a highly reactive metal, yet it is used for making cooking utensils
b.
You must have seen tarnished copper vessels being cleaned with lemon or
tarmarind juice
18. Explain why I₂ is solid, Br₂ is liquid, CI₂ and F2 are both gases at room temperature?
19. Which one of Cu, Ag and Au is most malleable?
20. Which one of Fe, Ag and Pb is the best conductor of heat?
21. Name a metal and a nonmetal existing in liquid state at room temperature
22. Why is limestone added to the blast furnace?
23. Compare and contrast the Bessemer and open hearth processes.
24. Describe the advantages of using steel alloys instead of pure iron.
232
Metals and Nonmetals
25. Write balanced chemical equations for the given reactions, which take place in
the blast furnace during the extraction of iron:
a.
The reaction of iron (III) oxide with carbon monoxide.
b.
The reaction of calcium oxide with silicon (IV) oxide
Part III: Fill in the blank spaces
26. Gold can be hammered in to sheets. Therefore, it is
. (malleable/
ductile)
27. Copper is used in electrical appliances because it is good conductor of electricity
and
. (ductile/brittle)
28. Copper can displace
from its salt solution. (Zinc/silver/iron)
29. The purest form of iron is known as
30. Aluminum metal is extracted by electrolysis from the mineral
233
UNIT
6
HYDROCARBONS AND THEIR NATURAL SOURCES
