Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
classify inorganic compounds on the basis of their composition and/ or their
chemistry;
discuss types of oxides and their chemical properties;
explain the Arrhenius concept of acids and bases;
mention the classification of acids and salts;
describe the general properties, preparation and uses of common acids,
bases and salts;
distinguish the differences between strong and weak acids/ bases; and
concentrated and dilute acids/ bases;
recognize the corrosive nature of acids and bases, and exercise the
necessary precautions in handling and using them;
develop skills for identifying acidic, basic and neutral compounds;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, classifying, comparing
and contrasting, inferring, predicting, communicating, measuring, asking
questions, interpreting data, drawing conclusion, applying concepts,
relating cause and effect and problem solving.
Chemistry Grade 10
Start-up Activity
Discuss the following in groups and present your
conclusion to the class.
1. Which flavour (salty, sour, bitter or none) each
of the following substances does have? Coffee,
unripe orange, cheese, outer peel of lemon, kosso,
water, common salt, vinegar.
2. Consider the following: carbohydrates, proteins,
urea, oils, diamond, salt, water, baking soda.
Classify them into organic and inorganic and
analyze the source of each substance.
3. Can you identify organic and inorganic compounds
using their melting points?
3.1 Introduction
By the end of this section, students will be able to
define inorganic compounds;
classify inorganic compounds as oxides, acids, bases and salts.
The term inorganic compound refers to all compounds that do not contain carbon
except simpler compounds of carbon like oxides (eg CO₂), carbonates (eg CaCO₃)
and carbides (eg SiC). Inorganic compounds are compounds consisting of mineral
constituents of the earth or generally found in nonliving things. Compounds found in
living things are generally organic compounds (see unit 6 for the details). The majority
of metal compounds are inorganic.
Inorganic compounds are mostly found in nature as silicates, oxides, carbonates,
sulphides, sulphates, chlorides, nitrates, etc.
Inorganic compounds are generally classified into four groups namely oxides, acids,
bases and salts.
We are familiar with the utility and importance of oxides, acids, bases and salts in
our daily life. For example, we know that the carbon dioxide (CO₂) gas in CO₂-fire
extinguisher is an oxide, the sour taste of vinegar is due to acetic acid (CH₃COOH),
sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is a base used in the preparation of soaps, and sodium
chloride (NaCl) is common salt which is useful as a food ingredient. This unit deals with
the chemical nature and formation of more oxides, acids, bases and salts.
110
Important Inorganic Compounds
Exercise 3.1
1. List some inorganic compounds with which you are familiar. Write on the board.
2. Lime stone (CaCO₃) and common salt (NaCl) are inorganic substances. Why?
3. Which branch of chemistry is concerned with the study of all elements?
4. What is the source of inorganic compounds ?
3.2 Oxides
Form a group and discuss the following and present
your findings to the class;
?
1. Why oxygen is the most abundant element on the
earth's crust?
2. How oxygen exists in nature?
3. Which elements react with oxygen?
4. What do you call the product when oxygen reacts
Activity 3.1
with an element?
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define and classify oxides as acidic, basic, neutral, amphoteric and peroxides
define and give examples of acidic oxides, basic oxides, amphoteric oxides
and neutral oxides
explain the chemical properties of acidic oxides, basic oxides, amphoteric
oxides and neutral oxides
differentiate basic oxides from acidic oxides using experimental results
compare and contrast acidic and basic oxides
explain the salt-forming nature of acidic oxide, basic oxide and amphoteric
oxide
define neutral oxides and peroxides and give examples for each of them
discuss the chemical properties of peroxides
differentiate peroxides from other oxides by conducting an experiment
Oxygen reacts directly with almost all elements except the noble gases and inactive
metals like gold, platinum, and palladium. Such compounds of oxygen are called
oxides. Oxides are binary compounds containing oxygen and any other element
(metal, non-metal or metalloid). Note that binary compounds are those consisting of
only two elements.
Oxygen + Element (Metal, Non-metal or Metalloid)
Oxide
111
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 3.1: magnesium oxide, MgO, aluminium oxide, AI2O3, carbon dioxide,
CO2, and sulphur dioxide, SO₂ and carbon monoxide, CO are examples of oxides.
Exercise 3.2
Classify the following compounds as oxides or not oxides.
A. Na₂O
F. SO₃
B. N2O₅
G. H3PO4
C. Na2CO3
H. AI2O3
D. P4O10
I. H2O
E. KNO₃
J. H2SO4
Oxides, based on their properties are classified as shown in Figure 3.1.
Acidic Oxides
Basic Oxides
Oxides
Neutral Oxides
Amphoteric Oxides
Peroxides
Figure 3.1 Classification of oxides.
A. Acidic Oxides
Discuss in your group and present your conclusions to
the class.
1. What is acid rain and what are the major causes
of acid rain?
2. What would be the pH (decreases, increases or
remains unchanged) of solution when carbon
dioxide (CO₂), dinitrogen pentoxide (N₂O₅),
?
tetraphosphorous decaoxide (P₄O₁₀), sulfur
dioxide (SO₂) and dichlorine heptoxide (CI₂O₇)
are dissolved in water? What can you conclude
regarding the acid-base behavior of oxides of
nonetallic elements like C, N, S, CI, and P?
Activity 3.2
112
Important Inorganic Compounds
Acidic oxides are the oxides formed by the chemical combination of oxygen with non-
metals (Groups 14 -17).
These oxides are also called acid anhydrides, since they form acidic solutions when
reacted or dissolved in water. Acid anhydride means acid without water. Generally
speaking, acidic oxides are non-metal oxides. Examples of acidic oxides include
carbon dioxide, CO2, nitrogen dioxide, NO₂, and sulphur dioxide, SO₂. However, it
is very important to note that all non-metal oxides are not necessarily acidic oxides.
For example, carbon monoxide, CO, and di-nitrogen monoxide, N₂O, are non-metal
oxides, but they are neutral oxides which will be discussed later (D). There are acidic
oxides that do not react directly with water. The acids of such oxides are formed
by other methods. For example; SiO₂ is not soluble in water, but it neutralizes basic
oxides, thus it is acidic.
SiO₂ + Na₂O
Na2SiO₃ (sodium silicate)
The acid of SiO₂ (H2SiO₃) is prepared by the reaction of HCI with Na2SiO₃ as shown
below:
Na2SiO3 (aq) + HCI (aq)
H2SiO3 (aq) + 2NaCl (aq)
Chemical properties of acidic oxides
1. Acidic oxides (acid anhydrides) dissolve in water to form acidic solution (acid).
Acid anhydride + Water
Acid
CO2 + H2O
H2CO3 (Carbonic acid)
SO₂ + H2O
H2SO3 (Sulphurous acid)
2. Acidic oxides react with basic or metallic oxides to form salt.
Acidic oxide + Basic oxide
Salt
CO2 + Na₂O
Na2CO₃ (sodium carbonate)
SO₃ + CaO
CaSO₄ (calcium sulphate)
3. Acidic oxides react with bases to form salt and water. This reaction is called
neutralization reaction.
Acidic oxide + Base
Salt + Water
SO₂ + 2NaOH
Na2SO₃ + H2O
CO2 + 2LiOH
Li2CO₃ + H₂O
113
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 3.3
1. List some examples of acidic oxides.
2. Give two examples of non-metallic oxides which are not acidic oxides.
3. Complete and balance the following equations.
a. N2O5 + H2O
d. Ca(OH)₂ + SO₃
b. P₄O₁₀ + H2O
e. KOH + CO2
C. MgO + CO2
f. SrO + SO₂
B.
Basic Oxides
Basic oxides are oxides that are composed of metals and oxygen. Most metals form
oxides which exhibit basic properties and dissolve in water to give alkaline solutions.
But, all metal oxides are not necessarily basic oxides; for example AI2O₃ and ZnO
are amphoteric oxides, which will be discussed in part (C). Oxides of metals that
dissolve in water and react with it to form basic or alkaline solutions are called basic
anhydrides. There are metallic oxides which have basic properties but are insoluble in
water. These oxides react with acids to give salt and water
Example:
FeO + 2HCI
FeCl₂ + H2O
The oxides of active metals, group IA and heavier members of group IIA, dissolve in
water and readily form bases. The term base is used to describe both soluble and
insoluble basic oxides. Some examples of basic oxides are Li₂O, Na₂O, K₂O, MgO,
CaO, BaO, and CuO.
Discuss the following questions in your group and
present your conclusion to the class.
a. What products do basic oxides form in their
?
reactions with water, acidic oxides and acids?
b. What is the type of reaction that takes place
between lime (CaO) and carbon dioxide (CO₂)?
C. Write the balanced chemical equation for each of
Activity 3.3
the chemical reactions that occur in (a) and (b).
Chemical properties of basic oxides
1.
Basic oxides dissolve in water to form alkaline solutions. As they dissolve, they
react with water to form the corresponding metal hydroxides.
Basic oxide + Water
Base (Alkali)
Examples:
Li₂O + H2O
2LiOH
CaO + H2O
Ca(OH)₂
114
Important Inorganic Compounds
2.
Basic oxides react with acidic oxides to form salts.
Basic oxide + Acidic oxide
Salt
Examples:
BaO + SO₃
BaSO₄
Na₂O + CO2
Na2CO₃
3.
Basic oxides react with acids to form a salt and water.
Basic oxide + Acid
Salt + Water
Examples:
CaO + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + H2O
CuO + H2SO₄
CuSO₄ + H2O
Table 3.1 Some common indicators and the colour they develop in acidic and basic
solutions
Indicator
Colour in aqueous solution of
Colour in aqueous
acidic oxide
solution of basic oxide
Universal
Yellow - orange (in weakly acidic)
Blue (in weakly basic) and
Indicator
and red (in strongly acidic)
purple (in strongly basic)
Litmus
Red
Blue
Phenolphthalein
Colourless
Pink (red)
Methyl orange
Red
Yellow
Note that acidic and basic oxides can be identified either by their effects on indicators
or chemical interaction they have with one another. Acidic oxides react with bases
while basic oxides react with acids. But acidic oxides do not react with acids and basic
oxides do not react with bases.
Experiment 3.1
Test for Acidity and Basicity of Oxides
Objective: To identify basic and acidic oxides.
Apparatus: Deflagrating spoon, gas jar and gas jar lid, test tubes.
Chemicals: Sulphur, magnesium or calcium metal, water, universal indicator, litmus
paper (blue and red).
Procedure:
1.
Take a small amount of powdered sulphur in a deflagrating spoon and
heat it.
115
Chemistry Grade 10
As soon as sulphur starts burning, introduce the spoon into a gas jar. Cover
the gas jar with a lid to ensure that the gas produced does not escape.
Remove the spoon after some time. Add 10 mL of water into the gas jar
and quickly replace the lid. Shake the gas jar well. Take two test tubes and
pour 5 mL of the solution to each test tube. Add a few drops of universal
indicator solution to the first test tube and blue litmus paper in the second.
2. Ignite a small amount of magnesium or calcium metal on a deflagrating
spoon and insert in to a gas jar. Add 10 mL water to the ash formed and
shake. Take two test tubes and pour 5 mL of the solution to each of the
test tubes. Add a few drops of universal indicator in the first and red litmus
paper to the second test tube.
Questions
a. What compounds are formed by the combustion of sulphur and magnesium
or calcium? Write chemical equations to show the reactions.
b. What happens when water is added to the gas jars in which sulphur was
burnt?
c. What colours are observed by adding drops of universal indicator and
blue or red litmus to the solutions in the test tubes?
d. Why does the change in the colour of indicators occur in the various
solutions? Write a laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
Note: Universal indicator and litmus paper serve as indicators. Indicators are
substances used to identify whether a given solution is acidic or basic by showing
colour changes.
Exercise 3.4
1. Complete and balance the following chemical equations:
a. K₂O + H₂O
d. Li2O + SO₂
b. MgO + H2O
e. BaO + H2SO4
C. Na₂O + CO₂
f. CuO + HCI
2. Classify the following oxides as basic or acidic:
a. MgO
d. N2O₅
g. K2O
b. BaO
e. Cu2O
h. SO₂
C. P₄O₁₀
f. Fe2O3
116
Important Inorganic Compounds
C.
Amphoteric Oxides
?
What trend do you observe in the properties of
oxides of the elements in a period as you go from left
to right in the periodic table? Which elements form
a basic oxide, which elements form acidic oxides?
Discuss this in your group and present to the class.
Activity 3.4
An oxide which shows both acidic and basic behavior is called amphoteric oxide (see
Figure 3.1).
Acid
Salt + Water
Amphoteric Oxide
Salt + Water
Base
Figure 3.1 The reaction of amphoteric oxide with acids and bases.
For example, oxides of aluminium (AI₂O₃) and zinc (ZnO) are amphoteric. These oxides
react with strong bases as well as strong acids.
A.
Reactions showing amphoteric nature of aluminium oxide (AI₂O₃)
HCI
AICI₃ + H₂O
AI2O₃
NaAIO₂ + H₂O
NaOH
B.
Reactions showing amphoteric nature of zinc oxide (ZnO)
HCI
ZnCl₂ + H₂O
ZnO
Na₂ZnO₂ + H₂O
NaOH
Some other examples of amphoteric oxides are PbO, PbO₂, SnO, and SnO₂. It is
also important to realize that hydroxides which react with both acids and bases are
described as amphoteric hydroxides. For example, aluminium hydroxide, AI(OH)₃,
reacts with both acids and bases to form salt and water. So, AI(OH)₃, is amphoteric
in nature.
What is the common characteristic of acidic, basic and amphoteric oxides? Acidic
oxides form salts when reacted with basic oxides and bases. Basic oxides also produce
117
Chemistry Grade 10
salts in their reactions with acidic oxides and acids. Amphoteric oxides form salts when
they react with acids and bases. Thus, acidic oxides, basic oxides and amphoteric
oxides are salt-forming oxides.
Exercise 3.5
1. Write the chemical equations to show the amphoteric properties of, AI2O3 and
PbO when they react with:
a. NaOH
C. KOH
b. HNO3
d. H2SO4
Experiment 3.2
Investigating Amphoteric Behaviour of Oxides
Objective: To observe the amphoteric behaviour of AI2O3.
Apparatus: Spatula, reagent bottles, beakers, and glass rod.
Chemicals: AI2O3, HCI, NaOH, Universal indicator and water.
Procedure:
1. Mix 20 mL concentrated HCI and 80 mL water in one reagent bottle;
2. Dissolve 8 g NaOH in 100 mL water in another reagent bottle.
3. Add universal indicator to the acid and base, and observe the colour change.
4. Take two beakers and place a spatula full of AI2O3 in each of the beakers.
5. Pour the HCI solution (which you prepared) into one of the beakers and NaOH
solution into the other. Stir the mixture with a glass rod.
6. Add universal indicator in the solutions of beakers and observe the colour
change.
Questions
1. Does AI2O3 react with the solutions in both beakers?
2. What does the change in colour of the indicator in the mixtures indicate?
3. Write the chemical equations to show what has happened?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
118
Important Inorganic Compounds
D.
Neutral Oxides
1. Explain the acid-base behavior of oxides according
to the electropositive character (oxidation state) of
the oxide's central atom. Consider all nitrogen oxides
a. Assign oxidation state for each.
b. Classify them as soluble and in soluble in water.
C.
Which oxidation state (higher or lower) favors
solubility in water?
d. Which of the nitrogen oxides produce acidic
solution in water?
?
2. In general, oxides of nonmetals are acidic whereas
oxides of metals are basic or amphoteric. Can an
oxide be neither acidic nor basic?
Discuss in your group and present to the class
Activity 3.5
Neutral oxides react neither with acids nor with bases to form salt and water. Hence,
neutral oxides do not show basic and acidic properties. Examples of neutral oxides
are water, H2O, carbon monoxide, CO, dinitrogen monoxide, N₂O, and nitrogen
monoxide, NO. Neutral oxides are very few in number. Neutral oxides are not salt-
forming oxides.
E.
Peroxides
Discuss the following in your group and present your
conclusion to the class.
?
a. Oxides contain O2- ions or the group -0- or =0.
What is the oxidation state of oxygen in oxides?
b. What is the oxidation state of oxygen in AI2O3,
N₂O₅, P4O 10' KO₂ and SO₂?
C. What kind of bonds form oxygen in these oxides?
Activity 3.6
Compounds which contain oxygen with oxidation number -1 are called peroxides. In
peroxides, the two oxygen atoms are linked to each other and with atoms of other
elements. Thus, peroxides contain the peroxide, "-0-0-" link. Some examples of
peroxides are hydrogen peroxide, H₂O₂, sodium peroxide, Na₂O₂, calcium peroxide,
CaO₂, barium peroxide, BaO₂, and strontium peroxide, SrO₂.
Most peroxides of metals are formed by burning the metals in a sufficient amount of
oxygen.
119
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 3.2:
2Na (s) + O2 (g)
Na2O2 (s)
Ca (s) + O2 (g)
CaO2 (s)
There are many organic peroxides (ROOR') which are important activators in a
process called polymerization, which creates plastic polymers.
Chemical Properties of Peroxides
1. Peroxides are powerful oxidizing agents; they react with different substances
by losing oxygen.
Example 3.3:
PbS (s) + 4H₂O₂(aq)
PbSO4 (s) + 4H₂O (I)
2KI (aq) + H2SO4 (aq) + H2O2 (aq)
I2 (s) + K2SO₄ (aq) + 2H2O (I)
2. Peroxides react with aqueous acids to form hydrogen peroxide.
Example 3.4:
Na2O₂ (s) + 2HCI (aq)
2NaCl (aq) + H2O2 (aq)
CaO2 (s) + H2SO4 (aq)
CaSO4 (s) + H2O2 (aq)
Hydrogen Peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide, H₂O₂, is a colorless liquid whose solutions are usually used as
bleach and an antiseptic. Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to release oxygen. This
reaction is slow but can be speed up by the addition of catalysts like MnO₂ or Pt.
2H₂O₂(aq)
2H2O (I) + (g)
Hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidizing agent. Its oxidizing power is responsible
for its effectiveness as an antiseptic for mouthwash and cleansing wounds. When
hydrogen peroxide is added to a colored dye, the molecule responsible for the color
will oxidize and so the color will disappear, showing its bleaching action. For example,
if hydrogen peroxide is added to a black dye (paint) that contains lead sulphide, PbS,
the black colour turns white. This is due to the oxidation of PbS to PbSO₄. The equation
for this process is:
PbS (s) + 4H2O2
PbSO4 + 4H2O (I)
120
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.3
Distinguishing Peroxides from Other Oxides
Objective: To identify peroxides from other oxides.
Chemicals: CaO or MgO, AI2O3 or ZnO or PbO, Na2O₂ or BaO₂, P₄O₁₀' KI, dilute
H2SO4, starch, water.
Materials: Reagent bottle, six beakers, dropper, and spatula.
Procedure:
1. Take three beakers. In the first beaker, dissolve 20 g KI in water to prepare
a 250 mL solution. Dilute 2 mL concentrated H2SO4 by pouring it in 18 mL of
water in the second beaker.
2. Prepare starch solution in the third beaker by boiling 1g starch in 100 mL
water.
3. Take four beakers and pour 50 mL KI solution to each of them. Acidify the
solutions in each of the beakers by adding 5-10 drops of dilute H2SO ₄.
4. Add a spatula full of CaO or MgO in the first, AI2O3 or ZnO or PbO in the
second, Na2O₂ or BaO₂ in the third and P4O10 in the fourth beaker and then
add about 5 mL starch solution to each of the four beakers.
Questions
1. In which beaker do you see a color change?
2. What is the cause of the colour change?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the change?
4. Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Exercise 3.6
1. Classify the following oxides as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral and
peroxides
a. Na₂O
f. N2O5
k. Li2O
b. NO
g. CaO
I. H3PO₄
C. CO2
h. CO
m. AI2O3
d. ZnO
i. CaO2
n. SO₂
e. MgO
i. Na₂O₂
121
Chemistry Grade 10
2. Write an acidic oxide that should react with water to form each of the
following acids?
a. H2SO3
C. HNO3
e. H3PO3
b. H2SO4
d. H2CO3
f. H3PO4
3. Identify the basic anhydrides that react with water to form each of the following
bases:
a. Ca(OH)₂
C. Mg(OH)₂
e. Sr(OH)₂
b. KOH
d. NaOH
f. Ba(OH)₂
4. Complete and write the balanced equation for each of the following
a. MgO + H2SO4
C. AI2O3 + HNO3
e. NaOH + CO2
b. CaO + H3PO4
d. K₂O + H2SO4
f. ZnO + H3PO4
5. How peroxides differ from oxides? Write the structures of H2O2' Na₂O₂, CaO2
6. How can you identify whether an oxide is acidic, basic or neutral?
3.3 Acids
Discuss in your group and present it to the class.
a. Describe the reason why unripe citrus fruits or
?
lemon juice give sour taste?
b. List as many sour foods as possible which you have
ever tasted.
C. Give some examples of acids that you have
Activity 3.7
encountered in your everyday life?
By the end of this section, students will be able to
define acids in terms of the concepts of Arrhenius;
give examples of acids based on Arrhenius;
categorize acids as monoprotic and poly protic based on the number of
ionizable(replaceable) hydrogen atom;
group acids as binary and ternary based on the number of elements, they contain
define strong and weak acids;
differentiate between strong and weak acids;
define concentrated and dilute acids;
describe the conceptual difference between strong and concentrated acids;
explain the conceptual difference between weak and dilute acids;
apply the necessary precautions while working with acids;
define pH;
describe the pH scale;
identify a given pH-labelled solution as acidic, basic or neutral;
122
Important Inorganic Compounds
perform activities to determine the pH of some common substances using universal
indicators or pH meter;
calculate the pH of a given acidic solution;
calculate the concentration of hydrogen ion from the given information;
perform activities to investigate some physical properties of acids;
do activities to investigate some chemical properties of acids;
discuss the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acidic oxides with
water and formation of volatile acids from non -volatile acids as the three
methods of preparation of acids;
carry out simple experiment to prepare acids in laboratory;
describe the uses of the three common laboratory acids;
explain the general properties of acids.
Acids play key roles in our bodies, in our homes, and in the laboratories. We seem to
like the sour taste of acids; we add them to salad dressings, and spices. Many foods,
including citrus fruits and some vegetables, contain acids.
Acetic acid in vinegar, citric acid in lemons and other citrus fruits, are among the
acids that we encounter every day. Hydrochloric acid is the acid in gastric juice; it is
essential to digestion. Phosphoric acid gives flavour to many carbonated beverages.
In Latin the word acidus is used for sour. In the study of chemistry the term acid has
been used to name a group of compounds which have a sour taste.
Arrhenius Definition of Acids
The simplest definition of acids is suggested by Savante Arrhenius, a Swedish Chemist.
Arrhenius defined an acid as a substance that releases hydrogen ion or proton, H⁺,
or hydronium ion, H3O+, in aqueous solution. In general, the ionization of acids takes
place as follows.
HA(aq)
H⁺(aq) + A⁻ (aq) or HA(aq) + H₂O(I)
H₃O⁺(aq) + A⁻(aq)
Example 3.5:
HCl(aq)
H⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq) or HCl(aq) + H₂O(I)
H3O⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq)
H2SO₄(aq)
2H⁺(aq) + SO, ²-(aq) or H₂SO₄(aq) + 2H₂O(I)
2H₃O⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq)
According to this definition, for a substance to be an Arrhenius acid, it should contain
ionizable hydrogen. Some examples of Arrhenius acids are HNO3, H2SO4, H3PO4,
HBr, HI and HF.
Although the Arrhenius concept has limited scope yet, it led to the development of
more general theories of acid-base behavior. Broader Acid-base definitions will be
dealt in grade 12 chemistry.
123
Chemistry Grade 10
Classification of Acids
?
Sulphuric acid, H2SO4, has two hydrogen atoms and
it is a diprotic acid. Propionic acid, 2 COOH, has
six hydrogen atoms but is classified as a monoprotic
acid.
Discuss the reason in your group and present it to the
Activity 3.8
class.
A.
Classification of Acids Based on the Number of lonizable Hydrogen
Acids are classified as monoprotic, diprotic and polyprotic depending upon the
number of replaceable hydrogen ions (H⁺) or hydronium ions (H₃O⁺ ions) per molecule
of the acid.
An acid that contains only one ionisable hydrogen atom per molecule is called
monoprotic.
Example 3.6: Hydrochloric acid (HCI) and nitric acid (HNO₃) are monoprotic
acids because each give only one H+ ion upon dissociation in aqueous solution.
HCI (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl- (aq)
HNO3 (aq)
H+ (aq) + NO3- - (aq)
Polyprotic acids are those acids containing more than one ionizable (replaceable)
hydrogen ion in aqueous solution. Polyprotic acids which contain two ionizable hydrogen
atoms such as H2SO4, H₂S, and H2CO3 are called diprotic acids; those containing three
ionizable hydrogen atoms like H3PO4 are called triprotic acids. The dissociation of
polyprotic acids in aqueous solution is shown in the following chemical equations:
H2SO4 (aq)
2H+ (aq) + SO₄²⁻ (aq)
H2CO3 (aq)
2H+ (aq) + CO3²⁻ (aq)
H3PO4 (aq)
3H+ (aq) + PO4³⁻ (aq)
?
Ammonia (NH₃) and phosphoric acid (H₃PO₄) have
three hydrogen atoms but ammonia does not behave
as a triprotic acid. It is a base. Why? Discuss in your
group and present it to the class.
Activity 3.9
B.
Classification of Acids Based on the Number of Elements they Contain
Acids can also be classified depending on the number of their constituent elements
as binary and ternary acids. Binary acids are those acids composed of only two
different elements. The two elements are hydrogen and a non-metal.
124
Important Inorganic Compounds
Examples of binary acids are HCI, HBr, HF, HI, and H2S.
Ternary acids also called oxy-acids are acids composed of three different elements.
The three elements usually are hydrogen, oxygen and a non-metal. Examples are
H₂SO₄, H2CO3, HCIO₄, and H3PO4
1. Add a drop of lemon juice on your tongue and try
to identify its taste. Repeat your observation with
?
orange juice. Try to classify them as acid or base,
depending on their taste.
2. Why should curd and acid-containing substances
not be kept in brass and copper vessels? (Brass is
Activity 3.10
an alloy of copper and Zinc). Discuss in class.
Acids generally have the following properties:
General Properties of Acids
I. Acids have a sour taste. Aqueous solutions of acids have a sour taste. Lemon juice
and orange juice taste sour due to the presence of citric acid. Citric acid in lemon
juice and orange juice is harmless. However, concentrated acids are corrosive and
poisonous. So the test 'taste' is never allowed to identify acids especially in the
laboratories.
II. Acids change the color of certain acid-base indicators. The common indicators
available in high school laboratories are litmus, phenolphthalein, methyl orange
or methyl red and universal indicator. Note that natural dyes like red extract of
cabbage leaves, petals of some colored flowers and turmeric also act as indicators
to test the presence of acid or base.
Experiment 3.4
Effect of Acids on Indicators
Objective: To detect the acidity of a solution using indicators.
Chemicals: Lemon juice, dilute HCI, dilute HNO3' dilute H2SO4
phenolphthalein, litmus, methyl red, universal indicator
Apparatus: Test tubes, test tube rack, test tube holder, and reagent bottles.
125
Chemistry Grade 10
Procedure:
Take four clean test tubes and place some lemon juice in the first, dilute HCI in
the second, dilute HNO3 in the third and dilute H2SO4 in the fourth. Dip a strip of
blue litmus paper into each of the four test tubes and observe. Follow the same
procedure and repeat the experiment until each acid has been tested by each
indicator. Record your observation.
Questions
1. What colours have you observed when each indicator was added to each of
the four acid solutions? Record the colour change of each indicator in each
solution (lemon juice, dilute HCI, HNO3 and H2SO 4) using the following table.
2. Why do all the acids show similar color changes in the same indicator?
3. What can you say about the acid-base behavior of indicators? Are indicators
acidic or basic ?
Table 3.2 Colour of indicators in lemon juice, dilute HCI, HNO3 and H2SO4
Indicator
Colour of indicator in
Lemon juice
Dilute HNO3
Dilute HCI
Dilute H2SO4
III. Acids react with active metals to yield hydrogen gas. Acids react explosively
with metals like sodium, potassium and calcium. The reaction is very dangerous and
should not be performed. However, dilute acids (HCI, H2SO 4) react moderately
with reactive metals like: Mg, Zn, Fe and Al to form their respective salts with the
evolution of hydrogen gas.
Example 3.7:
H2SO4 + Zn
ZnSO₄ + H2
6HCI + 2AI
2AICI₃ + 3H2
Concentrated nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid react with copper
producing nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide gases, respectively, instead
of hydrogen. This is because concentrated HNO3 and hot concentrated H2SO4
are oxidizing acids. The reactions of these acids with copper are given by the
following equations:
Cu + 4HNO3
Cu(NO₃)₂ + 2NO2 + 2H2O
Cu + 2H2SO₄
CuSO4 + SO2 + 2H2O
126
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.5
Investigating the Reactions of Metals with Dilute Acids
Objective: To investigate the reaction between active metals and dilute acids.
Chemicals: Dilute H2SO4, dilute HCI, zinc, magnesium and iron
Apparatus: Test tubes, test tube holder, test tube rack, burner, match, cork and
spatula.
Procedure:
Take three test tubes and place a spatula-full of powdered zinc in the first,
powdered magnesium in the second and iron filings in the third. Pour dilute HCI
into each of the test tubes until the metals are completely covered by the acid. To
test the type of gas evolved, cover one of the test tubes with a cork which has a
glass delivery (jet tube as shown in Figure 3.2). Bring a burning match stick close
to the glass tube mouth, the gas burns with a pale blue flame with a characteristic
sound. Repeat the experiment with dilute H2SO4 after placing each of the three
metals in three different test tubes.
Questions:
A. What does the formation of bubbles indicate?
B. What sound do you hear when the burning splint is close to the mouth of the
test tube?
C. Which gas is evolved during the reaction?
D. Which metal's reaction with dilute HCI or H2SO4 is the most violent?
E. Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Blue flame
Narrow jet tube
Cork
Clamp
Liquid HCI or
dil. H2SO₄
Zinc granules or
Magnesium metal
Figure 3.2 Action of dilute acids on relatively active metals.
Acids react with carbonates and hydrogen carbonates to form salt, water and carbon
dioxide gas
127
Chemistry Grade 10
Acid + Hydrogen carbonate
Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
Acid + Carbonate
Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
Example 3.8
2HCI + CaCO3
CaCl₂ + H2O + CO2
HCI + NaHCO3
NaCl + H2O + CO2
Experiment 3.6
Reactions of Acids with Carbonates and Hydrogen Carbonates
Objective: To investigate the reaction between acids and carbonates and
bicarbonates.
Chemicals: Dil. H2SO4, dil. HCI, Zinc, Magnesium, iron
Apparatus: Test tubes , test tube holder, test tube rack, burner, match, cork and
spatula
Procedure:
1. Take three conical flasks and add powdered Na2CO3 in the first, powdered
CaCO3 to the second and powdered sodium bicarbonate to the third. Pour
dilute HCI into each of the three conical flasks until the acid covers the
carbonates and bicarbonate. Hold damp blue litmus paper close to the mouth
of the conical flasks. Repeat this with damp red litmus paper and record your
observations. Bubble the gas through limewater as shown in Figure 3.3.
2. Repeat the experiment using the same carbonates and hydrogencarbonate
with dilute H2SO4 and dilute HNO3
HCI
Thistle
funnel
Double
bore cork
CO2
Na2CO3
Lime water
Figure 3.3 Test for Carbon dioxide.
128
Important Inorganic Compounds
Questions
A. What does the formation of bubbles in the conical flasks indicate?
B. Did the colour of the damp blue litmus paper change when you held it close
to the mouth of the conical flasks? What about the colour of damp red litmus?
C. What happened to the colour of lime water when you bubbled the gas
through it? If there was any change, what did it prove? Write a balanced
chemical equation for the change?
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
IV. Concentrated acids react with sulphites to form salts with the liberation of sulphur
dioxide gas.
Sulphite + Acid
Sulphur dioxide + Salt + Water
CaSO₃ + H2SO4
SO₂ + CaSO4 + H2O
NaHSO₃ + HCI
SO₂ + NaCl + H2O
Experiment 3.7
Neutralization Reaction
Objective: To investigate the reaction between acids and bases
Chemicals: 1 M HCI, 1 M NaOH, 0.5 M Ca(OH)₂, red and blue litmus papers
Apparatus: Four 150 mL beakers, two droppers, stirring rod, two watch glasses.
Procedure
1. Make 1 M NaOH solution by dissolving 4.0 g NaOH in enough water to make
100 mL solution.
2. Make a 1 M HCI solution by dissolving 8.3 mL of concentrated HCI in enough
distilled water until the volume of the solution is 100 mL.
3. Dissolve 3.7 g of Ca(OH)₂ in enough distilled water to make 100 mL solution.
4. To a 150 mL beaker add 10 mL HCI solution and 9.5 mL NaOH solution
and stir thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus paper. Continue adding
NaOH solution dropwise using a dropper, stirring after each addition and
checking with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red stays
red. Put 2 mL of the neutral solution in a watch glass and allow the water to
evaporate until the next day.
5. To another 150 mL beaker add 10 mL Ca(OH)₂ solution and 9.5 mL HCI
solution. Repeat all the steps, which you followed in procedure 4.
129
Chemistry Grade 10
Questions
A. Is there any colour change, when you dip blue and red litmus papers into the
solution of the acid and the base?
B. Why is it necessary to add NaOH solution dropwise (one drop at a time) in
procedure 4?
C. During this experiment, under what conditions does the blue litmus remain
blue and the red remain red?
D. What are the products formed in procedures 4 and 5? Write balanced
chemical equations for the reactions?
F. Write a laboratory report on your observations and submit to your teacher.
V. Acids react with bases (oxides and hydroxides of metal and ammonium hydroxide)
to form salts and water. The reaction of acids with basic oxides or bases to form
salt and water is called neutralization reaction
Acid + Base (basic oxides or hydroxides of metal)
Salt + Water
Example 3.9: reaction of acids with basic oxides
2HCI + MgO
MgCl₂ + H2O
H2SO4 + CaO
CaSO₄ + H2O
Example 3.10: Reaction of acids with hydroxides of metals
H2SO4 + 2NaOH
Na2SO₄ + 2H2O
HNO3 + KOH
KNO3 + H2O
VI. Aqueous solutions of acids are electrolytes, meaning that they conduct electrical
current. Some acids are strong electrolytes because they ionize completely in
water, yielding a great number of ions. Other acids are weak electrolytes that
exist primarily in a non-ionized form when dissolved in water.
Example 3.11: A solution of hydrochloric acid (HCI) conducts electricity as it
contains replaceable H atom which is furnished in solution as H+ ion and carries
the current.
HCI (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl- (aq)
HCI is a strong electrolyte because it gives large amount of ions in aqueous
solution.
Strong electrolytes give bright light. CH₃ COOH gives few ions in aqueous solution;
hence it is a weak electrolyte. Weak electrolytes give dim light.
130
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.8
Can Aqueous Acid Solution Conduct Electricity?
Objectives: To investigate the conductivity of acids
Chemicals: 1 M HCI, 1 M HNO3, 1 M CH₃ COOH,
Apparatus: Three 150 mL beakers, two graphite electrodes, insulated electric
wires, two dry cells, and bulb
Procedure:
Take about 100 mL of 1 M HCI in the first beaker, the same volume and concentration
of HNO3 and CH₃COOH in the second and third beakers respectively.
Arrange the set up as shown in Figure 3.4. First test the conduction of electricity
through HCI solution by inserting the two graphite electrodes. See whether the
bulb glows or not. Is the light bright or dim? Record your observation. Repeat the
same activity with HNO3 and CH2COOH. Rinse the electrodes after use in each
of the acid solutions. Compare the intensity of light produced with HNO3 and
CH3COOH.
AC plug
230 volt
Bulb
Beaker
dil.HCI solution
Graphite rods
Figure 3.4 Conductivity of acid solutions.
Questions
A. In which of the acid solutions does the bulb produce?
I) bright light? II) dim light?
B. What conclusions can you draw from your observations?
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
131
Chemistry Grade 10
Strength of Acids (Strong and Weak Acids)
Discuss in your group and present your conclusion to
the class.
1. Add a few drops of citric acid solution and
hydrochloric acid separately on a piece of waste
cotton cloth; What happens? Based on your
?
observations, can you classify these acids as weak
acid or strong acid?
2. Why is it safe to put acetic acid-containing vinegar
on food yet extremely dangerous to use dilute nitric
acid for the same purpose?
Activity 3.11
Based on their degree of dissociation, acids are divided into strong acids and weak
acids. If an acid completely dissociates in an aqueous solution, it is called a strong
acid. Strong acids produce large amount of H+ ions in the aqueous solution as they
dissociate completely. Hydrochloric acid (HCI), nitric acid (HNO₃), and sulfuric acid
(H₂SO₄) are some examples of acids that dissociate completely in aqueous solution.
Their dissociation is indicated by a single arrow
(-)
as shown below:
HCI (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl⁻ (aq)
HNO3 (aq)
H+ (aq) + NO3- - (aq)
H2SO4 (aq)
2H+ (aq) + SO₄ 2- (aq)
A dilute aqueous solution of strong acids contains predominantly the ions derived
from the acids instead of the acid molecules. For example, HCI and HNO3 are almost
completely ionized in water.
An acid is called weak if it dissociates only partially in aqueous solution. Weak acids
release few hydrogen ions in aqueous solution. The aqueous solution of a weak acid
contains hydronium ions, anions and dissolved molecules of the acid. Examples of weak
acids are acetic acid (CH₃COOH), oxalic acid (H₂C₂O₄), carbonic acid (H2CO₃). These
acids dissociate only partially as indicated by the double arrow
(=)
shown below:
CH3COOH
H+ + CH3COO⁻
H2C2O4
2H+
+
C2O₄²⁻
H2CO3
2H+ + CO3²⁻
Organic acids which contain the acidic carboxyl group - COOH, are generally weak
acids.
132
Important Inorganic Compounds
Exercise 3.7
1.
a. Give examples of organic acids and inorganic acids.
b. Classify your examples as strong and weak acids
2. Why do HCI, HNO3, etc. Show acidic characteristics in aqueous solutions while
solutions of compounds like alcohol and glucose do not show acidic property ?
Concentrated and Dilute Acids
Discuss in your group and present your conclusion to
?
the class.
a. In a solution, if there is 96% H2O and the rest is
H2SO4, what kind of solution is it?
b. In a solution, if there is 96% H2SO4 and the rest is
H2O, what kind of solution is it?
Activity 3.12
The terms "concentrated" and "dilute" are used to describe the relative amount of
acid present in a given solution. A concentrated acid has a relatively large amount of
solute dissolved in the solvent. A dilute acid has a relatively smaller amount of solute
dissolved in the solvent. Both strong acid and a weak acid may be concentrated or
diluted depending on the number of moles of acid present.
Precautions in Handling Acid
Concentrated acids are corrosive and may cause visible destruction or irreversible
alterations to living tissue by chemical action at the site of contact. Hence, the following
safety precautions should be taken when handling acids:
a. Wear goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat
b. If a concentrated acid is spilled or splashed on your body, first wash the affected
part with running water and then with 10% Na2CO₃ solution
C. To dilute concentrated acids, pour the concentrated acid in to water and not water
in to the acid.
d. If corrosive acids are swallowed, administer weak bases such as Mg(OH)₂ or
AI(OH)₃.
e. Use bellows to pipette acid instead of sucking using yours lips
f. If an acid enters your eye, wash with water repeatedly and then consult a doctor
g. If concentrated acid is spilled on to cloth, immediately wash it with running water
pH and pH scale
The molar concentrations of H3O+ in aqueous solutions are generally very small and
expressing acidity as the concentration of H3O+ becomes cumbersome. Instead, a
133
Chemistry Grade 10
more convenient quantity called pH is used as a measure of the acid strength of a
solution. pH scale is used to rank solutions in terms of acidity or basicity (alkalinity).
Concentration of hydrogen ion [H⁺] in pure water is the basis for the pH scale. Water
is a weak electrolyte because it ionizes very slightly into ions in a process called
autoionization or self-ionization; H2O 1L H+ + OH-
The ionic product constant of water 'Kw' is given as
Kw = [H⁺][OH⁻] = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴ at 25 °C
It is known that the amount of [H⁺] and [OH⁻] in pure water are equal
[H⁺] = [OH⁻] or
[H⁺]² = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
[H⁺] = 1.0 x10⁻⁷
at 25 °C
As it is difficult to deal with such small figures having negative exponents, it is convenient
to convert these figures into a positive figure using a numerical system. It is taking
the common (base-10) logarithm of the figure and multiplying it with -1. 'p' before
a symbol means' negative logarithm of the symbol. Therefore, pH is the negative
logarithm of molar concentration of the hydrogen ions.
pH = log[H⁺]
With reference to this equation, a scale develops according to the molar concentration
of H⁺ ions that is called pH scale. It ranges from o to 14. According to this scale, pH
of water is calculated as: pH =- - log[H⁺] = -log (1x10⁻⁷) = 7,
similarly pOH = - log[OH⁻] = -log(1x10⁻⁷) = 7
pH value normally varies from O to 14. Therefore:
pH + pOH = 14
UNIVERSAL INDICATOR
COLOUR CHART
O 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
ACIDIC
NEUTRAL
ALKALINE
UNIVERSAL INDICATOR
UNIVERSAL INDICATOR
CHANGING COLOUR TO
CHANGING COLOUR TO
ORANGE (PH=1)
YELLOW GREEN (PH=4)
SOLUTION OF
SOLUTION OF
0. 1mol dm⁻³ CH₂COOH
0.1 mol dm⁻³ HCL
Figure 3.5 Measurement of pH using a universal indicator.
Hence, the sum of the pH and pOH of the solution is always 14 at 25 °C. The pH of
a solution can be measured using a universal indicator solution (see Figure 3.5). When
134
Important Inorganic Compounds
universal indicator solution is added to an acid solution, it develops different colors
depending on the pH of the solution. In order to identify the pH, we need to compare
the color is developed with the standard color chart. A solution of a compound with
pH 7 or pOH 7 is considered as a neutral solution. Solutions of pH less than 7 are
acidic and those more than 7 are basic. pH values of some common items are given
in Figure 3.6 as examples.
Car
Stomach
Drain
Battery
Lemon
Tomato
Milk
Blood
Tablets
Soap
Cleaner
Decreasing
PH
Increasing
o
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Acidic
Neutral
Alkaline
Stomach Acid Vinegar Coffee
Water
Baking
Ammonia
Bleach
Soda
Solution
Figure 3.6 pH values of some common items.
As the pH value decreases the acidity of the solution increases. For example, if two
solutions A and B have pH values of 4 and 6, respectively, then we can conclude that
solution A is more acidic than solution B. The hydrogen ion concentration in solution A
is one hundred times greater than that in B.
Example 3.12: Calculate the pH value of a solution when hydrogen ion
concentration is 1.0 X 10⁻⁵mo L⁻¹
Solution: pH is related to hydrogen ion concentration by an equation
pH = - log[H⁺]
It is given that
[H⁺] = 1.0 X 10⁻⁵ mol L-¹ = 10⁻⁵ mol L⁻¹
pH = - log[H⁺] =. log(10⁻⁵)
= -(-5 log (10) = 5 X 1=5
Example 3.13: Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration of an aqueous solution
when its pH is 9.
Solution: The concentration of hydrogen ion and the pH value of an aqueous
solution are related by pH = - log [H⁺]
-pH = log [H⁺]
[H⁺] = antilog (-pH) = 10⁻⁹ = 1.0 X 10⁻⁹ mol L⁻¹
The Relationship Between pH and Concentration
Since the pH scale is logarithmic, a solution of pH 1 has 10 times higher concentration
of [H⁺] than that of a solution of pH 2; 100 times than that of a solution of pH 3 and
135
Chemistry Grade 10
so on. Hence, low pH value means strong acid while high pH value means a strong
base and vice versa.
Example 3.14: A solution of hydrochloric acid is 0.01M. What is its pH value?
Solution: Hydrochloric acid is a strong acid so it ionizes completely.
That is: HCl(aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl⁻ (aq)
0.01
0.01
0.01
pH = - log[H⁺]
By putting the values of H+ ions in the above equation:
pH = - log[H⁺] = - log(1.0 X 10⁻²) = 2
Example 3.15: The hydrogen ion concentration in a dilute solution of citric acid is
1 X 10⁻⁶ M. What is the pH of the solution?
Solution:
pH = - log[H⁺] = -log 1 X 10⁻⁶ = 6
Example 3.16: Calculate the pH value of 0.05 M H₂SO₄. Assume that H2SO4 is
completely ionized.
Solution: H2SO4 is a strong acid and ionizes as
H2SO4 (aq)
2H⁺(aq) + SO, 4 -(aq)
0.05
2 X 0.05
Molarity of
H+ = [H⁺] = 0.1 mol L⁻¹
pH =-log(H⁺)= -log(0.1) = 1
Exercise 3.8
1. Find the pH of 0.01. M sulphuric acid?
2. HCI and H2SO₄ are strong acids. Why do the equimolar solutions of the two
acids have different pH?
3. Two solutions A and B have pH values of 2 and 6 respectively. How many times
greater is the hydrogen ion concentration in solution A than that of solution B?
136
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.9
pH of Solutions of Common Substances
Objective: To determine the pH of different substances
Chemicals: Lemon juice, vinegar, tonic water, tomato juice
Materials: Beakers, and universal indicator solution or pH indicator paper
Procedure:
Take four beakers and place lemon juice in the first, vinegar solution in the second,
tonic water in the third and filtered tomato juice solution in the fourth. Then add
a few drops of universal indicator solution or dip a piece of pH indicator paper
into each of the solutions. Compare the colour developed with standard colour
chart to decide the pH of each solution.
Questions:
a. What is your conclusion based on your observations?
b. Were the substances used in this experiment acidic or neutral? Why?
c. Record your observations using the following Table:
Table 3.3 Colour and corresponding pH.
Substance
Color developed
pH
Lemon juice
Vinegar solution
Tomato Juice
Tonic water
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Preparation of Acids
Acids can be prepared by:
1. The reaction of oxides of non-metals (acidic oxides) and water:
Acidic oxide + Water
Acid
Example 3.17: N2O5 (s) + H2O (I)
2HNO3 (aq)
P4O10 (s) + 6H2O (I)
4H₃PO₄(aq)
2.
Direct combination of some non-metals like S and CI with hydrogen:
This method is mostly used to prepare binary acids (acids consisting only two elements
Nonmetal + Hydrogen
Binary acid
137
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 3.18: H2 (g) + CI2 (g)
2HCI (g)
H2(g) + S (s) )
H2S (g)
When gaseous hydrogen chloride and hydrogen sulphide dissolve in water, they form
hydrochloric acid, and hydrosulphuric acid respectively.
3. Using a non-volatile acid: Volatile acids can be prepared by heating their
salts with a non-volatile acid .For example, concentrated sulphuric acid (H₂SO₄) is a
nonvolatile acid and it is used for the preparation of volatile acids Hydrochloric acid
(HCI) and nitric acid (HNO₃) according to the following equations:
NaCl (s) + H2SO4 (I)
NaHSO₄ (s) + HCI (I)
Nonvolatile acid
Volatile acid
NaNO₃ (s) + H2SO4 (I)
NaHSO₄ (s) + HNO3(I)
Nonvolatile acid
Volatile acid
Experiment 3.10
Preparation of Chlorous Acid
Objective: To investigate the product formed from Ba(CIO₂)₂ and H2SO4
Chemicals: Ba(CIO₂)₂, concentrated H2SO₄, water, blue, red litmus papers, methyl
red.
Materials: Two 250 mL beakers, glass rod, dropper, test tubes, test tube rack.
Procedure:
1. Dissolve 12 g Ba(CIO₂)₂ to prepare 100 mL solution in one beaker. Dilute 2 mL
concentrated H2SO4 with water to prepare 50 mL of dilute H2SO4 solution in the
second beaker.
2. Add 80 mL of Ba(CIO₂)₂ solution to the dilute solution of H2SO4 in the second
beaker. Is there any formation of the white precipitate? What do you think is
the precipitate formed? Wait for some time till the precipitate settles. Continue
adding Ba(CIO₂)₂ solution using a dropper, one drop at a time until formation of
white precipitate stops. After all the precipitate settles, take 5 mL of the clear
liquid in a test tube and test with litmus or methyl red.
Questions:
a. Is the final solution acidic or basic?
b. Which acid is formed?
c. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report as a group and present to the class
138
Important Inorganic Compounds
Use of Some Important Acid
?
1. List uses of some common acids in your daily life.
2. High consumption of sulphuric acid in a country
indicates the economic growth of the country. What is
the reason? Discuss in groups and present to the class.
Activity 3.13
Table 3.4 Uses of the common acids H2SO4, HCI and HNO3
Acid
Use
Sulphuric acid,
H2SO₄ is the leading industrial chemical. It is used:
H2SO₄
In production of sulphate and phosphate fertilizers, synthetic,
fibers, paints, drugs, detergents, paper and dyes
In petroleum refining
In production of metals
As electrolyte in car batteries
Hydrochloric
It is present naturally in the gastric juice of our body and helps
Acid, HCI
in the digestion of food
Industrially, HCI is used for pickling of iron and steel (to remove
surface impurities) before galvanizing and tin plating
Used to produce aniline dyes, drugs, photographic films, plas-
tics like polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
Used to recover magnesium from sea water
Nitric Acid,
Used industrially in the manufacture of
HNO3
*
Explosives such as trinitrotoluene (TNT) and trinitroglycerine
Fertilizers such as KNO, 3 and NH₄NO₃
Rubber, chemicals, plastics, dyes and drugs.
Reading Assignment
Read from reliable sources the uses of common acids H3PO4, H2CO3, CH3COOH and
discuss in class with your group
Exercise 3.9
1. Which one of the following substances are Arrhenius acids:
a. HBrO₄
e. HBr
b. BCI₃
f. PCI₅
C. H2S
d. HF
139
Chemistry Grade 10
2. Classify the following acids as monoprotic, diprotic or triprotic, binary or
ternary, strong or weak acids. (give three answers for each type):
a. HCIO₄
d. H2SO3
g. HCI
i. HCN
b. H2SO4
e. HF
h. H3PO4
k. HNO3
C. H2CO3
f. H2S
i.HNO₂
I. CH3COOH
3. A reagent bottle (labelled as A) is filled with HCI solution and the other
(labelledas B) is filled with water. Both liquids in the bottles are colourless. What
method do you recommend to identify the acid and water?
4. What is the basis for the classification of acids as strong and weak?
5. What is the pH of a solution having the following hydrogen ion concentrations?
a. 5 X 10⁻³ M
C. 2.0 X 10⁻⁶ M
b. 0.003 M
6. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentrations in solutions having the following pH
values:
a. 4
b. 2
C. 5
7. How many moles of H2SO4 are present in 0.500 L of a 0.150 M H2SO4 solution?
8. Identify the following solutions as acidic or basic, estimate [H₃O⁺] values for
each, and rank them in order of increasing acidity:
a. Saliva, pH =6.5
b. Orange juice, pH = 3.7
C. Pancreatic juice, pH = 7.9
d. Wine, pH = 3.5
3.4
Bases
Discuss the following questions in your group and
present your conclusions to the class.
1. What is the main ingredient in stomach antacid ?
2. Make a list of some bitter-tasting foods and
beverages.
?
3. Have you ever wondered about the origin of the
saying "it is a bitter pill (kosso) to swallow"? Discuss
and give a meaning to the saying.
4. Have you ever had soap in your mouth? How does
it taste?
Activity 3.14
After completing this section, you should be able to
define bases in terms of the concepts of Arrhenius;
give examples of bases based on Arrhenius;
discuss the general properties of bases;
140
Important Inorganic Compounds
define strong and weak bases;
distinguish between strong and weak alkalis (soluble bases);
define concentrated and dilute alkalis;
distinguish between concentrated and dilute alkalis (soluble bases);
use the necessary precautions while working with bases;
define pOH;
show the mathematical relationship between pH and pOH;
calculate the pOH of a given basic solution;
calculate the concentration of hydroxide ion from the given information;
carry out activities to investigate some chemical properties of bases;
discuss the reaction of active metals with water, the reaction of basic oxides with
water and double displacement reactions as the three methods of preparation
of bases;
carry out simple experiments to prepare bases in laboratory;
explain the uses of the two common laboratory bases.
Bases are either oxides or hydroxides of metals, which are therefore called basic
oxides and hydroxides respectively. They are of great importance in chemical
industries and in our daily lives, directly or indirectly. For example, sodium hydroxide,
NaOH is used in the production of soap, paper, textile etc.
Potassium hydroxide, KOH is used to produce soft soap, fertilizers etc. Calcium
hydroxide, Ca(OH)₂, is used to manufacture mortar and bleaching powder, to remove
soil acidity etc.
Arrhenius Definition of Bases
According to the Arrhenius theory, a base is a substance that produces a hydroxide ion
(OH⁻) when it is dissolved in water. Soluble bases are called alkalis.
For example, sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide are bases because they
produce OH- ion when dissolved in water.
NaOH (aq)
Na (aq)+ + OH⁻(aq)
KOH (aq)
K⁺ (aq) + OH- (aq)
Note that the ions produced by the base can come from either of two sources. Metal
hydroxides, such as NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH)₂, are ionic compounds that already
contain ions and merely release those ions when they dissolve in water. Ammonia,
however, is not ionic and contains no ions in its structure. Nonetheless, ammonia is a
base because it undergoes a reaction with water when it dissolves, producing NH₄⁺
and OH- ions:
NH3 (aq) + H2O (I)
1L
NH₄OH(aq)
NH₄⁺ (aq) + OH⁻(aq)
The reaction of ammonia with water is a reversible process whose equilibrium strongly
favors unreacted ammonia.
141
Chemistry Grade 10
General Properties of Bases
1. What is the taste of carbonated beverage, coffee
and tonic water? How can it be differ from the taste
of lemon juice or vinegar?
2. Explain the reason why a dilute solution of sodium
?
bicarbonate can be used to treat bee stings,
whereas a dilute solution of acetic acid can be
used to treat wasp stings.
Discuss with your group and present your conclusion to
Activity 3.15
the class.
1. Alkalis have a soapy feeling and a bitter taste: Bases have a bitter taste; feel
slippery like soap to the skin in dilute aqueous solutions. Strong bases such as
NaOH and KOH are very corrosive and poisonous. So they should be neither
brought into contact with the skin nor tasted.
2. Alkalis change the color of indicators: Aqueous solutions of bases turn the color
of red litmus to blue, phenolphthalein to pink (red), methyl red to yellow and
universal indicator blue (purple). This property is because of the OH- ion given by
the base.
3. Alkalis release hydroxide ion in aqueous solution: The characteristic properties
of bases in aqueous solutions are due to the presence of the hydroxide ion, OH-
which they release on dissolution.
Example 3.19: NaOH (aq)
Na (aq)⁺ + OH- (aq)
KOH (aq)
K+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
4. Bases neutralize acids or acidic oxides to form salt and water:
Example 3.20: Base + Acid (or Acidic Oxide)
Salt + Water
NaOH (aq) + HCI (aq)
NaCl (aq) + H2O (I)
2NaOH (aq) + CO2 (aq)
Na2CO3 (aq) + H₂O(I)
5. Aqueous solutions of bases conduct electricity: Soluble bases are electrolytes.
Solutions of strong bases are good conductors while solutions of weak bases are poor
conductors
142
Important Inorganic Compounds
Discuss with your group and present your conclusion
to the class.
1. What is the difference between concentrated base
and strong base, dilute base and weak base? Can
?
a strong base be a dilute base and a weak base
concentrated base? Discuss in class.
2. Why solutions of weak bases give dim light and
solutions of strong bases give bright light? Discuss
Activity 3.16
in class.
Strength of Bases (Strong and Weak Bases)
A strong base is almost completely ionized in aqueous solution to give its constituent
cations and anions. That is the extent of ionization of a strong base is very high. Thus,
the amount of hydroxide ions ( OH⁻) in the solution of a strong base is large.
KOH (aq)
K+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
Hydroxides of alkali (Group IA) metals and lower members of alkaline earth metals
such as LiOH, NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH)₂ are examples of strong bases. Strong bases
are strong electrolytes as they produce large amount of ions and conduct high current.
A weak base is only partially ionized into its cations and anions in aqueous solution.
That is, the extent of ionization of a weak base is small. Thus, the amount of hydroxide
ions (OH⁻) in the solution of a strong base is small.
NH 4 OH (aq)
1L
NH₄⁺ (aq) + OH- (aq)
The double arrow shows that the dissociation of a weak base does not proceed to
completion. This means an aqueous solution of a weak base contains only a small
amount of ions derived from the dissociation of the base and a large amount of the
non-ionized base. For example, a solution of ammonia containing 0.1 mole NH3 per
litre of solution ionizes only to the extent of 1.3%. Weak bases are weak electrolytes
as they allow low current. Examples of weak bases include Mg(OH)₂ and Ca(OH)₂.
Concentrated and Dilute Bases
The concentration of an alkali is a measure of the number of moles of the alkali
dissolved in 1 litre of solution and is therefore expressed in mol per liter. Concentrated
bases contain relatively large amounts of a base in a given volume of solution
while dilute base solutions contain only a small amount of base. The concentration is
expressed in terms of mole per litre (Molarity).
The greater the number of moles of the base per liter of the solution, the more
concentrated is the solution. For example, a solution containing ten moles of NaOH
per litre is more concentrated than the solution containing two moles of NaOH per
143
Chemistry Grade 10
liter. The latter solution is more dilute than the former. Thus, both a strong base and a
weak base may be concentrated or dilute depending on the number of moles of the
base present per liter.
Precautions in Handling Bases
Strong bases like NaOH and KOH are known as caustic alkalis. The word "caustic"
refers to a substance that can cause burning. Thus, it is very important to avoid contact
of these bases with any part of our body or clothing. Not only strong bases but also
weak bases are corrosive. For example, concentrated ammonia solution can cause
blindness if splashed into the eye.
The following safety precautions are useful in handling bases in school laboratories or
anywhere while working with them
a. Wear eye goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat.
b. If bases are spilled on your working tables wipe the spillages immediately.
C. Whenever bases are splashed on your cloth, wash the affected part with running
water.
d. If a base enters your eyes, wash with water repeatedly as first aid treatment and
seek medical advice.
e. If a base is swallowed by accident, drink 1-2% acetic acid or lemon juice
immediately.
f. Whenever bases come into contact with your skin, wash the affected part with
plenty of water and then wash the affected part with a very dilute solution (about
1%) of a weak acid such as acetic acid.
pOH (note that 'p' is small, O and H are capitals!)
1. Since water, H2O, has H+ and OH-, it is both acidic
?
and basic. Do you agree?
2. Why pure water doesn't change the color of either
red litmus or blue litmus?
3. If [OH⁻] increases in a solution what happens to its
[H⁺]? Share your comments with your group.
Activity 3.17
pOH is a measure of the concentration of hydroxide ions in an acidic or a basic
solution. It is defined as the negative logarithm of hydroxide, OH- ion concentration.
pOH = - [OH⁻]
Relationship Between pH and pOH
The pH and pOH are related mathematically as pH + pOH = 14
This equation can be derived using the ionic product of water, Kw, as follows:
The ionic product of water, Kw is the product of the concentration of [H⁺] or [H₃O⁺]
and [OH⁻].
144
Important Inorganic Compounds
Electrical conductivity measurements of pure water such as distilled water show that
concentrations of H3O and OH are 1.0 X 10⁻⁷ M at 25°. Therefore, the ionic product
of pure water is Kw = [H⁺] or [H₃O⁺] X [OH⁻]
= (1.0 X 10⁻⁷) X (1.0 X 10⁻⁷) = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
[H⁺][OH⁻] = 1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
Taking the logarithm of both sides of the equation g10{[H⁺][OH⁻]} = log1.0 X 10⁻¹⁴
We get {-log₁₀ [H⁺]} + {- log₁₀ [OH⁻]} = 14
Hence, pH + pOH = 14
Example 3.21: Find out the pH and pOH of a 0.0001M solution of NaOH?
Solution: Potassium hydroxide solution is a strong base. It ionizes completely such
that one mole of NaOH gives one mole of OH ions.
NaOH(aq)
Na⁺(aq) + OH-
0.0001M
0.0001M 0.0001M
Therefore, 0.0001M solution of NaOH produces 0.0001M OH ions
[OH⁻] = 0.0001M= 1 X 10⁻⁴
pOH = -log[OH⁻] = - log1 X 10⁻⁴ = 4
pH = 14 - 4= 10
Exercise 3.10
1. Which solution has a higher [H₃O⁺] concentration, one with pH =5, or with pH
=9? Which solution has the higher OH concentration?
2. Give the pH and pOH for each solution with the following concentrations:
a.
[H₃O⁺] = 1.0 X 10⁻⁵
b.
[OH] = 1.0 X 10⁻⁹ M
3. Give the hydroxide ion concentrations of solutions with the following values of
pH. Which of the solutions is most acidic? Which is most basic?
a. pH 13.0
b. pH 3.0
C. pH 8.0
Preparation of Bases
Bases containing hydroxide ion (hydroxide bases) can be prepared by the following
methods:
I. By the reaction of highly reactive metals from Group IA and Group IIA (below
magnesium) with water. This reaction produces the metal hydroxide with the liberation
of hydrogen gas
2Li (s) + 2H2O (I)
2LiOH (aq) + H2 (g)
145
Chemistry Grade 10
2Na (s) + 2H2O( (I)
2NaOH (aq) + H2 (g)
Ca (s) + 2H2O (I)
Ca(OH)₂ (aq) + H2 (g)
II. By the reaction of Group IA or Group IIA metal oxides with water, which gives the
metal hydroxides?
Metal oxide + Water
Metal hydroxide
Na₂O (s) + 2H2O (I)
2NaOH (aq)
BaO (s) + 2H2O (I)
Ba(OH)₂ (aq)
III. By double displacement reaction
The reaction of an aqueous solution of a soluble base and a soluble salt, gives another
soluble base and an insoluble salt as products
Ba(OH)₂ (aq) + K2SO₄ (aq)
2KOH (aq) + BaSO₄ (s)
Ca(OH)₂ (aq) + Na2CO3 (aq)
2NaOH (aq) + CaCO3 (s)
Common uses of NaOH and Ca(OH)₂
Sodium hydroxide, NaOH (lye or caustic soda) is used in the manufacture of soaps
and detergents, degreasers and as the main ingredient in oven and drain cleaners.
Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)₂ (slaked lime) is used in the manufacture of cement and
lime water. It is usually added to neutralize acidic soil. Ca(OH)₂ is used also for lime
water test for carbon dioxide.
Experiment 3.11
Chemical Behavior of Bases
Objectives: To investigate the thermal stability and reaction of bases with acids.
Chemicals: NaOH or KOH, Ca(OH)₂, HNO3, water, blue and red litmus papers,
cobalt chloride
Apparatus: Test-tube, test-tube rack, test-tube holder, Bunsen burner, three bea-
kers, dropper, measuring cylinder, glass rod and watch glass.
Procedure:
1. Place 4.5 g NaOH or KOH in one test-tube and the same amount of Ca(OH)₂
in another test-tube. Heat the test-tube containing NaOH or KOH gently using
a Bunsen burner, by holding the test tube with a test tube holder. Hold the
cobalt chloride paper partly inserted in the test tube. See whether the cobalt
chloride paper shows a colour change or not. Repeat the same experiment
with the second test tube that contains Ca(OH)₂.
146
Important Inorganic Compounds
2. Dissolve 3.6 g KOH in distilled water to prepare 100 mL solution in one
beaker. Dilute 2 mL concentrated HNO3 to make a 50 mL solution in another
beaker. Add 10 mL KOH solution and 9.5 mL HNO3 to the third beaker, stir
thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus papers. Continue adding HNO3
using a dropper, one drop at a time stirring after each addition and checking
with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red remains red.
3. Put 5 mL of the neutral solution on a watch glass and allow the water to
evaporate until the next day.
Questions:
1. What type of reaction occurred between the KOH and HNO3? Write the
balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
2. What was left on the watch glass?
3. Which hydroxide was melted on heating? Which base was decomposed on
heating to give metal oxide and water? How do you know this? Write the
balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Write a laboratory report and
present it to the class.
Experiment 3.12
Preparation of Bases
Objective: To prepare bases from metal oxides and using double displacement
reaction
Chemicals: Water, MgO, K2SO₄, Ba(OH)₂ solution
Apparatus: Spatula, balance, three beakers, measuring cylinder, dropper, glass
rod.
Procedure:
1. Add a half a spatula measure of MgO to a test tube containing clean water.
Shake well and then test whether the solution is acidic or basic using red litmus
paper. Does the colour of the red litmus paper change?
2. Add 7 g K2SO₄ to the first and 7 g Ba(OH)₂ to the second beaker. Add water
to each beaker and stir with a glass rod to prepare a 100 mL solution of each
sample. After dissolution is complete, take 20 mL Ba(OH)₂ solution and pour it
into the third beaker. Measure 20 mL K2SO₄ solution, mix it with the solution in
the third beaker and shake well. Observe what is happening. Continue add-
ing K2SO₄ solution drop by drop using a dropper while shaking the solution
after the addition of each drop.
147
Chemistry Grade 10
When the formation of a white precipitate does not occur anymore stop adding
K2SO₄ solution and test whether the solution in the third beaker is acidic or basic
using litmus paper.
Questions:
1. Did the colour of red litmus paper change when dipped into the solutions
obtained in procedure 1. Is the solutions acidic or basic?
2. Why do you think is the white precipitate formed in procedure 2?
3. What is the nature of the final solution in the third beaker?
4. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions 1 and 2.
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
3.5 Salts
Discuss the following in class and present your conclusion
to the class.
1. List as many salts as you can that are used in home,
medicine or agriculture.
2. What is the natural source of salts? How can you
?
define salts?
3. Make a list of coloured salts available in your school
laboratory.
4. What is the most common salt in seawater such as in
Red Sea?
Activity 3.18
By the end of this section, students will be able to
define salts;
give examples of salts;
classify salts as acidic and normal salts;
discuss the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acids with bases,
neutralization and the reaction between acids and metals as the methods of salt
preparation;
carry out simple experiment to prepare a salt by neutralization;
list some important salts;
explain the uses of some important salts;
discuss the properties of salts;
explain the chemical tests of some salts by conducting activities.
Salts are ionic compounds generally formed by the neutralization of an acid with a
base. A salt gets its name from the names of the metal ion (derived from the base)
148
Important Inorganic Compounds
and the acid radical derived from the acid. For example, NaCl is formed from Na⁺
derived from NaOH and CIT is derived from HCI. Hence, NaCl (sodium cloride) is a
salt of NaOH and HCI. Similarly, KNO₃ (potasium nitrate) is a salt of KOH and HNO3.
Salt formation
Na⁺OH⁻
+
H+CI-
Na+Cl⁻ + H2O
Base
Acid
Salt
Water
Salt formation
K+OH-
+
H+NO3⁻
KNO3 + H2O
Base
Acid
Salt
Water
During neutralization reaction, the cation of the base combines with the anion of the
acid and a salt is formed (while H+ and OH combine to form H₂O) as shown above.
Salts are also defined as ionic compounds formed when the ionizable hydrogen of
acids are partly or completely replaced by metal ions or ammonium ion.
Classification of Salts
Discuss in your group and present the conclusion to the
class.
Recall the concept of the neutralization reaction
between an acid and a base to give a salt and water.
?
a. What would be the nature of the salt, if all the acid
hydrogen ions are not replaced by metal ions or
ammonium ions?
b. What would be the nature of the salt, if all the
base hydroxide ions are not replaced by the anions
Activity 3.19
of the acid?
Salts can be classified into three main groups as shown below in Figure 3.7:
Normal Salts
Salts
Acidic Salts
Basic Salts
Figure 3.7 Classification of Salts
I.
Normal Salts
A salt formed by the complete replacement of ionizable H+ ions of an acid by a
positive metal ion or NH₄⁺ + ions is called normal or neutral salt. These salts are neutral
to litmus.
149
Chemistry Grade 10
HCI (aq) + KOH (aq)
KCI (aq) + H2O (I)
H2SO4 (aq) + ZnO (aq)
ZnSO (aq) + H2O (I)
HNO₃(aq) + NH₄OH (aq)
NH₄NO₃( aq) + H2O (I)
II. Acidic salts
These salts are formed by the partial replacement of replaceable H⁺ ions of an acid
by a positive metal ion.
H2SO4 (aq) + КОН(аq)
KHSO₄(aq) + H₂O(I)
H3PO₄(aq) + NaOH(aq)
NaH₂PO₄(aq) + H₂O(I)
These salts KHSO₄ and NaH₂PO₄ turn blue litmus red. For example, when KHSO₄
dissolves in aqueous solution, it releases the ions K⁺, H⁺, SO ⁴². It releases hydrogen
ions hence it is acidic.
Acidic salts react with bases to form normal salts, K2SO₄ and Na₃PO₄
KHSO (aq) + KOH (aq)
K2SO₄ (aq)+ H2O (I)
NaH₂PO₄(aq) + 2NaOH (aq)
Na₃PO₄(aq) + H2O (I)
III. Basic Salts
These are salts in which not all of the hydroxide ions in a base have been replaced
by the anions of the acid. Basic salts are formed by the incomplete neutralization of
a polyhydroxy base by an acid.
AI(OH)₃ (aq) + HCI (aq)
AI(OH)₂CI (aq) + H₂O(I)
Zn(OH)₂ (aq) + HNO3 (aq)
Zn(OH)NO₃(aq) + H₂O(I)
The above basic salts further react with acids to form normal salts.
AI(OH)CI (aq) + HCI (aq)
AICI₃ (aq) + H₂O(I)
Zn(OH) (aq) + 2HNO3 (aq)
Zn(NO₃)₂ (aq) + 2H₂O(I)
General Methods for the Preparation of Salts
?
How salts could be prepared? List a few methods to
prepare sodium chloride in the laboratory? Discuss in
your group and present it to the class.
Activity 3.20
Usually soluble salts are prepared by methods that involve crystallization, while
insoluble salts are prepared by methods that involve precipitation.
1. Preparation of Soluble Salts
A. The reaction of an acid and a metal (Direct Displacement method)
This is direct displacement method in which hydrogen ion of acid is replaced by a
reactive metal. Such as calcium, magnesium, zinc and iron, e.g.
150
Important Inorganic Compounds
Active metal + Acid
Salt + Hydrogen
Mg(s) + 2HCI (aq)
MgCl₂(aq) + H₂(g)
Zn (s) + H2SO4 (aq)
ZnSO₄ (aq) + H2 (g)
Note that the reactions of Group IA metals like sodium and potassium are very
vigorous and it is not advisable to use the metals of Group IA for the preparation of
salts by this method.
B. The reaction of an acid and a base (Neutralization method)
It is a neutralization reaction in which acid and base react to produce a salt and water
Acid + Base
Salt + Water
HCI (aq) + NaOH(aq)
NaCl(aq) + H₂O(g)
Exercise 3.11
Identify the base and the acid used for the formation of each of the following
salts
a. Zinc sulphate (ZnSO₄)
C. Silver acetate (CH₃COOAg)
b. Calcium phosphate Ca₃(PO₄)₂
d. Sodium carbonate (Na2CO₃)
C. By the reaction of an acid and metallic oxide
Mostly the insoluble metallic oxides react with dilute acids to form salt and water
Metallic oxide + Dilute Acid
Salt + Water
CuO(s) + H2SO4 (aq)
CuSO₄(aq) + H₂O(aq)
ZnO (s) + 2HNO3 (aq)
Zn(NO₃)₂ (aq) + H2O (I)
D. The reaction of an acid and a carbonate or bicarbonate:
Dilute acids react with metallic carbonates to produce salts, water and carbon dioxide
gas.
Metal carbonates or Bicarbonates + Dilute acid
Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
Na2CO3 (aq) + 2HNO3 (aq)
NaNO₃(aq) + H₂O(I) + CO₂(g)
Ca(HCO₃)₂ (s) + 2HCI (aq)
CaCl₂ (aq) + 2H2O (I) + 2CO2 (g)
2.
Preparation of Insoluble Salts by Double Decomposition (Precipitation)
In this method, usually solutions of soluble salts are mixed. During the reaction,
exchange of ionic radicals (i.e., metallic radicals exchange with acidic radicals) takes
place to produce two new salts. One of the salts is insoluble and the other is soluble.
The insoluble salt precipitates (solidify in solution).
AgNO₃(aq)
+
NaCl(aq)
AgCI(s) + NaNO₃(aq)
Na2CO₃(aq) + CuSO₄(aq)
CuCO₃ (s) + Na2SO₄ (aq)
151
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 3.13
Preparation of Sodium Chloride
Objective: to prepare sodium chloride from sodium bicarbonate
Chemicals: Sodium bicarbonate, concentrated hydrochloric acid.
Apparatus: Evaporating dish, graduated cylinder, Burner.
Procedure
1. Add to the dish about 5 g of NaHCO₃ and weigh again. Record the mass in
blank (a) in the table below.
2. Add 5 to 6 mL of distilled water to the dish to wet the bicarbonate. Cover the
dish with a watch glass.
3. Move the watch glass aside slightly and add, in small portions, about 6 mL of
concentrated hydrochloric acid from a 10 mL graduated cylinder. These small
portions of acid should be added so that the acid runs down the inside wall of
the evaporating dish. After the addition of 6 mL of acid, continue adding acid
only as long as CO2 (gas) continues to be evolved. Remove the watch glass
and evaporate to dryness over a water bath (the evaporating dish is placed
on top of a beaker containing boiling water).
4. Next, heat the dish on wire gauze with the burner for about 3 minutes. Allow
the dish to cool and weigh accurately. Again, heat the dish, cool, and weigh.
Continue heating and weighing until the dish reaches constant mass. Record
this constant mass in blank (d) in the table below.
Questions:
1. What is the product formed? Write the balanced chemical equation for the
reaction.
2. What is the change as the reaction occurs? What does this show?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Some of the most important bases are listed corresponding to their uses in the
following table.
152
Important Inorganic Compounds
Table 3.5 Some important salts and their uses.
Salts
Uses
Sodium chloride (common
1. Preparation and preservation of food
salt, NaCI)
2. Raw material for the manufacture of sodium,
chlorine, and sodium hydroxide
3. Component of Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS)
4. Manufacture of baking soda (NaHCO₃) and
Na2CO₃
5. In making a freezing mixture which is used by ice
cream vendors
Ammonium nitrate,
Nitrogenous fertilizer and in explosives
(NH₄NO₃
Copper (II) sulphate,
1. Used to make Bordeaux mixture (mixture of CuSO₄
(CuSO₄)
and Ca(OH)₂ and other fungicides. Bordeaux
mixture is used to prevent fungal attack of leaves
and vines
2. Useful in electroplating and dyeing
Iron (III) chloride, (FeCl₃)
1. Used in the treatment of waste water
2. Used for etching printed circuits
Potassium nitrate, (KNO₃)
1. Used in making gun powder ((mixture of KNO₃,
carbon and sulphur) and other explosives
2. Used as fertilizer in agriculture
Calcium sulphate,
Used for plastering walls and supporting fractured
(CaSO₄.2H₂O, Gypsum)
bones.
Barium sulphate, (BaSO₄)
1. Given to patients as a "barium meal" before
gastrointestinal x-ray photography
2. Used as a white pigment
Iron (II) sulphate (FeSO₄)
Given as iron tablets to patients who suffer from
anemia
Properties of Salts
Salts can be classified depending on the anion (negative ion) they possess, because
the anion is partly responsible for the solubility of the salt.
1. Solubility of salts
When salts are added to water or water is added to salt, different types of actions
take place. Some salts are soluble in water; some are insoluble while some salts are
only slightly soluble.
2. Tendency to absorb water from the atmosphere or release water to the atmosphere.
Salts can be classified as hygroscopic, deliquescent and efflorescent depending
on their tendency to absorb water from or release water to the atmosphere.
153
Chemistry Grade 10
Hygroscopic salts are those which absorb water from the atmosphere but remain
solid.
Example: Anhydrous copper (II) sulphate, CuSO₄
Deliquescent salts absorb water from the atmosphere to form a solution. The process
of absorbing water from the atmosphere by a solid to form a solution is called
deliquescence.
Example: Calcium chloride(CaCl₂), Sodium nitrate (NaNO₃), Iron(III) chloride (FeCl₃)
Efflorescent salts lose their water of crystallization to the atmosphere. The loss of
water of crystallization by solid crystals to the atmosphere is known as efflorescence.
It is very important to note that all deliquescent substances are hygroscopic, but all
hygroscopic substances are not necessarily deliquescent.
Example 3.22: Hydrated sodium carbonate (Na₂CO₃₁⁰H₂O), Hydrated sodium
sulphate (Na₂SO₄ 10H2O)
3. Aqueous solutions of soluble salts are good conductors of electricity, because
they release mobile positive and negative ions in solution.
NaNO₃ (aq)
Na+ (aq) + NO3- (aq)
CaCl₂ (aq)
Ca2 (aq) + (aq)
4. Thermal stability of salts: Thermal stability of a salt is the property of a salt to
resist irreversible change in its chemical or physical structure, often by resisting
decomposition at a high relative temperature. When different salts containing
the same anion are heated, they may not show similar behavior. Some salts are
thermally stable while others undergo decomposition. The following examples
illustrate this fact.
A. Thermal decomposition of carbonates
All the carbonates of Group IIA undergo thermal decomposition to the metal oxide
and carbon dioxide gas. The term "thermal decomposition" describes splitting up a
compound by heating it. Carbonates are salts containing a carbonate, CO₃², as an
anion.
If "M" represents any one of the elements, the following describes this decomposition:
MCO₃(s)
MO(s) + CO₂
The carbonates of Group IIA are: MgCO₃, CaCO₃, SrCO₃, BaCO₃
The carbonates become more thermally stable down the group. In Group IA, lithium
carbonate behaves in the same way, producing lithium oxide and carbon dioxide:
Li2CO₃(s)
Li₂O(s)+CO₂
The rest of the Group IA carbonates do not decompose at laboratory temperatures,
154
Important Inorganic Compounds
although at higher temperatures this becomes possible. The decomposition temperatures
again increase down the group.
Most transition metals decompose on heating to give the metal oxides and carbon
dioxide:
Example 3.23:
CuCO3 (s)
CuO (s) + CO2 (g)
B. Thermal decomposition of nitrates
Nitrates are salts containing a nitrate, NO₃⁻, as an anion. The Group IIA and most
transition metal nitrates undergo thermal decomposition to the metal oxide, nitrogen
dioxide and oxygen gas.
Nitrate
Metal oxide + Nitrogen dioxide + Oxygen
Example 3.24: 2Mg(NO₃)₂ (s)
2MgO (s) + 4NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
2Pb(NO₃)₂ (s)
2PbO (s) + 4NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
Nitrates of sodium and potassium decompose on heating to give nitrites (instead of
the oxides) and oxygen gas;
2NaNO3 (s)
2NaNO₂ (s) + O2 2 (g)
2KNO3 (s)
2KNO₂ (s) + (g)
The carbonate and nitrate of lithium differ from those of sodium and potassium; they
decompose on heating in the following manner:
4LiNO3 (s)
2Li2O (s) + 4NO2 (s) + O2 (g)
Li2CO3 (s)
Li2O (s) + CO2 (g)
Note that both the nitrates and carbonates of lithium are thermally unstable similar to
Group IIA. This reveals that lithium behaves more like Group IIA rather than Group IA.
Chemical Tests of Some lons in Salt
?
1. Do you know why fireworks give different colors?
Consult books in your library, and discuss in your
group. Explain to the class.
2. How do chemists know of the presence of certain
ions in a compound?
Activity 3.21
155
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 3.14
Test for Cations-I
Objective: To identify the presence of Li⁺, Na⁺, K+, Ca²⁺, Sr²⁺ and Ba²⁺ in salts
by flame tests.
Chemicals: Distilled water, salts containing Li+, Na⁺, K+, Ca²⁺, Sr²⁺ and Ba²⁺.
Apparatus: Platinum or nichrome wire, watch glass, Bunsen burner.
Procedure:
1. Place a small amount of the salt containing a Li+ ion on a watch glass, moisten
it with pure concentrated HCI, dip the tip of the platinum or Nichrome wire
into the moist salt and then bring to the Bunsen flame.
2. Observe the colour produced.
3. Repeat the same step for salts containing Na+, K+, Ca²⁺, Sr²⁺ and Ba²⁺ and
record your observations. Rinse the platinum or nichrome wire with distilled
water after each test.
Question:
a. Write the colour of the flame produced in the following table.
Table 3.6 Metal ion and corresponding flame colour
Metal ion in the salt
Colour of flame produced
Lithium (Li+)
Sodium (Na⁺)
Potassium (K+)
Calcium (Ca²⁺)
Strontium (Sr²⁺)
Barium (Ba²⁺)
b. Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Flame tests are used to identify the presence of a relatively small number of metal
ions in a compound. Certain metals give a characteristic color to a Bunsen flame when
their solid salts or moist salts are heated directly in the flame. A flame test is commonly
used to identify the presence of lithium, sodium, potassium, calcium, strontium and
barium ions in salts.
156
Important Inorganic Compounds
Experiment 3.15
Test for Cations - II
Objectives: To identify the presence of Cu²⁺, Fe2⁺ and Fe³⁺ in salts.
Chemicals: Ammonia solution, sodium hydroxide solution, salts containing each of
Cu²⁺, Fe2⁺ and Fe³⁺ ions
Apparatus: Beakers, test tubes, test tube rack, glass rod.
Procedure:
1. Dissolve a salt containing Cu²⁺ in the first beaker, Fe2⁺ in the second and Fe³⁺ in
the third. Take three test tubes and add a 2 mL solution of (each ion) Cu²⁺ salt
to the first, Fe2⁺ salt solution to the second and Fe³⁺ salt solution to the third.
2. Add aqueous ammonia in small quantities until it is in excess, to the first test
tube containing a copper (II) salt solution and record your observations.
3. Add sodium hydroxide solution in small quantities, until it is present in excess, to
the second and third test tubes, and record your observations.
Questions:
1. What does the formation of a blue precipitate in the first indicate? Write the
chemical equation for the blue precipitate formation.
2. Observe the colours of the precipitates formed and complete the following
Table 3.7 Colour observed and its indication.
Colour observed
Confirms the presence of
Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions. Write a laboratory report
in group and present to the class.
Experiment 3.16
Test for Sulphates
Objective: To identify for the presence of sulphate using barium salts.
Chemicals: Any soluble sulphate salt (such as sodium sulphate), barium chloride
or barium nitrate solution, and dilute HCI.
Apparatus: Beakers, test tubes, and test tube rack,
Procedure: Add some sodium sulphate solution to a test tube and acidify the solu-
tion by adding a few drops of dilute HCI. Then add BaCl₂ or Ba(NO₃)₂ solution
and note if a white precipitate is formed.
Questions:
1. Name the white precipitate formed?
2. Why is it necessary to add a few drops of dilute HCI?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class
157
Chemistry Grade 10
Experiment 3.17
Test for Carbonates and Hydrogen Carbonates
Objective: To distinguish between carbonates and hydrogen carbonates
Chemicals: Na2CO₃, NaHCO₃, dilute HCI, lime water
Apparatus: Conical flasks, Beaker
Procedure:
1. Take 20 mL solution of Na2CO3 and add it to one conical flask and 20 mL
NaHCO3 solution to another. Add the same amount of dilute HCI to each of the
conical flasks; Fit a rubber stopper to which a delivery tube is inserted to each
conical flask. Allow the gas produced to pass through lime water and observe the
changes.
2. Again take Na2CO3 solution in one conical flask and NaHCO3 solution in the
other. Add the same amount of CaCl₂ solution to each of the conical flasks.
Questions:
1 What happened to the lime water in each case?
2. Which solution formed a white precipitate upon the addition of CaCl₂ solution?
3. Write balanced chemical equations for all the reactions.
Write a laboratory report and present it to the class.
Experiment 3.18
Test for Nitrates (Brown Ring Test)
Objectives: To identify the presence of nitrate in a solution.
Chemicals: Nitrate solution, iron (II) sulphate solution, concentrated H2SO4
Apparatus: Test tube, test tube rack, beaker,
Procedure:
Take 2 mL of nitrate solution in a test tube and add an equal volume of freshly
prepared iron (II) sulphate solution. Hold the test tube in an inclined position and
carefully pour concentrated sulphuric acid down along the inclined side of the
test tube. The acid sinks to the bottom. Carefully observe the changes in test tube.
Questions:
1. Where is the brown ring formed?
2. Write the chemical equation for the formation of the brown ring.
3. What does the formation of brown ring in the solution indicate? Write a
laboratory report
158
Important Inorganic Compounds
Exercise 3.12
1. You are provided separate solutions of NaCl, HCI, NaOH and Phenolphtha-
lein (Marked 1). All the solutions are colorless. How would you recognize the
solutions of acid, base and salt?
2. Suggest at least three methods for the preparation of salts.
3. Classify the following salts as soluble or insoluble in water:
a. NH₄CI
e. AgNO₃
i. CaSO₄
b. K₃PO₄
f. CaCl₂
i. BaCO₃
C. FeCO3
g. PbSO₄
d. AgCl
h. Na₂S
4. Why do aqueous solutions of soluble salts conduct electricity?
5. Which carbonates do not decompose on heating?
6. Nitrates mostly decompose by heat to give metal oxide, nitrogen dioxide and
oxygen. Which nitrates do not give these products on heating?
7. What reagents do you use to identify the presence of the following ions in
salts?
a. Halide ions
C. Sulphate, SO 4²⁻ ions?
b. Fe²⁺ and Fe³⁺ ion
Plant Nutrients
By the end of this topic, students will be able to
explain the applications of some salts as fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides;
give examples of salts used for fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides.
Form groups, discuss the following questions in class
and present it to the class.
1. Plants need nitrogen for their growth, and there is
plenty of nitrogen in the air. If this is so, why do we
apply nitrogenous fertilizers to the soil to support
?
plants growth?
2. Some people prefer to eat organic food that has
been grown without fertilizers and pesticides.
Does eating organic food overcome the problems
Activity 3.22
caused by artificial fertilizers?
Essential plant nutrients could be either macronutrients or micronutrients, depending on
the amount required by plants.
159
Chemistry Grade 10
Table 3.8 Essential plant nutrients
Macronutrients
Micronutrients
These are the elements required
These are the elements required by plants in
in relatively large amounts by
relatively small (trace) amounts.
plants.
These elements are iron, cobalt, zinc, manganese,
These elements are nitrogen,
molybdenum, copper, boron and chlorine. The
phosphorus, potassium, calcium,
elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are
magnesium, sulphur, carbon,
obtained by plants from air and water. These are
hydrogen and oxygen.
not considered as mineral nutrients.
Nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium are said to be primary mineral nutrients. What
are the roles of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium in plant growth?
Nitrogen (N)
is a very important plant nutrient and absorbed by plants in the form of nitrate
ions (NO₃⁻).
is utilized in the synthesis of amino acids, proteins, coenzymes and nucleic acids
which are taking place in the growth and development of plants
is also involved in the synthesis of chlorophyll to produce a deep green color.
Phosphorus (P)
is absorbed by plants mainly in the form of H2PO₄⁻ - and HPO3²⁻ in small amounts.
facilitates early growth and root formation, quick maturity and promotes seed
or fruit production.
has a role in the formation of some amino acids and proteins, coenzymes, nucleic
acids and high energy phosphate compounds like Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP).
Potassium (K)
is absorbed by plants in the form of the K⁺ ion.
is a component of enzymes that facilitate the process of photosynthesis protein
synthesis, and adjusts stomata movement.
is the most important ion in controlling the turgidity of plant cells.
increases in the solute potential (sap concentration) within the cells which leads to
an increase in the amount of water that enters the cells osmotically.
Exercise 3.13
1. What is the importance of the following elements for the growth of food crops?
A. Nitrogen
B. Phosphorus
C. Potassium
2. In what form do plants absorb these elements?
3. Why nitrogen is not absorbed by plants in the form of N2? And phosphorous
not in the form of P ₄²
160
Important Inorganic Compounds
Fertilizers
Fertilizers are materials that are added to soils to increase the growth, yield or
nutritional value of crops. There are organic( natural) and synthetic (artificial)
fertilizers.
Organic (natural) fertilizers are fertilizers derived from animals and plants.
Organic fertilizers provide readily available nutrients to plants after some
period of decay and decomposition and can supply the elements nitrogen,
phosphorus, potassium and various trace elements to the soil.
Synthetic (artificial) fertilizers contain nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium, and
are known as complete fertilizers.
A mixed artificial fertilizer may contain nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.
Such type of fertilizer is called a complete fertilizer.
The term NPK is used to describe fertilizers containing the elements nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium.
Examples of artificial fertilizers are ammonium sulphate, (NH₄)₂SO₄, potassium nitrate
(KNO₃), ammonium nitrate (NH₄NO₃), and diammonium hydrogen phosphate, DAP
(NH₄)₂HPO₄). The most important mineral nutrients that need to be added to the soil
are usually nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.
All three elements are needed in large quantities. Commercial fertilizers are
normally given a "grade", which reflects the percentages they contain of N,
P and K by dry weight. For example, a NPK fertilizer may be described as
10:10:10 indicating that there is 10% of each element in the fertilizer.
The suitable proportions are best determined in relation to the tested fertility of
the soil and the requirements of the particular crop that is being grown on it. This
means fertilizers of the same composition are not used for different purposes.
In nitrogen-deficient soil, a fertilizer containing a higher percentage of nitrogen
than phosphorus and potassium must be used. In addition to this, all fertilizers
are not used for the treatment of all kinds of soil. For example, ammonium
sulphate is more suitable for use in basic soils than in acidic or neutral soils.
Exercise 3.14
1. Explain the terms mixed fertilizer, complete fertilizer and fertilizer grade
2. Classify the following as organic or synthetic fertilizers:
A. NH₄NO₃
B. Urea
C. (NH₄)₂SO₄
3. Can the same fertilizer be applied to all types of soil? Explain.
Pesticides
Pesticides are chemicals that can be applied to crops to kill pests that affect
plant growth and development.
161
Chemistry Grade 10
Herbicides
Herbicides (weed killers) are chemicals used to manipulate or control
undesirable plants. Some examples of herbicidal salts are: Common salt ( NaCI),
copper sulphate ( CuSO₄), sodium arsenite (NaAsO₂), Ammonium sulphamate
(NH₄SO₃NH₂), sodium chlorate (NaCIO₃).
Reading Assignment
Read about the use of more salts as pesticides and herbicides from a reliable source
and present it to your class.
Check List for Reference
Key Terms of the Unit
Alkalis
for water (kw)
Non-volatile acid
Acid salt
Dilute acid
Normal salt
Acidic oxide
Electrolyte
pH
Acid, basic and
Efflorescent
Peroxide
normal salt
Fertilizer
pOH
Amphoteric oxide
Flame test
Pesticide
Arrhenius acid
Hygroscopic
Polyprotic acid
Arrhenius base
Litmus
Salt
Basic salt
Macronurient
Strong acid
Basic oxide
Molarity
Strong base
Binary acid
Micronutrient
Ternary acid
Concentrated acid
Monoprotic acid
Universal indicator
Deliquescent
Neutral oxide
Weak acid
Dissociation constant
Neutralization
Weak base
Unit Summary
Inorganic compounds are those compounds that originate from mineral constituents
of the earth's crust. Inorganic compounds may be classified as oxides, acids, bases
and salts.
Oxides are binary compounds consisting of oxygen and any other element. Most
common oxides are classified as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral oxides and
peroxides. Acidic oxides are oxides of non-metallic elements. Basic oxides are
oxides of metals. These metal oxides which dissolve in water are also called basic
anhydrides. Amphoteric oxides are those oxides which show the properties of
both acids and bases. Neutral oxides are those oxides which do not show basic
or acidic properties. Peroxides are oxides containing a peroxide (-0-0-) link and
the oxidation state of oxygen is -1.
Arrhenius acids are substances that release hydrogen ions or protons in aqueous
162
Important Inorganic Compounds
solution. Arrhenius bases are substances that release hydroxide (OH-) ions in
aqueous solution. Strong acids and strong bases ionize almost completely in
aqueous solution. Weak acids and weak bases ionize only slightly in aqueous
solution.
pH is the negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration pH = -log [H⁺].
pOH is the negative logarithm of hydroxide ion concentration pOH = -log[OH⁻].
KW = [H⁺][OH⁻] = 1 X 10⁻¹⁴ at 25°C.
pKw = pH+ pOH = 14 at 25°C
Salt is an ionic compound containing a cation derived from a base and anion
derived from an acid. Salts may be classified as acidic, normal and basic salts.
An acid salt is formed when ionizable hydrogen atoms of an acid are replaced
partly by a metal ion or ammonium ion. A normal salt is formed when all ionizable
hydrogen atoms of an acid are completely replaced by a metal or ammonium ion.
A basic salt is a salt containing ionizable hydroxide ion.
Hygroscopic salt absorb water from the atmosphere. Deliquescent salt absorb
water from the atmosphere and dissolve in the water absorbed to form solutions.
Deliquescent salt absorb water from the atmosphere and dissolve in the water
absorbed to form solutions. Efflorescent salt lose their water of crystallization to
the atmosphere.
Plant nutrients are minerals required by plants for their growth and development.
The elements plants need for their growth and development are classified as
Macronutrients and micronutrients depending on the amount utilized by them.
Fertilizers are natural products or synthetic chemicals that are added to the soil
to increase its crop producing potential. Synthetic fertilizers are classified as
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium fertilizers. Pesticides are chemicals used in
agriculture to kill pests that reduce crop yields.
Review Exercises
Part I: Match the substances in column X with those properties in column Y
Column X
Column Y
1.
Apple (pH = 3.3)
A.
Strongly Acidic
2.
Tomato (pH =4.4)
B.
Strongly Alkaline
3.
Household ammonia (pH = 11.9)
C.
Neutral
4.
Distilled water (pH =7)
D.
Weakly acidic
5.
Hydrochloric acid (pH = 0.0)
E.
Weakly alkaline
6.
Grapes (pH = 4.5)
7.
Milk of magnesia (pH = 10.5)
8.
Dish-washing powder (pH = 12)
163
Chemistry Grade 10
Part II: Match the ions or molecules in column X with the correct test reagent in
column Y
Column X
Column Y
9.
Iron (II) ion
a.
Silver nitrate
10.
lodide ion
b.
Acidified barium nitrate
11.
Sulphate ion
C.
Heat with aluminium
12.
Carbon dioxide
d.
Iron (II) sulphate & sulphuric acid
13.
Nitrate ion
e.
Sodium hydroxide
f.
Limewater
Part III: Fill in the blanks by using the correct words /terms given in the brackets
14. The pH value of an acid is
than 7. (greater/less)
15. A solution is said to have
character when its pH value is greater than seven
(basic/acidic)
16. The pH value of a neutral solution is
at 298K. (Zero/7)
17. The pH of 10⁻⁶ is
than the pH of 10⁻⁴ HCI. (greater/less)
18. The pH of water decreases when
is dissolved in it. (NH₃/SO₂)
19. The hydrogen ion concentration of a solution with pH = 3 is
than the solution
with pH = 6. (greater/less)
20. An acid produces
ions in aqueous solution. (Hydrogen/hydroxide)
21. The concentration of H+ ions given by HCI is
than that given by equal
concentration of CH₃COOH (greater/less).
Part IV: Select the correct answer from the given choices
22. Which one of the following is a diprotic acid?
a. Hydrochloric acid
C. Sulfuric acid
b. Phosphoric acid
d. Acetic acid
23. Which of the following is not the characteristic of an acid:
a. An acid changes the color of an indicator
b. An acid has a bitter taste
C. An acid ionizes in water
d. An acid produces hydronium ions in water
24. When an acid reacts with an active metal:
a. Hydronium ion concentration increases
b. Hydrogen gas is produced
C. Metal forms anions
d. Carbon dioxide gas is produced
25. The pH of a solution is 8. What is the pOH of the solution?
a.
8
C.
6
b.
8 X 10⁻⁷
d. 2.1 X 10⁻⁶
26. Which of the following solutions would have a pH value greater than 7?
a. [OH⁻] = 2.4 X 10⁻² M
d. [OH] = 4.4 X 10⁻⁹ M
b. 0.0001 M HCI
C. [H₃O⁺] = 1.53 X 10⁻² M
164
Important Inorganic Compounds
Part V: Give Short Answers
27. The hydrogen ion concentration in an acidic solution is 10⁻⁵ ? What is the pH
value of the solution?
28. An element combines with oxygen to form an oxide. This oxide dissolves in
water. This aqueous solution changes blue litmus to red. Write: A. the nature of
the aqueous solution (alkaline or acidic) B. the nature of the element (metal or
nonmetal)
29. What do you understand by the statement 'acetic acid' CH₃ COOH, is a monoprotic
acid?
30. Write the balanced equations for the reaction of zinc oxide with:
a. hydrochloric acid
b. aqueous sodium hydroxide
31. How many times will the hydrogen ion concentration change when the pH value
of an aqueous solution is changed from 6 to 5?
32. Write the balanced chemical equations for the preparation of the following salts:
a. A soluble sulphate by the action of an acid on a metal
b. A soluble sulphate by the action of an acid on an insoluble metal oxide
C. An insoluble sulphate by the action of an acid on another salt
33. Calcium oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to form calcium chloride and water.
a. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
b. Farmers often add calcium oxide to the soil. Explain why they do this.
34. Fertilizers are spread on fields by farmers.
a. Why do farmers use fertilizers?
b. State the names of three elements most commonly found in fertilizers.
C. Ammonium sulphate is a fertilizer. Describe how you can make ammonium
sulphate in the laboratory from aqueous ammonia and sulphuric acid.
d. Ammonium nitrate is also a fertilizer. Write a word equation to show how
ammonium nitrate can be produced.
35. State the names of a suitable acid and alkali you can use to make each of the
following fertilizers:
a. Ammonium sulphate
b. Potassium phosphate
C. Ammonium nitrate
36. A classmate states, "All compounds containing H atoms are acids, and all
compounds containing OH groups are bases." Do you agree? Give examples
and explanations.
165
4
ELECTROCHEMISTRY
UNIT
ENERGY CHANGES AND ELECTROCHEMISTRY
