Unit Outcomes
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
define the basics of chemical reaction;
describe the four major types of reactions;
develop skills in writing and balancing chemical equations;
define oxidation - reduction reactions
analyse redox reactions by specifying the oxidizing agent, the reducing
agent, the substance reduced or oxidized;
explain molecular mass, formula mass, molar mass, empirical and
molecular formulas;
determine molecular mass, formula mass, molar mass, empirical and
molecular formulas
describe the mole concept
solve problems related to moles of substances
develop skills in solving problems based on chemical equations (mole-
mole, mass - mass, volume - volume and mass - volume problems);
develop skills in determining the limiting reactant, theoretical yield, actual
yield and percentage yield;
demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, inferring, predicting,
classifying comparing and contrasting, communicating, measuring, asking
questions designing experiments, interpreting data, drawing conclusions,
applying concepts, relating cause and effect and problem - solving.
Chemistry Grade 10
Start-up Activity
Discuss the following questions in groups of three or four
students, then share your findings with the class.
1. Changes in our daily lives include fruit ripening, which
involves the transformation of raw fruit (containing
starting substance) into ripe fruit (containing new
substance), and the fermentation of injera (new
material) from teff flour (starting material).
a. What are the differences between the raw
and ripened fruit?
b. What are the differences between the
fermented injera and the teff flour?
c. Are these changes reversible? Make a list of
at least three more changes that occur in your
day-to-day activities, and note the differences
between the starting materials and new
materials in each.
2. Are the following changes reversible?
a. Dough is changed to bread through baking.
b. Firewood changed to ash through burning.
3. Explain whether the following refer to the quality or
quantity of substances.
a. A farmer determines the amount of fertilizer
for his farm.
b. A nurse calculates the dose of a medicine for
a patient.
c. A chef mixes the right amounts of ingredients
for cooking food.
1.1 Introduction
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define chemical reaction;
give some examples of chemical reactions.
explain physical and chemical changes using examples
Change is the law of nature. We observe various types of changes around US. The
growth of seed in to a plant, the burning of wood in a fire place, the rusting of iron
articles in moist air, the rotting of food and the evaporation of liquids are some
of the changes that we see taking place around US. Scientists categorize changes as
physical and chemical changes. A physical change is a change that does not involve
2
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
the formation of a new substance with a new chemical composition. Examples of
physical changes are evaporation of liquids, powdering of sugar and melting of ice.
The change which results in the formation of one or more new substances with new
chemical composition is known as a chemical change. Examples of chemical changes
are turning of milk into curd, photosynthesis by green plants and rotting of egg by
bacteria. Chemical changes occur due to chemical reactions between substances.
In general, a change is called a chemical reaction if it exhibits all or part of the
following characteristics.
i.
Formation of new substances
ii.
Production of heat or light or both
iii.
Change in color
iv.
Change in temperature and etc.
Chemical reaction is the process in which reacting substances, called reactants, are
converted into new substances, called products. The characteristics of the products are
completely different from those of the reactants.
For example, if you burn sulphur with oxygen, the sulphur and oxygen are completely
converted to sulphur dioxide. Sulphur dioxide is a colourless gas with a pungent
odour. These characteristics of sulphur dioxide are completely different from the
characteristics of the original substances, sulphur and oxygen. A chemical reaction is
represented by a short hand notation called chemical equation as:
Reactants
Products
A chemical equation uses chemical symbols to show what happens during a chemical
reaction. A balanced chemical equation can be used to describe the relationships
between the amounts of reactants and products. The quantitative study of reactants
and products in a chemical reaction is called reaction's stoichiometry. In this unit you will
study, the types of chemical reactions, chemical equations, redox reactions, chemical
formulas, masses of compounds, mole concepts, and reaction's stoichiometry.
Exercise 1.1
a. What is a chemical reaction?
b. Explain the meanings of chemical and physical changes using examples.
C. Give two examples of evidences for chemical reactions not mentioned in the
text.
1.2
Chemical Equations
At the end of this section, students will be able to
explain the conventions used to write chemical equation;
write the chemical equations of varieties of chemical reactions;
3
Chemistry Grade 10
balance chemical equations using;
The Inspection method,
The Least Common Multiple (LCM) method,
The Algebraic method.
Form a group and discuss each of the following and
present your conclusion to the rest of the class.
1. How can you show chemical symbols, physical
states and quantities of substances involved in a
?
chemical reaction?
2. What is the difference between a chemical
equation and a chemical reaction?
3. Which law is applied when a chemical equation
Activity 1.1
is balanced?
A chemical equation is a shorthand representation of an actual chemical reaction in
terms of chemical symbols and formulas. In a chemical equation the starting substances
are called reactants; and the new substances produced are known as products.
In a chemical equation, reactants are written on the left side and products on the
right side of the equation. An arrow
()
is placed between the two sides to indicate
transformation of reactants into products.
Reactants
products
1.2.1 Writing Chemical Equation
In writing chemical equation, instead of using words, chemical symbols and formulas
are used to represent the reaction.
Steps to write a chemical equation
1.
Write a word equation: A word equation is stated in words. For example, the
word equation for the reaction between hydrogen and nitrogen to produce
ammonia is written as:
Hydrogen + Nitrogen
Ammonia (Word equation)
Note that we read the '+' sign as 'reacts with' and the arrow can be read as 'to
produce', 'to form', 'to give' or 'to yield'.
2.
Write the symbols and formulas for the reactants and products in the word
equation.
H2 + N2
NH3 (Unbalanced equation)
3.
Balance the equation
4
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
3H2 + N2
2NH3 (Balanced equation)
Chemically reactive substances might be solids, liquids, gases, or they can dissolve in a
solvent. Particularly ionic compounds commonly react in aqueous solution, or dissolve in
water. Sometimes this information is added to an equation by placing the appropriate
symbols after the formulas:
(s) - Solid
(I) - Liquid
(g) - Gas
(aq) - Aqueous solution
Example 1.1: Write the chemical equation for the reaction that occurs between
calcium carbonate and sulfuric acid.
1.
Word equation:
Calcium carbonate + Sulphuric acid
Calcium sulphate + Water + Carbon dioxide
2.
Chemical equation: CaCO₃(s) + H2SO4(I)
CaSO₄(s) + H₂O(I) + CO₂(g)
3.
The equation is balanced
Example 1.2: Write the chemical equation for the reaction of sodium chloride
and silver nitrate.
1. Word equation:
Silver nitrate + Sodium chloride
Silver chloride + Sodium nitrate
2. Chemical equation: AgNO₃(aq) + NaCl (aq)
AgCI(s) + NaNO₃ (aq)
3. The equation is balanced.
Generally, any chemical equation must fulfill the following conditions:
A. An equation must represent a true and possible chemical reaction.
B. The symbols and formulas must be written correctly. The elements - hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine exist as diatomic
molecules. For example, these elements should be written as molecules in the
equation. The equation must be balanced.
A chemical equation has both qualitative and quantitative meanings. Qualitatively, a
chemical equation indicates the types of the reactants and products in the reaction.
Quantitatively, a chemical equation expresses the relative number (amount) of moles,
molecules or masses of the reactants and products. For example, the balanced
chemical equation : 2H₂ + O2
2H2O has both qualitative and quantitative meaning.
Qualitatively, it shows that the reaction between hydrogen and oxygen forms water.
Quantitatively, it indicates that two units of hydrogen combine with one unit of oxygen
to form two units of water. The quantities may be expressed in terms of grams, number
of moles or number of molecules ( see for more details in subsection 1.6.1).
5
Chemistry Grade 10
1.2.2 Balancing Chemical Equations
At the end of this section, students will be able to
balance chemical equations using:
The Inspection method
The Least Common Multiple (LCM) method
The Algebraic method
According to the Law of Conservation of Mass, atoms are neither created nor destroyed
during a chemical reaction (refer to grade 9 chemistry). As a result, the number of
atoms of each element should remain the same before and after the reaction. To
balance a chemical equation means to equalize the number of atoms on both sides of
the equation by putting appropriate coefficients in front of the formulas.
A. Balancing Chemical Equations by Inspection Method
The most common way to balance chemical equations is to use inspection method. It
is exactly what the name states. You balance the equation by inspecting it. It is also
known as a trial and error method or a hit and trial method.
Follow four easy steps, given below, to balance a chemical equation by inspection
method:
1. Write the word equation.
2. Write the correct symbols or formulas for the reactants and products (unbalanced
equation).
3. Start with the most complicated compound count and tabulate the number of each
type of atoms on the two sides of the unbalanced equation.
4. Make the number of each type of atoms on the left side equal to the number of
corresponding atoms on the right side of the equation.
Example 1.3: Balance the chemical reaction that takes place between iron and
water to form iron (IV) oxide and hydrogen gas by the inspection method.
Step 1: Iron + Water
Iron (IV) oxide + Hydrogen (word equation)
Step 2: Fe + H2O
Fe3O₄ + H2 (Unbalanced equation)
Let US count and tabulate the number of various types of atoms on the reactant
and product sides of the expression
Fe + H2O
Fe3O4 + H2
Atom
Reactant side
Product side
Equation
Number of Fe atoms
1
3
Number of O atoms
1
4
Number of H atoms
2
2
Total no. of atoms
4
9
Unbalanced
6
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Balancing Fe atoms: There is one Fe atom on the left side while there are three
Fe atoms on the right side. Therefore, a suitable coefficient of Fe on the left side
is 3. Thus,
3Fe + H2O
Fe₃O₄ + H₂
(2)
Balancing O atoms. There is one o atom (in H2O) on the left side and there are
four o atoms on the right side. Therefore, a proper coefficient of H2O is 4 as H₂O.
3Fe + 4H2O
Fe3O4 + H2
(3)
Balancing H atoms. There are eight H atoms (in 4H2O) on the left side, but only
two H atoms (in H₂) on the right side. Therefore, an appropriate coefficient of H
is 4 as 4H2. Thus,
3Fe + 4H2O
Fe3O4 + 4H2
(4)
Equation 4 is a balanced chemical equation. Note that number of atoms of each
element is conserved (no. of atoms reactant side = no. of atoms product side).
How?
These are shown below:
Atom
Reactant side
Product side
Equation
Number of Fe atoms
3
3
Number of o atoms
4
4
Number of H atoms
8
8
Total number of atoms
15
15
Balanced
NB: Inspection method works best for simple equations.
B. Balancing chemical equations by the LCM method
By taking the LCM of the total valency of the reactants and products and dividing it
by the total valency of the reactants and products, the coefficients for the balanced
chemical equation are derived. This is known as The LCM method. The following
examples show all of the steps required to balance a chemical equation using the
LCM Method.
Examples:
i. When aluminum reacts with oxygen, aluminum oxide is formed. Write the balanced
chemical equation for the reaction
Step 1: Represent the reaction by a word equation:
Aluminum + Oxygen
Aluminum Oxide
Step 2: Write the correct symbols or formulas for the reactants and products
AI + O₂
AI2O₃
Step 3: Place the total valency of each atom above it.
7
Chemistry Grade 10
3
4
66
Al + O₂
AI2O₃
From the equation we see that the valency of aluminum is 3. The total valency of
oxygen is 2 x 2 = 4. The total valency of aluminum in AI2O₃ is 3 X 2 = 6.
The total valency of oxygen in AI₂O₃ is 2 X 3 = 6, LCM is 12.
Step 4: Find the LCM of each total valency and place it above the arrow, here LCM
is 12.
3
4
12
66
Al + O₂ LCM AI2O₃
Step 5: Divide the LCM by each total valency number to obtain the coefficients for
each of the reactants and products. Place the obtained coefficients in front of the
respective chemical formulas
4AI + 30₂
2AI₂O₃ (Balanced)
Checking: There are 4 aluminum and 6 oxygen atoms on both sides of the equation.
Hence, the chemical equation is correctly balanced
ii. The reaction of sodium sulphate with aluminum nitrate would form aluminum sulphate
and sodium nitrate. Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 1: Sodium sulphate + Aluminum nitrate
Aluminum sulphate + Sodium nitrate
(word equation)
Step 2: Na₂SO₄ + AI(NO₃)₃
A12(SO₄)₃ + NaNO₃
22
3
3
6
6
11
Step 3: Na 2SO₄ + AI(NO₃)₃
A12(SO₄)₃ + NaNO₃
2
2
3
3
6
6
6
11
Step 4: Na₂ SO₄ + AI(NO₃)₃ LCM AI₂(SO₄)₃ + NaNO₃
Step 5: 3Na 2SO₄ + 2AI(NO₃)₃
AI₂(SO₄)₃ + 6NaNO₃ (Balanced)
There are 6 nitrogen, 6 sodium, 3 sulphur, 30 oxygen and 2 aluminum atoms on both
sides of the equation. Thus, the equation is correctly balanced.
iii. The reaction of magnesium nitrate with ammonium phosphate would form ammonium
nitrate and magnesium phosphate. Write the balanced equation.
Step 1: Magnesium nitrate + Ammonium phosphate
Magnesium phosphate +
Ammonium nitrate
Step 2: Mg(NO₃)₂ + (NH₄)₃PO₄
NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂
22
3
3
11
3
3
Step 3: Mg(NO₃)₂ + (NH₄)₃PO₄
NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂
22
3
3
6
11
3
3
Step 4: Mg(NO₃)₂ + (NH₄),PO₄ LCM -> NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂
8
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Step 5: 3 Mg(NO₃)₂ + 2 (NH₄),PO
6NH₄NO₃ + Mg₃(PO₄)₂ (Balanced)
There are 12 nitrogen, 24 hydrogen, 3 magnesium, 2 phosphorous and 26 oxygen
atoms on both sides of the equation. Thus, the equation is correctly balanced.
B. Balancing Chemical Equations Using Algebraic Method
This method of balancing chemical equations involves assigning algebraic variables
as stoichiometric coefficients to each species in the unbalanced chemical equation.
These variables are used in mathematical equations and are solved to obtain the
values of each stoichiometric coefficient. Consider the formation of ammonia from
hydrogen and nitrogen as an example.
Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation with the correct symbols of the reactants &
products:
N2 + H2
NH3 (unbalanced equation)
Step 2: Assign algebraic variables to each species as coefficients (a, b, c) in the
unbalanced equation:
aN2 + bH2
cNH3
Then, set equations for each element so that it is equal in both the right and left hand
side.
N: 2a = c (subscript of N is 2 in the left side and 1 in the right side)
H: 2b = 3c (subscript of H is 2 in the left side and 3 in the right side)
Step 3: Choose the smallest variable and assign arbitrary number in order to determine
the remaining variables.
In the above case, a is the smallest coefficient. Assuming a = 1, the values of b and c
can be obtained as follows. c = 2 X 1 = 2, 2b = 3c = 3 X 2 = 6; b = 6/2 = 3
Since a, b, and C have no common multiples, they can be substituted into the equation
as follows.
N2 + 3H2
2NH3 ( balanced equation)
Example 1.4: Balance the reaction: Al + O2
AI2O3 using the algebraic method.
Assign variables for each element
aAl + bO2
cAl2O3
The equation for Aluminum: a = 2c (subscript of Al is 2 in the left side and 2 in the
right side). The equation for oxygen: 2b = 3c (subscript of o is 2 in the left side
and 3 in the right side)
9
Chemistry Grade 10
Assuming a = 1, we get:
c = a/2; c= 1/2
2b= x(1/2) = 3/2 ; b = 3/4
Since fractional values of b and c are obtained, the lowest common multiple
denominator between the variables a, b, and c must be found and multiplied with
each variable.
Since the lowest common multiple denominator is 4, each of the variables must be
multiplied by 4.
Therefore, a = 4 X 1 = 4; b = (3/4) X 4 = 3; c = (1/2) X 4 = 2
Substituting the values of a, b, and c in the unbalanced equation, the following
balanced chemical equation is obtained.
4AI + 30₂
2AI2O3
Example 1.5: Balance the equation: PCI₅ + H2O
H3PO4 + HCI
Step 1: PCI₅ + H2O
H3PO4 + HCI
Step 2: aPCl₅ + bH2O
cH₃PO₄ + dHCl
P: a = c (subscript of P is 1 in the left side and 1 in the right side)
CI : 5a = d (subscript of CI is 5 in the left side and 1 in the right side)
H: 2b = 3c + d (subscript of H is 2 in the left side and 3 in H3PO4 in 1 in HCI)
o : b = 4c (subscript of O is 1 in the left side and 4 in the right side)
Assume a =1, therefore c=1, 5a = d
d =5, b =4.
Substituting the values of a, b, c and d in the unbalanced equation:
PCI₅ + 4H2O
H3PO4 + 5HCI (balanced)
Exercise 1.2
1. Balance the following chemical equations, using the inspection method:
a. Na + H2O
NaOH + H2
b. KCIO₃
KCI + O2
C. H2O2
H2O
+
O2
d. AI + H₃PO₄
AIPO4 + H2
e. HNO3 + H2S NO + S + H2O
2. Write the balanced chemical equation to represent the following reactions.
a. Sodium bromide reacts with chlorine to form sodium chloride and bromine
10
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
b. Hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium carbonate to form sodium chloride,
water and carbondioxide
C. Potassium chlorate when heated produces potassium chloride and oxygen
d. Calcium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid to form water, carbon
dioxide and calcium chloride
e. Silver oxide decomposes to silver and oxygen gas.
3. Balance the following equations using the LCM method.
a. Al + HCI
AICI₃ + H₂
b. Fe₂(SO₄)₃ + KOH
K2SO₄ + Fe(OH)₃
C. CaCl₂ + Na₃PO₄
Ca₃(PO₄)₂ + NaCl
d. FeCl₃ + NH₄OH
Fe(OH)₃ + NH₄CI
4. Balance the following equations using the algebraic method.
a. PCI₅ + H2O
H3PO4 + HCI
b. Mg + H2O
Mg(OH)₂ + H2
C. Zn(NO₃)₂
ZnO + NO₂ +
d. H2SO₄ + NaOH Na₂SO₄ + H2O
e. NH3 + O2
NO + H2O
f.
C₆H₁₂O₆+O₂
CO2 + H2O
g. FeCl₃ + MgO
Fe2O3 + MgCl₂
h. BaCl₂ + K3PO₄
Ba₃(PO₄)₂ + 6KCI
i. P₄O₁₀+H₂O₂O
H3PO4
1.3 Types of Chemical Reactions
At the end of this section, students will be able to
list the four types of chemical reactions;
define combination reaction and give examples;
conduct experiments on combination reactions in groups;
define decomposition reaction and give examples;
conduct some experiments on decomposition reactions in groups;
define single - displacement reaction and give examples;
conduct some experiments on simple displacement reactions in groups;
define double - displacement reaction and give examples;
conduct some experiments on double - displacement reactions in group.
11
Chemistry Grade 10
In your group, discuss about the following processes
and share your conclusion with the rest of the class.
1. What are the final products of digestive protein
and starch? Is protein and starch digestion a
building up or breaking down process ?
2. What is alcohol fermentation and its process?
What are the two important chemical compounds
produced during the fermentation of "Teji" or
"Tella"? What is the main ingredient (starting
material) for the production of "Teji" and "Tella"?
3. What are the two major chemical reactants and
the two chemical products of photosynthesis? Is
photosynthesis a breaking down or a building
up process? Compare this process with cellular
?
respiration.
4. What are the combustion products of kerosene?
Is the combustion of kerosene a building up or a
breaking down process?
Activity 1.2
Different elements and compounds react in different ways to produce different kinds
of new substances. Many chemical reactions can be classified as one of the four
basic types of reactions. By analyzing the reactants and products of a particular
reaction, you can classify them into one of these categories. Some reactions may
be categorized into more than one category. A complete understanding of these
reaction types will help predict the products of unknown reactions. The four basic
types of chemical reactions are combinations, decompositions, single displacement,
and double displacement reactions, which are described in the next section.
Such reactions are generally classified as shown in Figure 1.1.
Types of Chemical Reactions
Direct combination
Decomposition
Single displacement
Double displacement
A+B AB
AB A+B
A + BC AB+C
AB + CD
AD + BC
Figure 1.1 Classification of chemical reactions.
12
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
A. Direct Combination Reactions
Combination reactions are those reactions in which two types of pure substances react
directly and form a single substance. In a combination reaction, two elements, two
compounds, or an element and a compound react to form a single compound. In
general, a combination reaction may be represented by the equation.
A + B
AB
where the reactants A and B are elements or compounds, the product AB is a compound.
Such type of reaction is also known as synthesis or composition reaction.
Examples
2Na
+
CI2
2NaCl
Element
+
Element
Compound
CaO
+
CO2
CaCO3
Compound
+
Compound
Compound
Note that in the above reactions, there is a single product.
Experiment 1.1
Investigation of Combination Reaction
Objective: To investigate the reaction between sulphur and iron.
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, watch glass
Chemicals: Sulphur powder, iron filings
Procedure:
1. Mix about 3 g of iron filings and 2 g of powdered sulphur in a watch glass.
2. Transfer the mixture in a glass test tube.
3. Mount the test tube in a sloping position on a stand as shown in Figure 1.2.
4. Heat the test tube until the mixture in the glass glows red hot.
5. Remove the test tube from the flame and observe the result.
13
Chemistry Grade 10
Iron fillings
+
sulphur
Bunsen
burner
Figure 1.2 The reaction between iron and sulphur.
Questions
1. What were the colors of iron filings and sulphur before the reaction?
2. What was the color of the resulting compound after the reaction?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
B. Decomposition Reactions
A decomposition reaction (or analysis) is a reaction that involves the breaking
down of a single compound into two or more elements or simpler compounds. A
decomposition reaction can be carried out using heat (thermal decomposition), light
(photo decomposition), electricity (electrical decomposition) or a catalyst. But most
decomposition reactions are carried out when heat is supplied and this heat energy is
indicated by a 'delta' () symbol above the arrow. The general form of equation for
a decomposition reaction is:
AB
A+B
where the reactant AB must be a compound and the products A and B could be
elements or compounds.
The simplest kind of decomposition reaction is when a binary compound decomposes
into its elements. For example, mercury (II) oxide, a red solid, decomposes when heated
to produce mercury and oxygen gas, similarly a colorless potassium perchlorate
decomposes to potassium chloride and oxygen gas.
2HgO(s)
2Hg(I) + O₂(g)
2KCIO₃(s)
2KCI(s) + 302(g)
14
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Experiment 1.2
Investigation of Decomposition Reaction
Objective: To investigate the decomposition of copper (II) carbonate(CuCO₃).
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, cork, delivery tube.
Chemicals: CuCO3 and lime water.
Procedure:
Put 1g of CuCO3 powder in a glass test-tube. Mount the test tube in a sloping
position on a stand as shown in Figure 1.3. Fit a cork and a delivery tube to the
test tube. Put another test tube containing lime water at the end of the delivery
tube. Heat the CuCO3 with a burner.
Delivery tube
Stand
Lime water
Clamp
Copper(II)
carbonate
Bunsen burner
Figure 1.3 Decomposition of copper (II) carbonate.
Questions
1. What was the color of copper (II) carbonate before heating?
2. What was the color during heating and after cooling?
3. What change did you observe in the lime water?
4. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
C. Single Displacement Reactions
A reaction in which one element displaces another element from its compound is known
as single displacement or replacement reaction. Such a reaction is represented by the
following two general forms.
15
Chemistry Grade 10
A + BC
B + AC
If A is a metal, it will displace B to form AC, provided A is a more active metal than B.
A + BC
BA+C
If A is a non-metal, it will displace C to form BA, provided A is a more active non-
metal than C. In general, a more reactive element displaces a less reactive element
from a compound.
Examples of single-displacement reactions
1. Active metals displace hydrogen from acids
Reactive metals such as potassium, calcium, sodium, and zinc displace hydrogen gas
from dilute acids. For example, zinc is an active metal, and it displaces hydrogen from
hydrochloric acid; but copper metal cannot do so.
Zn + 2HCI
ZnCl₂ + H₂
Cu + HCI
No reaction
2. Reactive metals, such as potassium, calcium, and sodium react vigorously with
water to displace hydrogen:
2Na + 2H2O
2NaOH + H2
Ca + 2H2O
Ca(OH)₂ + H2
3. A more active metal displaces a less active metal
Zinc displaces copper from copper (II) sulphate solutions
Zn + CuSO4
ZnSO₄ + Cu
Iron displaces copper from copper (II) sulphate solutions
Fe + CuSO4
FeSO₄ + Cu
after
sometime
Cu deposits on
Iron nail
the iron nail
CuSO₄ solution
FeSO₄ solution
Figure 1.4 Replacement of copper by iron metal from copper sulphate solution.
16
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Experiment 1.3
Investigation of Single Displacement Reaction
Objective: To investigate the displacement reaction between iron and copper (II)
Sulphate (CuSO₄)
Apparatus: Iron rod and beaker
Chemicals: CuSO4
Procedure:
1. Clean a piece of iron rod or iron knife with emery paper to remove any rust.
2. Take saturated CuSO4 solution in a beaker.
3. Dip the iron rod into the CuSO₄ solution as shown in Figure 1.5 and wait for a
few minutes. What did you observe on the iron rod?
4. Allow the reactants to stand for one day and observe any change on the iron
rod.
Iron rod
Questions
1. What did you observe
on the iron rod after one
day?
2. Write a balanced
Beaker
chemical equation for the
reaction.
3. Write the conclusion for
CuSO₄ Solution
the experiment.
Figure 1.5 Reaction between iron and copper (II)
sulphate.
Exercise 1.3
Complete the following single displacement reactions:
4. CI2 + KI
1. Zn + H2SO4
5. F2 + CaCl₂
2. Zn + Cu(NO₃)₂
3. Cu + AgNO₃
17
Chemistry Grade 10
D. Double Displacement Reactions
A double displacement reaction is a reaction in which two compounds react together
to form two new compounds by exchange of the positive and negative ions of each
reactant. Such a reaction is also known as double replacement reaction or metathesis.
This type of reaction can be written in the following general form of equation:
AB + CD
AD + CB
Experiment 1.4
Investigation of Double Displacement Reaction
Objective: To observe the displacement reaction between Na₂SO₄ and Ba(NO₃)₂:
Apparatus: Beaker, stirrer, filter paper, filter funnel.
Chemicals: Na₂SO₄, Ba(NO₃)₂ and water.
Procedure:
1. Take solution of Ba(NO₃)₂ into a beaker and add drop-wise Na2SO₄ solution
as shown in Figure 1.6. Then stir it continuously.
2. Filter the precipitate using a filter paper and funnel. Collect the filtrate or the
solution in a clean beaker.
Questions
1. Write the names of the compounds that are formed as a precipitate and as
solution at the end of the reaction.
2. What was the colour of the precipitate.
3. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Na2SO₄ solution
Stirrer
Ba(NO₃)₂ solution
Figure 1.6 Double displacement reaction between Na2SO₄ and Ba(NO₃)₂
18
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Example 1.6:
The two soluble compounds AgNO₃ and NaCl react to produce an in soluble
precipitate of AgCl and a soluble NaNO₃ solution.
AgNO3
+
NaCl
AgCl
+
NaNO₃
Soluble
Soluble
Insoluble
Soluble
When aqueous solutions of BaCl₂ and Na₂SO₄ react, a precipitate of BaSO₄ is
formed.
BaCl₂
+
Na2SO₄
BaSO₄
+
2NaCl
Soluble
Soluble
Insoluble
Soluble
When dilute hydrochloric acid is added to sodium carbonate double displacement
reaction takes place. In this reaction carbondioxide gas is produced.
Na2CO3 + 2HCI
2NaCl + H2O + CO2
Exercise 1.4
Give the correct answers for the following questions.
1. What type of reaction does usually take place in each of the following
reactions?
a. An active metal reacting with water
b. A metal reacting with a non-metal
C. An acid reacting with a metal hydroxide
d. Heating of a metal hydrogen carbonate
2. Classify the following reactions as combination, decomposition, single or
double displacement reactions.
a. FeO + C
Fe + CO
b. 2NH3 + H2SO4
(NH₄)₂SO₄
C. CaCO₃ + 2HCI CaCl₂ + CO2 + H2O
d.
2Cu(NO₃)₂
2CuO + 4NO₂ + O2
e. 2Na₃PO₄ + 3Ca(OH)₂ Ca₃(PO₄)₂ + 6NaOH
f.
CuSO₄.5H₂O
CuSO₄ + 5H2O
19
Chemistry Grade 10
1.4 Oxidation and Reduction Reactions
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon
and present your conclusion to the class.
When you dry your meal dishes with a towel, the towel
can be termed as a drying agent and the dish as
wetting agent. Assume that the meal dishes were wet
?
with water, which one would gain water, the towel or
the wetting agent and which one would lose the water,
the wetting agent or the towel, after cleaning? Relate
this idea with oxidizing agent and reducing agent,
oxidation and reduction of substances.
Activity 1.3
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define redox reactions;
define the terms oxidation and reduction in terms of electron transfer;
define oxidation number (oxidation state);
state oxidation number rules.;
determine the oxidation number of an element in a given formula.
In our day to day activity, we are familiar with the chemical processes like rusting of
iron, burning of substances, respiration, digestion of food and so on. All such types
of processes or reactions are known as oxidation and reduction or redox reactions.
Additionally, most metallic and nonmetallic elements are obtained from their ores by
the process of oxidation or reduction. What are oxidation and reduction reactions?
Oxidation-Reduction
An oxidation is defined as the loss of one or more electrons by an atom, and a reduction
is the gain of one or more electrons. Oxidation and reduction occur simultaneously.
Thus, an oxidation reduction reaction, or redox reaction, is one in which electrons are
transferred from one atom to another.
For example, when metallic zinc is added to a solution containing copper(II) sulphate
(CuSO₄), zinc reduces Cu²⁺ by donating two electrons to it. Therefore, Zn is oxidized
and copper is reduced and oxidation - reduction or redox reaction takes place as
shown in the following chemical equation:
Zn + CuSO₄
ZnSO₄ + Cu
Zn + Cu2+
Zn²⁺ + Cu
Oxidation and reduction reactions can also be defined in terms of oxidation number.
20
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Oxidation is an increase in the oxidation number of an element and reduction is a
decrease in the oxidation number. For example,
Cu° + 2Ag⁺ Cu2⁺ + 2Ag°
The oxidation number of copper is increased from 0 to +2 and thus copper is oxidized.
The oxidation number of silver is decreased from +1 to O, and therefore silver is reduced.
1.4.1 Oxidation Number or Oxidation State
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define oxidation number (oxidation state);
state oxidation number rules.;
determine the oxidation number of an element in a given formula.
Oxidation number or oxidation state is the number of electrons that an atom appears
to have gained or lost when it is combined with other atoms. Oxidation number could
be integers including zero and fractional numbers.
Rules for Assigning Oxidation Numbers
Rule 1: The oxidation state of an uncombined element is zero. This applies for poly
atomic molecules, S₈, P₄ and large structures of carbon or silicon each have an
oxidation state of zero.
Example 1.7: The oxidation number of Be = O, Cu = O, Br in Br₂ = O, o in
O3 = O, S in S₈ = O. P in P4 = O, O in O2 = o
Rule 2: The oxidation number of a monatomic ion is equal to the charge on the
ion.
Example 1.8: Na+ = +1, Mg²⁺ = +2, S²⁻ = -2.
Rule 3: The oxidation number of oxygen in a compound is usually -2 except in
the following cases:
Exceptions
The oxidation number of oxygen in:
A. peroxides is -1.
Example: Na₂O₂
B. superoxides is -1/2.
Example: KO₂
C. oxygen diflouride is +2 Example: OF2
Rule 4: The oxidation number of hydrogen in its entire compounds is +1 except
in metal hydrides, (like NaH, CaH₂ and AIH₃), where its oxidation number is -1.
Rule 5: The sum of the oxidation number of all the atoms in a neutral compound
is zero.
21
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.9:
+1 +6-2
H2SO4, (+2) + (+6) + (-8) = 0
Rule 6: In a polyatomic ion, the sum of the oxidation numbers of the constituent
atoms equals the charge on the ion.
Example 1.10:
-2
(SO₄)⁻², (+6)+ (-8) = -2
Rule 7: Elements of group IA have +1 and group IIA have +2 oxidation states in
all of their compounds
Rule 8: In a compound, the more electronegative element is assigned a negative
oxidation number, and the less electronegative element is assigned a positive
oxidation number.
Example 1.11: Assign oxidation number to all elements in
i. HNO3
ii. Cr2O₇²⁻
iii. MnO₄⁻
iv. Ca(H₂PO₄)₂.
i. HNO₃: According to rule 4 oxidation number of H = + 1. Thus the other group
(the nitrate ion) must have a net oxidation number of -1. Oxygen has an
oxidation number of -2, and if we use X to represent the oxidation number
of nitrogen, then the nitrate ion can be written as
[N(x)O₃(²⁻)]⁻ or
ii. Cr₂O₇²⁻: From rule 6 we see that the sum of the oxidation numbers in the
dichromate ion Cr2O₇²⁻ must be -2. We know that the oxidation number of o
is -2, so what remains is to determine the oxidation number of Cr, which we
call y. The dichromate ion can be written as
2y + 7 X-2=-2 y=+6
iii. MnO₄⁻: Let the oxidation number of Mn be X. MnXO₄²⁻. The sum of the
oxidation numbers of Mn and o in MnO⁻₄ is - 1 (Rule 6)
x + (-2 x 4) = - 1, 8 = X = +7
Therefore, the oxidation number of Mn in MnO₄⁻ is +7.
iv. Ca(H₂PO₄)₂: The oxidation number of Ca is +2. Let, the oxidation number of
P be X.
22
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
+2 +1 X -2
Ca(H2PO₄)₂
+ (4 X (+1)) + (2 X + (8 X (-2)) = 0
2+4 + 2x - 16 =0
2x 10 = 0 or X = +5
Hence, the oxidation number of P in Ca(H2PO₄)₂ is +5.
Exercise 1.5
1. Find the oxidation numbers to the underlined species for the following
compounds or ions.
a. K₄[Fe(CN)₆]
d. Na2S406
g. H2SO4
b. K₂Cr₂O₇
e. S2O8⁻²
h. HAuCI
C. H2PtCl₆
f.
i. Fe2(SO₄)₃
2. Determine whether the following processes are oxidation or reduction reactions
a. Cu²⁺+ 2e⁻
Cu
d. S²⁻ S+2e⁻
b.
K
K⁺ + e⁻
e. Fe²⁺ Fe³⁺ + e-
C. O + 2e⁻
O²⁻
f. N + 3e⁻
N³⁻
1.4.2 Oxidizing and Reducing Agents
At the end of this section, students will be able to
define the terms reducing and oxidizing agent;
identify reducing and oxidizing agents from a given redox reaction;
compare and contrast oxidizing and reducing agents.
Whenever one substance loses an electron (is oxidized), another substance must
gain that electron (be reduced). The substance that gives up an electron and causes
reduction is called a reducing agent. The substance that gains an electron and causes
the oxidation is called an oxidizing agent. The following comparison shows the
characteristics of reducing and oxidizing agents.
Reducing agent
Oxidizing agent
1. Loses one or more electrons
1. Gains one or more electrons
2. Causes reduction
2. Causes oxidation
3. Undergoes oxidation
3. Undergoes reduction
4. Becomes more positive
4. Becomes more negative
Tests for an oxidizing agent are accomplished by mixing it with a substance that is
easily oxidized to give a visible color change when the reaction takes place.
23
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.12:
I. Permanganate ion (MnO₄⁻) in acidic solution changes color from purple to
colorless
MnO₄⁻
Mn²⁺
MnO₄⁻ (purple)
Mn²⁺ (colorless)
2MnO₄ +16H+ + 10e-
2Mn²⁺ + 8H2O
Figures 1.7 The reduction of Mn⁷⁺ to Mn²⁺ in acidic media.
II. Dichromate in acidic solution changes color from orange to green
Cr2O₇2-
Cr³⁺
Cr2O₇²⁻ (orange)
Cr³⁺(Green)
Cr2O₇²⁻ + 14H+ + 6e-
2Cr³⁺ + 7H2O
Figures 1.8 The reduction of Cr6+ to Cr³⁺ in acidic media.
Other common oxidizing agents are chlorine, potassium chromate, sodium chlorate
and manganese (IV) oxide. Similarly, certain reducing agents undergo a visible colour
change with a substance which is easily reduced.
I. A moist starch solution changes potassium iodide paper to blue-black to show that
iodine is formed, 21-
12. That is potassium iodide is a reducing agent.
II. Hydrogen sulphide bubbled through a solution of an oxidizing agent forms a
yellow precipitate, S²⁻
S. Thus, H2S is a reducing agent.
Other common reducing agents are carbon, carbon monoxide, sodium thiosulphate,
sodium sulphite and iron (II) salts. The oxidizing or reducing ability of substances
depend on many factors. Some of these are:
Electronegativity: Elements with high electronegativity such as F2, O₂, N2 and Cl₂
are good oxidizing agents. Elements with low electronegativity for example, metallic
24
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
elements like Na, K, Mg and Al are good reducing agents.
Oxidation states: In a compound or ion, if one of its elements is in its higher oxidation
state, then it is an oxidizing agent. Similarly, if an element of a compound or ion is in
its lower oxidation state, then it is a reducing agent.
Example 1.13: Oxidizing agents
Reducing agents Fe⁺²S, C+2O, Na2S⁺⁴O₃
1.4.3 Analyzing Redox Reactions
At the end of this section, students will be able to explain why every reduction reaction
is accompained by oxidation reaction.
Oxidation and reduction or redox reactions occur simultaneously in a given reaction.
Form a group and discuss the following and present
your conclusion to the class.
1. How can you identify an oxidizing agent and
?
reducing agent in a reaction?
2. Why a reducing agent undergoes oxidation and
an oxidizing agent undergoes reduction?
3. Why must every redox reaction involve both an
Activity 1.4
oxidizing agent and a reducing agent?
Example 1.14: Identify the reducing and oxidizing agents in the following
balanced redox reactions:
2Fe + 302
Fe2O3
Assign oxidation states of the reactants and products, then identify the species
oxidized and reduced.
2Fe + 30₂ 2Fe2O3 +3 -2
Fe is oxidized from 0 to +3
o is reduced from o to -2
Therefore, Fe is reducing agent and O2 is oxidizing agent.
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl₂ + H₂
Mg°
+
2H+1CI-1
Mg⁺²Cl₂⁻⁻ + H₂⁰
Mg is oxidized from 0 to +2, therefore Mg is reducing agent.
H is reduced from +1 to 0, therefore HCI is the oxidizing agent.
25
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 1.6
1. Where do the most easily reduced and oxidized elements found in the
periodic table of the elements?
2. For the following substances, tell whether the oxidation number increases or
decreases in a redox reaction:
a. An oxidizing agent
b. A reducing agent
C. A substance undergoing oxidation
d. A substance undergoing reduction
3. In the following reactions, label the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
a. ZnO+C
Zn + CO
b. 8Fe + S₈
8FeS
C. Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe + 3CO₂
d. PbS + 4H2O2
PbSO₄ + 4H2O
1.4.4 Balancing Redox Reactions: Oxidation-Number-Change Method
At the end of this section, students will be able to balance redox reactions using
oxidation change method.
One way to balance redox reactions is by keeping track electron transfer, by using
the oxidation numbers of each of the atoms. It is based on the difference in oxidation
number of oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
For the oxidation-number-change method, start with the unbalanced equation. The
example below is for the reaction of iron (III) oxide with carbon monoxide.
Fe₂O₃+CO
Fe + CO2
Step 1: Assign oxidation numbers to each of the atoms in the equation and write the
numbers above the atom.
+3 -2
+2 -2
0
+4 -2
Fe2O3 + CO
Fe + CO2
Step 2: Identify the atoms that are oxidized and those that are reduced. In the above
equation, the C atom is being oxidized from +2 to +4. The Fe atom is being reduced
from +3 to O.
Step 3: Use a line to connect the atoms that are undergoing a change in oxidation
number. On the line, write the oxidation-number change.
26
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
- 3
+3 -2
+2 -2
0
+4 -2
Fe2O3 + CO
Fe + CO2
+2
Step 4: Use coefficients to make the total increase in oxidation number equal to the
total decrease in oxidation number. In this case, the least common multiple of 2 and 3
is 6. So the oxidation-number increase should be multiplied by 3, while the oxidation-
number decrease should be multiplied by 2. The coefficient is also applied to the
formulas in the equation. So 3 is placed in front of the CO and in front of the CO₂.
2 is placed in front of the Fe on the right side of the equation. The Fe2O₃ does not
require a coefficient because the subscript of 2 after the Fe indicates that there are
already two iron atoms.
- - 3*2=6
+3 -2
+2 -2
0
+4-2
Fe2O3
+
CO
Fe + CO2
+2*3=6
Step 5: Check whether each element is balanced. Occasionally, a coefficient may
need to be placed in front of a molecular formula that was not involved in the redox
process. In the current example, the equation is now balanced.
Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe
+
3CO₂
Example 1.15: Balance the chemical equation:
HNO3 + H3AsO3
NO + H3AsO4 + H2O
1.
Identify the oxidation number of each atom.
Reactant side: H= +1; N= +5; o = -2; As= +3
Product side: N= +2; o = -2; H= +1; As= +5
2.
Determine the change in oxidation number for each atom that changes.
N: +5
+2;
Change = -3
As: +3
+5;
Change = +2
3. Make the total increase in oxidation number equal to the total decrease in
oxidation number. We need 2 atoms of N for every 3 atoms of As. This gives
US total changes of -6 and +6.
4.
Place these numbers (2 & 3) as coefficients in front of the formulas containing
those atoms
2HNO3 + 3H3AsO3
2NO + 3H3AsO4 + H2O (balanced)
27
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 1.7
Balance the following using oxidation number change method
a. Al + H2SO4
AI₂(SO₄)₃ + H2
b. KCIO₃
KCI + O2
C. MnO2 + Al
Mn + Al2O3
d. Cu + H2SO4
CuSO₄ + SO₂ + H2O
Non-redox Reactions
At the end of this section, students will be able to identify redox and non redox
reactions.
What are non redox reactions? non redox reactions are chemical reactions where the
oxidation states of chemical elements remain unchanged in reactants and products.
Therefore, reactions in which neither oxidation nor reduction takes place or no species
either gains or loses electrons are non-redox reactions. Neutralization and double
displacement reactions are examples of non-redox reactions.
Example 1.16:
Na2SO₄ + CaCl₂
CaSO4 + 2NaCl
CaCO3
CaO+CO2
KOH + HNO3
KNO3 + H2O
1.5 Molecular and Formula Masses, the Mole Concept and
Chemical Formulas
Discuss the following in your group and present your
conclusion to the class.
1. Is it possible to count 'teff' seeds for practical
purposes? If not, why? How do you quantify 'teff'
?
for practical purposes such as in markets?
2. Molecules, atoms or ions are extremely small entities.
How can we express their quantities for practical
purposes such as in the laboratory reactions and in
Activity 1.5
industrial applications?
28
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
At the end of this section, students will be able to
explain and determine molecular mass, formula mass, molar mass, empirical and
molecular formulas;
describe the mole concept and solve problems related to moles of substances.
1.5.1 Molecular mass (MM) and Formula Mass (FM)
At the end of this topic, students will be able to explain and determine molecular
mass, formula mass.
The molecular mass or formula mass of a compound is used to calculate the percentage
of its constituents. For example, the molecular mass of H2O is used to determine the
percentage of hydrogen, and the formula mass of NaCl is used to determine the
percentage of sodium. What is molecular mass or formula mass?
Molecular Mass (MM) is the sum of masses of all the atoms present in a molecule.
Example 1.17:
MM of H2O = 2 X 1 amu (2 hydrogen atoms) + 16 amu (1 oxygen atom) = 18
amu,
MM of CO2 =12 amu carbon atom) +2 X 16 amu (2 oxygen atoms) = 44 amu
lonic compounds are not comprised of discrete molecules, but rather, ions. The
smallest unit of an ionic compound that retains the identity of an ionic compound
is called a formula unit. The mass of a formula unit is called its formula mass.
Fomula Mass ( FM) is the sum of the atomic masses of all atoms present in the
formula unit of the compound, whether it is molecular or ionic. But FM is used
mostly for ionic compounds.
Example 1.18:
FM of NaCl = 23 amu (1Na) + 35.5 amu (CI) = 58.5 amu.
FM of Ca(OH₂)₂ = 40 amu (1Ca) + 2 X [16 amu( (10) + 2 amu (2H)] = 76 amu
1.5.2 The Mole Concept
At the end of this topic, students will be able to
define mole and explain the concept using examples;
define molar mass;
calculate the molar masses of substances.
29
Chemistry Grade 10
It is the concept adopted as a convenient way to deal with the tremendous amount of
molecules or ions. A mole is defined as the amount of a substance that contains the
same number of entities as there are atoms in exactly 12 g of carbon-12. 12 g of
carbon-12 contains 6.022x10²³ atoms. This number is known as Avogadro's number
(NA), in honor of Amedeo Avogadro (1776-1856, who first proposed the concept).
The term mole, like a dozen or a gross, refers to a particular number of things. A
dozen of eggs equals 12 eggs, a gross of pencils equals 144 pencils, and a mole of
any substance equals 6.02x10²³ units of the substance.
Example 1.19: 1 mole of H2O equals 6.02 X 10²³ molecules of H2O
1 mole of NaCl equals 6.02 X 10²³ formula units of NaCl
Molar mass is the molecular mass or formula mass expressed in grams. It is the
mass of 1 mole of a substance.
Molar mass of substance A = mass of one mole of A = 6.02 x10²³ units of
substance A
Example 1.20: molar mass of H2O = 18 g = mass of 1 mole of H2O = 6.02 X
10²³ molecules of H2O
Molar mass of NaCl = 58.5 g = mass of one mole of NaCl =6.02 X 10²³
formula units of NaCl
1.5.3 Chemical Formulas - Empirical and Molecular Formulas
At the end of this topic, students will be able to
define empirical and molecular formulas;
determine empirical and molecular formulas;
calculate percentage composition of an element in a substance.
Chemical formulas are used to express the composition of compounds in terms of
chemical symbols. By composition we mean not only the elements present but also the
ratios in which the atoms are combined. Here, you deal with two types of formulas,
empirical formulas and molecular formulas.
Empirical formula (or simplest formula) for a compound is the formula of a substance
written with the smallest ratio (whole number ratio) subscripts. The molecular formula
is the actual formula that tells you the exact number of atoms of different elements
present in a molecule.
Example 1.21:
Empirical formula
Molecular formula
Benzene
CH
C₆H₆
Glucose
CH2O
C₆H₁₂O₆
30
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Note that the empirical formula, merely tells you the ratio of numbers of atoms in the
compound.
Percent Composition by Mass (%)
Percent composition by mass tells you what percent of each element is present in a
compound. Thus, it helps in chemical analysis of the given compound. The percentage
composition of a given compound is defined as the ratio of the amount of individual
elements present in the compound multiplied by 100. Mathematically,
Percent composition of an element =
n X molar mass of the element X 100%
molar mass of compound
where n is the number of moles of the element in 1 mole of the compound. For example,
in 1 mole of hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂) there are 2 moles of H atoms and 2 moles of
o atoms. The molar masses of H₂O₂, H, and o are 34.02 g, 1.008 g, and 16.00 g,
respectively. Therefore, the percent composition of H2O2 is calculated as follows:
% H = 34.02 2x1.00gH H2O2 = 5.926%
% O = 2 x 16 94.06%
Determination of Empirical and Molecular Formulas
Steps to determine empirical formula are:
Step 1: Derive the number of moles of each element from its mass. Masses of elements
may be given in terms of percent composition of elements or grams.
Step 2: Divide each element's molar amount by the smallest molar amount to yield
subscripts for a tentative empirical formula.
Step 3: Multiply all coefficients by an integer, if necessary, to ensure that the smallest
whole number ratio of subscripts is obtained
Example 1.22: What is the empirical formula of a compound that contains 43.6%
P and 56.4% o ?
Step 1: Derivation of moles of each element,
Given mass of the element
Number of moles each element =
Molar mass of the element
Number of moles of P = 43.6 g/mol = 1.41 mol
Number of moles of o = 56.4 16.0 g/mol = 3.53 mol
31
Chemistry Grade 10
Step 2: Smallest molar amount is 1.41
P: 1.41/1.41=1.00, O: 3.53/1.41 = 2.50
Step 3. Multiply both by 2 to convert into whole number, P: 2 X 1 =2, O: 2 X
2.5 = 5
Empirical formula is P2O5
Example 1.23: A compound contains 79.9% carbon and 20.1 % of hydrogen by
mass. What is the empirical formula of the compound?
Step 1: C= (79.9 g)/(12 g/mol) = 6.7 mol, H = 20.1g/(1g/mol) = 20.1 mol
Step 2: C= 6.7/6.7 = 1, H = 20.1/6.7 = 3
Step 3: Empirical formula = CH₃
Molecular formula = Empirical formula xn
molar mass of molecular formula
n=
molar mass of empirical formula
Example 1.24: What is the molecular formula of the oxide of phosphorus that has
the empirical formula P2O5 if it's molecular mass is 284?
Molar mass of P₂O₅ = 142,
n = 284/142 = 2
Therefore, molecular formula = (P₂O₅)₂ = P₄O₁₀
Example 1.25: The compound ethylene glycol is often used as antifreeze. It
contains 38.7% carbon, 9.75% hydrogen, and the rest oxygen. The molecular
weight of ethylene glycol is 62.07 g. What is the molecular formula of ethylene
glycol?
1. Calculate the empirical formula. Assume 100 g of the compound, which will
contain 38.70 g carbon, 9.75 g hydrogen and the rest oxygen.
Mass of o = 100 g - - (38.7 g of C+ 9.75 g H) = 51.55 g
2. Calculate the moles of each element present:
No of moles of C = 12.01 38.70 g C g C = 3.22 mol C
No of moles of H = 9.75 gH = 9.67 mol H
1.008 g H
No of moles of o = 51.55 g O = 3.22 mol
16.01 g o
32
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Next, calculate the ratio of molecular weight to empirical formula weight. The
molecular weight is given. The empirical formula is CH₃O, so the empirical formula
weight is 12.01 + 3(1.008) + 16.00 = 31.03.
= empirical formula mass mass = 62.07 31.03 = 2
Molecular
n
Therefore, the molecular formula is twice the empirical formula: C2H6O2.
Exercise 1.8
1. Define and discuss each of the following terms: mole, Avogadro's number,
molar mass, molecular mass, formula mass, percentage composition
2. Distinguish between
a. Formula mass and molecular mass of a compound
b. Empirical and molecular formula
3. How many atoms and ions are there in one formula unit of
a. K2CO₃
b. Ba₃(PO₄)₂
4. How many moles of each element are present in
a. 1.00 mole of Cu₃(PO₄)₂
b. 2.5 mole of Na2CO3
C. 2 moles of AI₂(SO₄)₃
5. Calculate the empirical formula for:
a. 39.3% Na, 60.7% CI
b. 56.5% K, 8.7% C, 34.8% O
6. A. A compound of carbon and hydrogen contains 92.3% C and has a molar
mass of 78.1g/mol. What is its molecular formula?
B. A compound of carbon, hydrogen and chlorine has a molar mass of 99
g/mol. Analysis of a sample shows that it contains 24.3% carbon and 4.1%
hydrogen. What is its molecular formula?
7. Calculate the molar mass of a compound if 0.372 mole of it has a mass of
152 g.
8. Calculate the molecular mass or formula mass (in amu) of each of the following
substances:
a. CH₄
C. SO₃
e. Na₂SO₄
b. NO₂
d. C6H6
f. Ca₃(PO₄)₂
9. Calculate the percentage composition by mass of the following compounds:
a. C2H₅OH
C. H2SO4
e. K2Cr₂O₇
b. Na₃PO4
d. CaCO₃
33
Chemistry Grade 10
1.6
Stoichiometry
Refer to grade 9 chemistry and revise the three
fundamental laws of chemical reactions. Discuss in class
using the following and give your own examples for
each law.
a. Carbon forms two types of oxides namely carbon
monoxide and carbon dioxide.
?
b. The ratio of the mass of hydrogen to the mass of
oxygen in water is always 1:8.
C. The total masses of calcium, carbon and oxygen
are the same before and after the decomposition
Activity 1.6
of calcium carbonate.
At the end of this section, students will be able to
deduce mole ratios from balanced chemical equations;
solve mass-mass problems based on the given chemical equation;
define molar volume;
state Avogadro's principle;
solve mass-mass problems based on the given chemical equation;
solve mass-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
solve volume-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
describe limiting and excess reactants.
Stoichiometry is the study of the quantitative composition of substances and the
relationship that exists between the reactants and the products involved in chemical
reactions. In other words, stoichiometry is the study of the amount or ratio of moles,
mass, or volumes (for gases) of reactants and products. Stoichiometric calculations are
based on the following two major principles.
A.
The composition of any substance in the chemical equation should be expressed
by a definite formula.
B.
The law of conservation of mass must be obeyed (the mass of reactants equals
the mass of products)
?
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon.
When wood burns, the ash weighs much less than the
original wood. Where did the "lost mass" go? How can
you estimate the mass of the wood that is no longer
Activity 1.7
present? Present your conclusion to the class.
Note that stoichiometric calculations are done for balanced chemical equations.
34
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
1.6.1 Molar Ratios in Balanced Chemical Equation
At the end of this section, students will be able to deduce mole ratios from balanced
chemical equations.
Stoichiometry problems of this type are called either mass-mass or mole-mole problems.
A balanced chemical equation provides information about the nature, masses, number
of moles, number of molecules/atoms of reactants and products.
For example, consider the reaction of hydrogen with nitrogen to produce ammonia.
The equation shows that 3 molecules of hydrogen and 1 molecule of N2 react to
produce 2 molecules of ammonia. The equation can also represent the reaction of 3
moles (3x6.02x10²³ molecules) of H2 with 1 mole (6.02 X 10²³ molecules) of N2 to
yield 2 moles (2x6.02 X 10²³ molecules ) of NH₃. The same equation can also tell US the
combination of 6 g of H2 with 28 g of N2 to yield 34 g of NH3. This can be further
interpreted as follows:
N2
+
3H2
2NH3
1 molecule N2 +
3 molecules H2
2 molecules NH₃ (Molecular interpretation)
1mol N2
+
3 mol H2
2 mol NH₃ (Molar interpretation)
28.0 g N2
+
3 X 2.02 g H₂
2 X 17.0 g NH₃ ( mass interpretation)
Calculations based on chemical equations (stoichiometric problems) are classified into
mass-mass, volume-volume and mass-volume problems.
1.6.2 Mass - Mass Relationships
At the end of this section, students will be able to solve mass-mass problems based on
the given chemical equation or using the conversion factor.
There are two methods for solving mass-mass problems. These are mass-ratio and
mole-ratio methods.
A. The Mass - ratio Method
In this method, the mass of one substance is determined from the given mass of the
other substance using the following steps.
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Place the given mass above the corresponding formula, and X above the
formula of the substance whose mass is to be determined
Step 3: Write the total molar mass of the substances below the formula of each
substance. (Total molar mass is the molar mass of the substance multiplied by its
coefficient).
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown mass, X.
35
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.26: How many grams of aluminum metal must be heated to produce
20.4 g of aluminium oxide?
Solution:
Step 1: 4AI + 302
2AI2O3
X
20.4 g
Step 2: 4AI + 302
2AI2O3
X
20.4 g
Step 3: 4AI + 302
2AI2O3
108
204
Step 4: x/(108 g) = (20.4 g)/(204 g)
Step 5:
X
= (20.4 g)/(204 g) X 108 g = 10.8 g
Therefore, 10.8 g of aluminum metal is needed to produce 20.4 g of aluminum
oxide.
Note that stoichiometric problems can also be solved using the mole ratio or molar mass
as conversion factors. The numbers in a conversion factor come from the coefficients of
the balanced chemical equation.
In general, for mole - mole problems,
mole A X mole ratio = mole B
Mass-Mass problems,
1mole A
mole
B
molar mass B
gram A X
X
X
= gram B
molar mass A
mole A
mole B
In the above example, coefficients of Al and AI2O₃ are 4 and 2 respectively
Therefore, conversion factor = mole ratio = 4 mol AI/2 mol O₂. Given molar masses,
1 mole AI2O₃ = 102 g, 1 mole Al = 27 g
The conversion steps are summarized as follows:
grams of AI2O₃
moles of AI2O3
moles of Al
grams of Al
Conversion factor: molar mass of AI2O₃ mole ratio
molar mass of Al
20.4 g X 1 mol AI₂O₃/102 g AI2O₃ X 4 mol Al /2 mol AI2O₃ X 27 g Al/1mol
Al = 10.8 g
Example 1.27: What mass of magnesium sulfate will be produced if 4.8 g of
magnesium reacts with excess sulfuric acid?
Step 1: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
36
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
4.8g
X
Step 2: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
4.8g
X
Step 3: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
24g
120g
Step 4:
X = (4.8 g)/(24 g) X 120 g = 24 g
Therefore, 13.6 g MgSO₄ will be produced. Check the result using conversion
factor. Hint: mole ratio = 1mole Mg/1mole MgSO4
B. The Mole - ratio Method
In this method, calculations are made in terms of moles; therefore the given mass is
converted into mole. The obtained mole can be converted back to mass if required.
Follow the steps given below to solve problems of mass-mass relationships using mole
ratio method:
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Convert the given mass to moles and write the obtained moles and the required
quantity, x, above the formulas of the respective substances.
Step 3: Place the coefficients as the number of moles under the formula of each
substance involved.
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown value, x; and convert the moles obtained into mass.
Example 1.28: How many grams of calcium oxide are needed to react completely
with 22.0 g of carbon dioxide?
Solution:
Step 1: CaO + CO2
CaCO3
Step 2: moles of CO2 = given mass/molar mass = 22 g/44 g/mol = 0.5 mol
X 0.5mol
Step 3: CaO + CO2
CaCO3
1mol
1mol
Step 4: x/1 = 0.5mol/1mol
X = 0.5 mol
Step 5: Convert the moles into grams of CaO
Mass of CaO produced = No. of moles CaO X molar mass CaO
= 0.5mol X 56 g/mol = 28 g
Solve the above problem using conversion factor,
gram CO2
Mole CO2
mole CaO
gram CaO
37
Chemistry Grade 10
22 g CO2 X
1mol CO2 X 1mol CaO X 56 g CaO 28 g of CaO
44 g CO2 1mol CO2 1mol CaO
Example 1.29: How many grams of carbon monoxide must react with excess iron
oxide to produce 28 grams of iron?
Step 1: Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe + 3CO2
given mass
Step 2: No. of moles Fe
=
molar mass
= 28 g/ 56 g/mol = 0.5 mol
X
0.5 mol
Step 3: Fe2O3 + 3CO
2Fe + 3CO2
3 mol 2 mol
Step 4: x/(3 mol) = 0.5 mol/(2 mol)
X = 0.5 X 3 mol/2 = 0.75 mol of CO
Step 5: Convert the moles into grams of CO
Mass of CO required = no. of moles CO X molar mass CO
= 0.75 mol X 28 g/mol =21 g (check the result using the conversion factor)
Note that although mass-mass and mole-mole stoichiometric problems are more
common, there are also mass-mole and mole-mass problems.
In mole-mass problems, the amount of one substance is given in moles and the mass
of another substance is determined, usually in grams and in mass-mole problems, the
mass of one substance is given, usually in grams and the amount of another substance
is determined in moles. Refer to relevant sources and solve Exercise 1.9 (a,b). You may
use the general sequence of conversions
for a mole-mass calculation follow the following sequence:
mol 1st substance
mol 2nd substance
mass 2nd substance
Example: What mass of Fe₂O₃ must be reacted to generate 3 moles of AI2O3?
Fe₂O₃ + 2AI
2Fe + AI2O₃
Given: Moles of AI2O₃ = 3, Molar mass of AI2O₃ = 102 g Required: Mass of Fe₂O₃,
molar mass of Fe2O₃ = 160 g
Solution: Follow the sequence, Gram AI2O₃
mole AI2O3
mole Fe2O₃
Gram Fe₂O₃
3 moles of AI2O₃ X 1 1 mole mol AI₂O₃⁻ Fe2O₃ X 1 160 mol g Fe2O₃ = 480 g of Fe2O₃
for mass- mole calculation follow the following sequence:
38
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
mass 1st substance
mol 2nd substance
mol 2nd substance
Example: How many moles of C2H₅OH are needed to generate 106.7 g of H₂O?
C2H₅OH + 30₂
2CO₂ + 3H2O
Given: mass of H2O = 106.7 g, molar mass of H2O = 18 g Required: No. of mole
of C2H₅OH
Solution: follow the steps: Gram H2O
moleH₂O
mole C2H₅OH
106.7 g X 1mole 18g H2O X mole 3mol C2H₅OH H2O = 1.97 moles of C2H₅OH
Exercise 1.9
1. Which of the following statements is correct for the equation shown here?
4NH₃(g) + 50₂(g)
4NO(g) + 6H₂O(g)
a. 6 g of H2O are produced for every 4 g of NH3 reacted.
b. 1 mole of NO is produced per mole of NH3 reacted.
C. 2 moles of NO are produced for every 3 moles of O2 reacted
2. How many moles of H2O are required to produce 4.5 moles of HNO3 according
to the following reaction?
3NO₂ + H2O
2HNO₃ + NO
3. How many moles of CaO are needed to react with excess water to produce
370 g of calcium hydroxide?
4. In the decomposition of KCIO₃, how many moles of KCI are formed in the
reaction that produces 0.05 moles of O2?
5. How many grams of CaCO₃ are needed to react with 15.2 g of HCI according
to the following equation?
CaCO₃ + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + CO₂ + H₂O
6. What mass of nitrogen dioxide is produced by the decomposition of 182 g
of magnesium nitrate?
7. Solve the following using either mass-mole or mole-mass relations
a. What mass of hydrogen sulphide gas is burned in a reaction that produces
4 mol SO₂ and water vapor: 2H2S+ 302
2SO₂ + 2H2O
b. How many moles of CO2 will be produced when 50 g of CaCO₃ are
reacted according to the chemical equation:
CaCO₃ + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + CO2 + H2O
39
Chemistry Grade 10
1.6.3 Volume - Volume Relationships
At the end of this section, students will be able to solve volume -volume problems
based on the given chemical equation.
At Standard Temperature (0°C) and Pressure (1atm) or STP, one mole of any gas
occupies 22.4 liters. This, 22.4 liters is known as molar volume at STP.
The volume of a gas and its number of molecules are related and explained by
Avogadro's Law. Avogadro's Law states that equal volumes of different gases, under
the same conditions of temperature and pressure, contain equal number of molecules.
According to this law, the volume of a gas is proportional to the number of molecules
(moles) of the gas at STP as shown below:
V ~ n; where V is the volume and n is the number of moles of gas
In Volume - volume problems, the volume of one substance is given and the volume of
the other substance is calculated.
Example 1.30: What volume of oxygen will react with methane to produce 44.8
liters of carbon dioxide at STP?
Step 1: CH₄ + 202
2H2O + 2
Step 2: Place the given volume and the required volume, X above the corresponding
formulas.
X
44.8 L
CH₄
+
202
2H2O
+
CO2
44.8 L
22.4 L
Step 3: Write the total molar volume (22.4 L multiplied by any coefficient) below
the formulas.
Step 4: x/44.8 L=(44.8 L)/(22.4 L) X = 44.8 /22.4 X 44.8 L= 89.6 L
Step 5: Solve for the unknown volume, X
X = 89.6 L of oxygen is needed.
40
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Exercise 1.10
From
1. What volume of nitrogen reacts with 33.6 litres of oxygen to produce
nitrogen dioxide?
2. How many litres of sulphur trioxide are formed when 4800 cm³ of sulphur
dioxide is burned in air?
3. How many litres of ammonia are required to react with 145 litres of oxygen
according to the following reaction?
4NH3 + 502 4NO + 6H2O
4. Calculate the volume of oxygen produced in the decomposition of 5 moles of
KCIO₃ at STP?
5. How many moles of water vapour are formed when 10 litres of butane gas,
C₄H₁₀ is burned in oxygen at STP?
1.6.4 Mass - - Volume Relationships
At the end of this section, students will be able to solve mass -volume problems based
on the given chemical equation.
In mass-volume problems, either the mass of one substance is given and the volume of
the other is required or the volume of one substance is given and the mass of the other
one is required. The steps to solve such type of problems are the same as the previous
steps except putting the masses on one side and the volumes on the other side of the
equality sign.
Example 1.31: How many grams of magnesium should react with sulphuric acid
to produce 5.6 L of hydrogen at STP?
Solution:
Step 1: Mg + H2SO4
H2
X
5.6 L
Step 2: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
X
5.6 L
Step 3: Mg + H2SO4
MgSO4 + H2
24 g
22.4 L
Step 4: x/24 g = 5.6 L/22.4 L
X = 6 g
Step 5: X = 6 g of magnesium is needed
41
Chemistry Grade 10
Exercise 1.11
1. How many litres of oxygen are required to react with 156 g of benzene
according to the chemical equation:
2C6H6 + 150₂
12CO₂ + 6H2O
2. What mass of iron metal would be completely oxidized by 89.6 L of oxygen
to produce 2 3 at STP?
3. Calculate the mass of calcium carbide that is needed to produce 100 cm³ of
acetylene according to the equation:
CaC2 + 2H2O
C2H2 + Ca(OH)₂
4. How many milliliters of sulphur dioxide are formed when 12.5 g of iron
sulphide ore (pyrite) reacts with oxygen (at STP) according to the equation
4FeS₂ + 110₂
2Fe2O3 + 8SO₂
1.6.5 Limiting and Excess Reactants
At the end of this section, students will be able to describe limiting and excess reactants.
calculate the limiting and excess reactants of a reaction.
Consider a dance contest at a club. If there are 14
men and only 9 women, then only 9 female/male pairs
can compete.
1. How many men will be left without partners?
2. Who (men or women) are in excess?
3. Who (men or women) limits the number of female/
?
male pair that can dance in the contest?
4. How can you relate this analogue with the chemical
reactions involving two or more reactants?
Discuss in your group and present in class your
Activity 1.8
conclusion.
In a chemical reaction involving two reactants, the reaction will stop when all of one
reactant has been completely consumed no matter how much of the second reactant
remains. The reactant completely consumed first in a reaction is called the limiting
reactant, because it limits or determines the amount of product that can be formed.
When the limiting reactant is completely consumed, no more product can be formed
and thus the other reactant remains excess. Excess reactants are the reactants present
42
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
in quantities greater than necessary to react with the quantity of the limiting reactant.
Suppose you want to make some cheese sandwiches. Each is made from two slices of
bread and a slice of cheese.
2 slices bread + 1 slice cheese
1 cheese sandwich
If you have 7 slices of bread and 2 slices cheese, you can make 2 cheese sandwiches.
3 slices of bread is excess. The number of sandwiches is limited by the number of slices
of cheese. Hence, slices of cheese are the limiting ingredient and slices of bread are
excess ingredient.
Note that: Yield of the product is the one calculated using the limiting reactant and it
is the smallest.
Example 1.32: Magnesium metal reacts with hydrochloric acid by the following
reaction:
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl2 + H2
If 0.30 mol Mg is added to hydrochloric acid containing 0.52 mol HCI, how many
moles of H2 are produced?
Solution:
Here there are 0.3 mol of Mg and 0.52 mol of HCI. Therefore, first determine the
limiting reactant. Calculate the yield of H2 (product) using both reactants, the reactant
that gives lower yield is the limiting reactant and the amount obtained by the limiting
reactant is the yield of the product.
A. Using the quantity of Mg
B. Using the quantity of HCI
0.3mol/1mo = x/1mol
0.52 mol/2 mol = x/1mol
0.3 mol
X
0.52 mol
X
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl₂ + H2
Mg + 2HCI
MgCl₂ + H2
1 mol
1 mol
2 mol
1 mol
0.3 mol/1 mol = x/1 mol
0.52 mol/2 mol = x/1 mol
X = 0.3 mol of H2
X = 0.26 mol of H2
H2 produced using HCI is less than H2 produced using Mg.
Hence, HCI is the limiting reactant and Mg is the excess reactant. The number of moles
of H2 produced is equal to the quantity of H2 obtained using HCI (limiting reactant)
which is 0.26 mol.
43
Chemistry Grade 10
Example 1.33: In a process for producing acetic acid, oxygen gas is bubbled
into acetaldehyde, CH₃CHO, containing manganese (II) acetate (catalyst) under
pressure at 60 °C.
2CH3CHO + O2
2HC2H₃O₂
In a laboratory test of this reaction, 20.0 g CH₃CHO and 10.0 g O₂ were put into a
reaction vessel. A. How many grams of acetic acid can be produced? B. How many
grams of the excess reactant remain after the reaction is complete?
Solution
1. Convert grams in to moles
given mass
No. of moles of CH₃CHO =
molar mass
= 20g
= 0.454 mol
44 g/mol
No. of moles of O₂ = given mass
molar mass
= 10 g
= 0.312 mol
32 g/mol
2. Calculate the amount of HC2H₃O₂ produced by 0.454 mol. CH₃CHO and 0.312 mol
O₂ in order to decide the limiting reactant.
A. Using the quantity of CH₃CHO
B. Using the quantity of O₂
0.454 mol
X
0.312 mol X
2CH3CHO +O2
2HC₂H₃O₂
2CH3CHO + O2
2HC₂H₃O₂
2 mol
2 mole
1 mol 2 mol
0.454 mol/2 mol = x/2 mol
0.312 mol/1 mol = x/2 mol
X = 0.454 mol of HC2H₃O₂
X = 0.624 mol of HC2H₃O₂
Therefore, the limiting reactant is acetaldehyde, CH₂CHO. It is the reactant that gives
lower yield in the above reaction. Oxygen is the excess reactant in the above reaction
since it gives higher yield.
Number of moles of HC2H₃O₂ produced = 0.454 mol
A. Amount of HC2H₃O₂ produced in grams = 0.454 mol X 60 g/mol = 27.2 g
B.
Calculate the amount of oxygen consumed using the product obtained by the
limiting reactant
X
0.454 mol
2CH3CHO + O2
2HC₂H₃O₂
1 mol
2 mol
44
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Amount of O2 consumed, X = 0.454 mol X 1 mol/2 mol = 0.227 mol
We started with 10 g of O2 or 0.312 mol, so the excess O2 = 0.312 - 0.227 =
0.085mol or 2.7 g.
Exercise 1.12
1. If 6.5 g of zinc reacts with 5.0 g of HCI, according to the following reaction.
Zn + 2HCI
ZnCl₂ + H2
a. Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b. How many grams of the reactant remain unreacted?
C. How many grams of hydrogen would be produced?
2. What mass of Na₂SO₄ is produced if 49 g of H2SO4 reacts with 80 g of
NaOH?
3. If 20 g of CaCO₃ and 25 g of HCI are mixed, what mass of CO2 is produced?
CaCO₃ + 2HCI
CaCl₂ + CO2 + H2O
4. If 3 moles of calcium react with 3 moles of oxygen, then
a. Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b. How many moles of calcium oxide are formed?
5. For the reaction: 2AI + 3H2SO₄ AI2(SO₄)₃ + 3H₂, how many grams of
hydrogen are produced if 0.8 mole of aluminum reacts with 1.0 mole of
sulphuric acid?
1.6.6 Theoretical, Actual and Percentage Yields
At the end of this section, students will be able to
describe theoretical, Actual and percentage yields;
calculate theoretical, Actual and percentage yields.
By Considering the preparation of 'Shiro' powder
from chickpeas at home, discuss in group the following
questions and present your conclusion to the class.
a. Have you noticed the amount of chickpeas before
and after the preparation of Shiro powder? Is it
possible for the amount of chickpeas to be equal
after and before making the Shiro powder? If not,
?
what is the reason?
b. How could the quantity of the Shiro powder
preparation be maximized?
C. How can you compare this analogy with the yield
of products in a chemical reaction?
Activity 1.9
45
Chemistry Grade 10
Many chemical reactions do not proceed to give 100 % yield for a number of reasons.
Some reactions generate unwanted products due to side reactions. Others are, by
nature incomplete. Some products are difficult to collect without loss which reduces
the yield. As a result, the actual yield (experimentally determined yield) of a product
is usually less than the theoretical yield (calculated yield). The theoretical yield is
the calculated amount of product that would be obtained if the reaction proceeds
completely. The measured amount of product obtained in any chemical reaction is
known as the actual yield.
The percentage yield is the ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield multiplied
by 100.
Measured amount
Actual yield
Percentage yield=
X 100%
Theoretical yield
Calculated
Example 1.34: What is the percent yield if 24.8 g of CaCO₃ is heated to give
13.1 g of CaO?
Solution
The actual yield of CaO (given in the problem!) is 13.1 g
Determine the theoretical yield using mass-mass relationship
24.8 g
X
CaCO3
CaO + CO2
100 g
56 g
x/(56 g) = (24.8 g)/(100 g)
X = 13.9 g is the theoretical yield of CaO
Actual yield of CaO
Percentage yield of CaO =
X 100
Theoretical yield of CaO
Percentage yield of CaO = (13.1 g )/(13.9 g) x100 = 94.2%
46
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Exercise 1.13
1. When 21.6 g of aluminum reacts with oxygen, 20.8 g of aluminum oxide is
produced. What is the percentage yield of aluminum oxide?
2. When 14.5 g of SO₂ reacts with 21 g of O₂, what will be the theoretical
yield and percentage yield of the reaction if the actual yield is 12 g?
3. In the reaction: 2C₈H₁₈ + 250₂
16CO2 + 18H₂, when 52.7 g of octane
(C₈H₁₈) burns in oxygen, the percentage yield of carbon dioxide is 82.5%.
What is the actual yield in grams?
Checklists for Reference
Balancing chemical equations
Oxidation
Chemical reaction
Oxidizing agents
Chemical equation
Percentage yield
Combination reaction
Products
Decomposition reaction
Percentage composition
Double displacement reaction
Redox reaction
Excess reactant
Reducing agents
Empirical formula
Reduction
Formula mass
Reactants
Limiting reactants
Single displacement reaction
Mass-mass problems
Stoichiometry
Mass-volume problems
Theoretical and actual yield
Molecular formula
Volume-volume problems
Mole concept
Unit Summary
Chemical equations are representations of chemical reactions using chemical
symbols and formulas.
In any reaction, the total mass of reactants equals the total mass of products
according to the law of conservation of mass. Thus, we should always balance
chemical equations.
Chemical reactions can be classified as combination, decomposition, single
displacement or double displacement reactions.
When a substance loses electron (s) or increases its oxidation number in a
reaction, the process is oxidation and when a substance gains electron (s) or
decreases its oxidation number, the process is reduction.
Oxidizing agents are substances reduced, and reducing agents are the
substances oxidized in reduction - - oxidation (redox) reaction.
Reactions in which neither oxidation nor reduction takes place are non-redox
reactions. Neutralization and double displacement reactions are examples of
47
Chemistry Grade 10
non-redox reactions.
Molecular mass or formula mass expressed in grams is called molar mass. Molar
mass is the mass of one mole of a substance.
A mole is defined as the amount of a substance that contains the same number
of entities as there are atoms in exactly 12 g of carbon-12. 12 g of carbon-12
contains 6.022x10²³ atoms. This number is known as Avogadro's number (NA).
Empirical formula (or simplest formula) for a compound is the formula of a
substance written with the smallest ratio (whole number ratio) subscripts. The
molecular formula is the actual formula that tells you the exact number of atoms
of different elements present in a molecule.
In chemical reactions, the quantitative relationship between reactants and
products is called stoichiometry. There are mainly mass-mass, mass volume and
volume-volume stoichiometric relations
The reactant completely consumed first in a reaction is called the limiting
reactant. The reactants present in quantities greater than necessary to react
with the quantity of the limiting reactants are excess reactants
In chemical reactions, the actual (experimentally determined) yield of a product
is usually less than the theoretical (calculated) yield. The percentage yield is the
ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield multiplied by 100.
Review Exercises
Part I: True-false type questions.
1.
In any chemical reaction, each type of atoms is conserved.
2.
In a balanced chemical equation, both sides of the equation have the same
number of moles.
3.
The oxidizing agent is oxidized by the reducing agent.
4.
Most metallic elements are strong reducing agents, whereas most non-metallic
elements are strong oxidizing agents.
5.
The higher the percentage yields of a chemical reaction, the more efficient the
reaction.
Part II: Write the missing words for each of the following.
6.
The oxidation number of manganese in KMnO₄ is
.
7.
The maximum yield of product is determined by
reactant.
8.
Reactions which do not involve electron transfer are known as
.
9.
The sum of masses of all the atoms present in a molecule is
.
10. The sum of the atomic masses of all atoms present in the formula unit of an ionic
compound is
.
11.
is the formula of a substance written with the smallest integer
(whole number) subscripts.
12.
is the actual formula that tells you the exact number of atoms of
different elements present in a molecule.
48
Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry
Part III: Multiple choice questions.
13. Which of the following contains the largest number of H2O molecules ?
a. 1 mole of H2O
C. 6.02 X 10²³ molecules of H2O
b. 18 g of H2O
d. 1 kg of H2O
14. The formula mass of Ca₃(PO₄)₂ is
a. 310
d. 120
b. 87
e. none
C. 200
15. One mole of two different substances A and B have equal
a. number of particles
d. molecular mass
b. molar mass
e. percentage composition of the
C. formula mass
elements
Part IV: Problem - solving questions.
Solve the following problems appropriately.
16. Calculate the molecular masses (in amu) of the following compounds:
a. sulphur dioxide (SO₂), a gas that is responsible for acid rain, and
b.
caffeine (C₈H₁₀N₄O₂), a stimulant present in tea, coffee, and cola
beverages.
17. How many moles of CO2 are present in 176 g of CO₂ ?
18. How many grams of oxygen can be prepared by the decomposition of 12
grams of mercury (II) oxide?
19. 25 g of NH₃ is mixed with 4 moles of O₂ in the given reaction:
4NH₃(g) + 50₂(g)
4NO(g) + 6H2O(I)
a. Which is the limiting reactant?
b. What mass of NO is formed?
C. What mass of H2O is formed?
20. Consider the following reaction: 2N2O₅
4NO₂(g)+ O₂(g)
When 40 g of N₂O₅ decomposes, 4.5 g of O2 is formed. What is the percent
yield?
21. Two compounds have the same composition: 85.62% C and 14.38% H.
a. Obtain the empirical formula corresponding to this composition.
b. One of the compounds has a molecular mass of 28.03 amu; the other, of
56.06 amu. Obtain the molecular formulas of both compounds.
22. A borane has the empirical formula BH₃ and a molecular mass of 28 amu. What
is its molecular formula?
23. The percentage composition of acetic acid is found to be 39.9% C, 6.7% H, and
53.4% o and its molecular mass was determined by experiment to be 60 amu.
Calculate the empirical and molecular formula of acetic acid.
49
Chemistry Grade 10
24. Balance the following equations using any method :
a. H3BO3 H₄B₆O₁₁ + H2O
b. P₂I₄ + P₄ + H2O PH 1 + H₃PO₄
C. HCIO₄ + P₄O₁₀ H3PO4 + CI2O₇
d. H₂S + HNO3 S + NO + H2O
e. H2SO4 + HBr SO₂ + Br₂ + H2O
f. KMnO₄ + HCI
MnCl₂ +CI₂ + KCI +H2O
g. K + KNO₃ N2 + K₂O
50
Expanded solute
Solute
Solvent
Expanded solve.
Step 2
Step I
Step 3
Step 3
Solution
Solution
Colloid
UNIT
SOLUTIONS
