UNIT 3
MOTION IN ONE AND TWO
DIMENSIONS
Introduction
Motion is one of the significant topics in physics. Everything in the universe moves. If
you give a glimpse to your environment, you might see several things in motion: a car
on a road, children playing on a playground, an airplane flying in the sky, even an ant
crawling on the ground. An object is said to be in motion if its position changes with
time.
The concept of motion is a relative. A body that may be in motion relative to one
reference system, may be at rest relative to another. For example, if you are sitting in the
classroom, you are at rest with respect to the earth; but actually, you are in motion with
respect to the Sun.
In this unit we will learn about motion in one dimension relative to any fixed reference
frame, and its applications in our day-to-day life. In addition to motion in 1D, we will
also discuss uniform circular motion as an example of motion in 2D.
Learning outcomes: Students will be able to:
gain an understanding of the fundamental principles of kinematics in one
and two dimensions.
develop skills in applying equations of motions to solve practical
problems.
recognize the effect of air resistance and force of gravity on motion of a
body.
describe technological advances related to motion; and identify the effects
of societal influences on transportation and safety issues.
47
Physics
Student Text Book
3.1 Uniformly Accelerated Motion in 1D
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
explain a uniformly accelerated motion in 1D;
explain the difference between average velocity and instantaneous velocity;
and
solve problems involving average velocity, instantaneous velocity and
acceleration.
?
Brainstorming
After revising what you have learnt in grades 9 and 10 about motion in a straight
line and uniformly accelerated motion discuss about the following questions in
group and present your group's answers to the class.
1. Define the terms position, distance, displacement, speed, and velocity in
motion.
2. Explain the relationship between
U
position and displacement,
U
distance and displacement,
U
distance and speed,
U
displacement and velocity,
U
average velocity and instantaneous velocity.
3. When do we say an object is accelerating?
4. How will it be possible for a car to move but not accelerating?
Acceleration
An object is said to accelerate when its velocity changes in magnitude, in direction
or both in magnitude and direction. Acceleration is a vector quantity, and is defined
as the rate of change of velocity or change in velocity per unit time. The SI unit of
acceleration is m/s².
Negative acceleration may or may not be deceleration, and deceleration may or may
not be considered negative acceleration. If the velocity and acceleration have the same
sign whether positive or negative it is speeding up. If the velocity and acceleration
have different signs, then the object is slowing down.
48
Grade 11
?
Activity 3.1:
Discuss in group and present your group's understanding of the following
questions to the class.
1. Does negative acceleration necessarily mean slowing down?
2. Does positive acceleration necessarily mean speeding up?
Average acceleration
The average acceleration, aₐᵥ of a particle is defined as the ratio of the change in
velocity to the time interval
a
where vf is the final velocity, vᵢ is the initial velocity and t is the time interval. The
SI unit of acceleration is m/s² = ms⁻²
Key term
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity. It is a vector quantity, with a unit of
m/s².
Example: 3.1
If the speed of a certain car is increased from rest to 20m/s in 6 seconds, what is
the average acceleration of the car?
Solution
We have v₀ = 0, = at and at t₀ =0, = , and Vf = at tf = 6s
1 3.67m/s²
Instantaneous acceleration
1
Instantaneous acceleration, ains or acceleration at a specific instant in time, is
obtained using the same process discussed for instantaneous velocity. That is, we
calculate the average acceleration between two points in time separated by At and
let At approach zero.
49
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 3.2.
The velocity of a particle that moves along a straight line varies as a function
of time with a velocity equation as: v(t) = t² - 2t. Find the acceleration of the
particle at t = 2 s.
Solution:
To find the acceleration at t =2s, we first find the acceleration at any time t, that is
a
Since,v(t) = t² - 2t
a
=
=
= t0 tim(21)
= = im(2r+(At)-2)),SinceAt0 ≈
= (2t-2)
This expression is the acceleration of the particle at any time t. Substituting the
given time t = 2s in this expression gives us the acceleration of the particle at t =2s.
Therefore a(t= 2s)=2(2)-2=2m/ s²
Motion with Constant Acceleration
Although there is a possibility to have varying acceleration (non-uniform
acceleration) in reality, in many common types of one-dimensional motion, the
acceleration is assumed to be constant or uniform. It means that, the velocity of the
object is changing by equal amount in equal interval of time. Such a motion is known
as a uniformly accelerated rectilinear motion. In this case, the average acceleration
equals the instantaneous acceleration, and the average velocity is the average of the
initial and final velocities.
50
Grade 11
Exercise 3.1:
A Cheetah, shown in the figure, is
the fastest land animals. It could run
up to 120 km/h. Starting from rest a
Cheetah can reach to a speed of 96.6
km/h in only three seconds. What is
its (a) average acceleration? and (b)
average velocity in these 3 seconds?
?
Activity 3.2:
Experiment
In this experiment the acceleration of a ball/wooden block/trolley/tin can
is determined by rolling or sliding it down a slight incline plane. To do so, the
distances they covered in successive time intervals is measured.
Apparatus and Materials
Ball/wooden block/trolley/tin can
Ramp,
meter stick.
electronic stopwatch
Ticker-timer with power supply unit
Ticker-tape
Sellotape
Ramp Construction
For the ramp you can use any flat, level object such as a board or a cardboard box.
It should be at least 1.25 meters long. If you don't have anything like that then you
will have to improvise. It doesn't matter what the ramp is made of as long as it is flat
and strong enough to support your rolling/sliding object without bending.
To raise one end of the ramp, use a pile of books. You may not be able to get the top
of the ramp at exactly the height given in the instructions. Get it as close as you can
and record the actual height in data tables A and B.
51
Physics
Student Text Book
Figure 3.1
Objectives
1. Become familiar with the concept of hypothesis testing by experiment.
2. Observe and measure motion on an inclined plane.
3. Understand the relationships between distance, time, and acceleration.
4. Understand how to draw and interpret a "best fit" or regression line on a graph
of experimental data.
5. Appreciate the difficulties in analyzing experimental data to make conclusions,
even if the data is carefully and correctly collected.
Procedure
1. Measure distance, d along the ramp with arbitrary starting point.
2. Set up the ramp with h = 0.10 m above the table, (as shown in Figure 3.9)
3. Starting with the ball/wooden block/trolley/cylinder at rest, use the stopwatch
to measure the time to roll distance d = 1.8 meter down the ramp.
4. Take 6, time measurements, record in data table. Cross out the highest and
lowest times and determine the average of the remaining four times. (Sum four
times and divide by four to find the average.)
5. Repeat steps 2 to 4 for distances of 1.6 m, 1.4 m, 1.2 m, and 1.0 m (see data
table).
6. Using cell-phone record the video of the motion and use it for plotting the S vs.
t, V vs. t and a vs. t graphs.
A countdown of "3, 2, 1" is a good way to begin the timing whether there is one
person or two involved in the experiment.
To stop the timing, it is best to use a flat object such as a ruler or the cover of a book
52
Grade 11
as a physical stop. This allows you to use your sense of hearing along with sight to
coordinate the stopwatch with the stopping point.
Data Table
Make six trials and discard the highest and lowest in each trial so you will average
the middle three values. Enter the average time in the data table. In each case use
t(avg) for the times to calculate t squared.
d (m)
t₁
t₂
t₃
4
t₅
t₆
tₐᵥ
t²ₐv
a=2d
II
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
1. Draw a graph of distance versus average time squared for your data, (d vs. t2)
2. Determine the slope the best fit line.
3. The value of acceleration is twice the slope.
4. Analyze the data using spreadsheet (Microsoft excel).
5. Using distance 'd' and average time draw: distance vs. time, velocity vs. time
and acceleration vs. time graph of the motion using spreadsheet (Microsoft
excel).
N.B. Contact your IT teacher to get an assistance about how to use Microsoft
excel in analyzing your data and draw graphs.
1. Compare the measured acceleration with the theoretical estimate
(a= = g sin Θ) , friction neglected by making the surface as smooth as possible.
2. Write a report on your findings.
53
Physics
|
Student Text Book
Review Questions 3.1
1. Define the terms average and instantaneous acceleration.
2. State the conditions in which an object is said to speed up and slow down.
3. What is the relationship between acceleration and deceleration?
4. A car driver accelerates her car by 1.4 m/s², starting from rest. (a) How long
does it take her to reach a speed of 2.0 m/s? (b) If she then brakes to a stop in
0.8 seconds, what is her deceleration?
5. A particle is in motion and is accelerating. The velocity of the motion as a
function of time is given by: v(t) = 20t - m/s. Find (a) the functional
form of the acceleration, (b) the instantaneous velocity at t = 3s, and (c) the
instantaneous acceleration at t = 3 S.
3.2 Equations of Uniformly Accelerated Motion in 1D
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
derive and apply the equations of uniformly accelerated motion in 1D.
solve various problems of uniformly accelerated motion in 1d.
Derivation of equations of motion for uniformly accelerated motion
in a straight line.
The symbols used have the following meanings:
S = displacement, vᵢ = initial velocity, vƒ = final velocity,
t = time for the acceleration, and a = acceleration
Directly from the definition of acceleration, we get
, which can be written as
vf = vᵢ + at
Equation 1
From the definition of average velocity, we get
s = vₐᵥt, =
but for uniformly accelerated motion,
Equation 2
54
Grade 11
Remember that average velocity and instantaneous velocities are different.
Instantaneous velocity is the velocity at a particular instant of time, but average
velocity is the velocity that represents a motion in a certain interval of time.
Substituting this equation of average velocity into the above equation of displacement
gives
Equation 3
By substituting for final velocity from equation 1 into equation 2 and rearranging
gives
S
(1)
Equation 4
Instead of final velocity if we substitute for initial velocity into equation 2 and
rearranging gives
s=v,t-1at²
Equation 5
Rearranging equation 1 for time (t) and substituting into equation 2 gives
(-)-
v² = vᵢ² + 2as
Equation 6
Note that, the above 6 equations all refer to uniformly accelerated motion in a
straight line. It means that, they do not apply if the acceleration is changing.
The above equations are important kinematics equations to solve any problem of
motion with constant acceleration. They summarized in Table 3.1 below.
Table 3.1: Kinematics equations for uniformly accelerated motion
Equation
Missing quantity
vf = vᵢ + at
Displacement (S)
Displacement (s), acceleration (a), and time (t)
55
Physics I Student Text Book
Acceleration (a)
Final velocity (vƒ)
s=v,t-1at²
Initial velocity (vᵢ)
v²ⱼ = v² + 2as
Time (t)
Note that the above equations are vector equations, it means that we need to take of
the direction of the quantities to be added. If they are in the same direction we add,
but if they point in opposite directions we subtract.
Example 3.3
A car accelerates uniformly from rest to a speed of 72 km/h in 8.0 S. (a) Find the
acceleration of the car. (b) Find the distance the car travels. (c) If the car brakes to
a stop over a distance of 50 m, then find its uniform deceleration.
Solution:
(a) In this problem we are given vᵢ = 0,vƒ = / h = 20m/ and t = 8.0 s
Using the equation
(b) To find the distance that the car travelled, we can use the equation:
thus
The distance can also be found from the equation: S
So that
(c) In this case the car breaks from 20m/s to a stop over a distance of 50 m, then
its deceleration will be:
This negative acceleration implies that the car's speed decreases from time to time.
56
Grade 11
Misconception Alert !!!
Note that all negative accelerations are not always decelerations. Negative acceleration
can also occur due to the change in direction with respect to a certain fixed reference
point.
Example: 3.4
The Ethiopian Airlines Boeing airplane lands on one of the Bole international
airport runways with an initial velocity of 40.0 m/s and then decelerates at 1.50
m/s². (a) What length of runway will it need? (b) For how long will it move on the
runway?
Solution:
Identify the known quantities: Vᵢ = 70m/s, a = -1.5m Vf = 0
S = 2a = 2(-1.5) -1600 -3.0 = 533.3m
The time to stop is
:
Determining the stopping distance of a vehicle
What is stopping distance?
When brakes are applied to a moving vehicle, the distance it travels before stopping
is called stopping distance. Calculating stopping distance is important for avoiding
potential hazardous situations. There are many factors that can affect the stopping
distance of a moving vehicle. Here are some;
Speed of the vehicle
Weight of the vehicle
Road conditions (slick, icy, snow, dry, wet)
Vehicle brake conditions (old or worn pads and rotors)
Braking technology in the vehicle
Tire conditions
This leads us to the actual formula for working out braking distances. The formula
is based on the velocity (speed) of the vehicle and the coefficient of friction between
the wheels and the road (µ).
Braking distance
57
Physics I Student Text Book
This is because, for a car coming to a stop due to friction: a = µg. Experiments have
shown that for dry roads, the coefficient of friction is about 0.7, and for wet roads it
is about 0.4. The stopping distance is then the sum of reaction distance and braking
distance.
Stopping distance
Reaction
distance
Braking distance
Hazard
Braking
The car
detected
begins
stands still
Figure 3.2: Stopping distance
The reaction distance is the distance you travel from the point of detecting a hazard
until you begin braking or swerving. The time between being where we first start
measuring, and where the car begins braking, is called the reaction time. As an
equation, looking at the car's speed, v, the distance v it travels over a period of
time v is:
The reaction distance = The car's speed X reaction time.
Reaction distance (sᵣ) =
Stopping distance = reaction distance + braking distance
Stoppind distance = vt +
Example 3.2:
(a) Compare the stopping distance for the following speeds of an automobile.
Assumes the road is dry and the co-efficient of friction between the tire and
the road is 0.70. (b) Discuss the potential damage that could be caused by the
automobile running with 80 km/h compared to that moving with 20 km/h.
reaction distance
Speedometer
Speedometer
braking
Stopping
distance
distance
reading
reading
=
(km/h)
(m/s)
t = your reactiontime
Sb 2 v²
Sr
80 km/h
60 km/h
30 km/h
20 km/h
58
Grade 11
?
Activity 3.3:
1. Discuss in group about the meanings of the traffic signs shown in the figure
below and the consequences resulted if one is going to miss it.
2. Discuss about the main causes of car accidents in your area, and the ways to
reduce the accidents. Your teacher can invite a guest from traffic offices.
RCP 9168 00318
HThChe and
me one
OVERTAKING LANE
PASSENGER CAR LANE
TRUCK LANE
120
80
100
80
80
60
30
km/h
Figure 3.3: Traffic sign
Review Questions 3.2
1. Derive the five kinematic equations.
2. It is found experimentally that, if a street surface is dry, a good driver can
safely decelerate an automobile with reasonably good tires at the rate of about
4.57 m/s². So, for a car moving at 60 km/h what should be the minimum
distance between two cars so that they won't crash during a sudden stop?
3. A driver of a vehicle traveling at a speed of 30 m/s on a motorway brake
sharply to a standstill in a distance of 100m. Calculate the deceleration of the
vehicle.
4. A motorist travelling at 18 m/s approaches traffic lights. When he is 30 m from
the stop line, they turn red. It takes 0.7 S before he can react by applying the
brakes. The car slows down at a rate of 4.6 m/s². How far from the stop line
will he come to rest and on which side of it?
5. The driver of a train travelling at 40 m/s applies the brakes as the train enters
a station. The train slows down at a rate of 2m/s. The platform is 400 m long.
Will the train stop in time?
6. The distance covered in n seconds and the distance covered in the nth second
are different questions. Derive the equation for the distance covered in the nth
second.
59
Physics
I Student Text Book
3.3 Graphical Representation of Uniformly
accelerated Motion in 1 D
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
graphically, represent position versus time graph, displacement time graph,
velocity time graph, and acceleration time graph of a uniformly accelerated
motion in 1d.
interpret a graph of velocity vs. time, displacement vs. time and acceleration
vs. time.
draw graphs from the kinematic equations.
determine the velocity of a motion from the slope of displacement-time graph,
and acceleration from the slope of velocity - time graph.
determine the displacement covered from the area under velocity - time
graph.
In this section, we will discuss about graphs that help us picture the concepts of
displacement, velocity and acceleration.
3.3.1 Displacement-Time Graphs
?
Brainstorming
What are dependent and independent variables in drawing graphs, and what
is the relationship between them?
Displacement-Time Graph
A displacement-time graph shows how displacement changes with time. In drawing
displacement-time graph, we record displacement and time for the motion, and
the displacement (the dependent variable) is plotted on the Y-axis, and time (the
independent variable) is plotted on the X-axis.
The slope of displacement-time graph
Slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. It is given by the equation:
Slope = run Horizontal Vertical increase increase x₂ t₂⁻t₁
60
Grade 11
x (m)
x2
rise
run
T1
t₁
t₂
t (s)
Figure 3.4: Slope of Position-time graph
This expression for slope is the same as the definition of velocity:
velocity =
So, the slope of a position-time graph equals the velocity of the motion.
a. Displacement-time graph for uniform motion
For a body moving at constant velocity (uniform motion), its graph of displacement
against time is a straight line with a constant slope/gradient, Figure 3.5 (b). This is
because distance is directly proportional to time =
b. Displacement-time graph for uniformly accelerated motion
For a body moving at constant acceleration, its graph of displacement against time
is a parabola (curved upward), Figure 3.5 (c). This is because distance is directly
proportional to the square of time In this case slope is increasing (sloping
up or getting steeper), hence velocity is increasing resulting in a positive acceleration.
Displacement-time graph for uniformly decelerated motion
Figure 3.5 (d), shows the case where the velocity of an object is decreasing, slope is
decreasing, resulting to a deceleration.
61
Physics
Student Text Book
Displacement
Displacement
Displacement
Displacement
Time
Time
Time
Time
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 3.5: Some common displacement-time graphs
Interpreting a displacement-time graphs
In interpreting or describing the motion of an object, we decide whether the object
is moving at a constant speed, accelerating or decelerating or is the object stationary
(at rest). To understand how to interpret these graphs, we need to know something
about the slope of a line. The slope of a line on a graph tells you how quickly the
quantity being graphed is increasing or decreasing. For this purpose, we use the
following properties of the slope of a dispacement time-graph.
A flat line (slope equals zero), means that the object is at rest.
An upwards straight line means that the object is moving forwards at a
constant speed.
For an upward curved line, for each second that ticks on the horizontal
time axis, the distance travelled is greater than the second before. In
other words, distance is increasing at an increasing rate. We say that
the object is accelerating.
If the line on the distance-time graph curves the other way (when the
slope becomes flatter), then the object will be decelerating, as each
second the distance travelled is less than the previous second.
So, the displacement vs. time graphs of Figure 3.5 are interpreted as follows.
a. shows the graph for an object stationary over a period of time. The slope is
zero, so the object has zero velocity.
b. shows the graph for an object moving at a constant velocity. You can see
that the displacement is increasing as time goes on. The slope, however,
stays constant (remember: it's the slope of a straight line), so the velocity is
constant. Here the slope is positive, so the object is moving in the direction we
have defined as positive.
62
Grade 11
c. shows the graph for an object moving at a constant acceleration. You can see
that the slope of the curve increases with time (becomes more vertical); thus,
the velocity is increasing with time and the object is accelerating.
d. shows the graph for an object moving at a constant deceleration. You can see
that the slope of the curve decreases with time (becomes more horizontal);
thus, the velocity is decreases with time and the object is decelerating.
Example 3.5:
Draw the displacement-time graph of a ball thrown directly upwards and caught
when it returns.
Solution:
Immediately after leaving the throwers hand, the velocity is positive and
large so the slope is positive and large.
As the ball rises, its velocity decreases so the slope decreases.
At the maximum height, its velocity is zero so the slope is zero.
As the ball descends, its velocity becomes increasingly negative,
corresponding to increasing speed in a downward direction. So, the slope
becomes increasingly negative.
The slope of the line represents the object's acceleration. This is constant and
negative, equal to the acceleration of free fall, g. The acceleration of the object
is the same when it descends as when it ascends so the slope of the line is always
equal to -9.8m/
The area under the line represents the displacement of the object from its starting
position.
The area between the positive
displacement
section of the line and the time
maximuum
axis represents the displacement
height
during the ascend.
The area under the negative
section of the line and the time
axis represents the displacement
during the descent.
Summing up theses two areas gives
0
0
time
zero. This corresponds to zero total
displacement, because it returns back
Figure 3.6: Displacement-time graph of an
to the thrown point.
object thrown vertically upward
63
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Exercise 3.2:
For the motion of a ball thrown vertically upward whose displacement-time
graph is shown in Figure 3.13, draw its distance time graph.
Velocity-Time Graph
A velocity-time graph shows how velocity
changes with time. In drawing velocity-time
graph, we record velocity and time for the
motion, and the velocity (the dependent
variable) is plotted on the Y-axis, and time (the
independent variable) is plotted on the X-axis.
That is vertical axis represents the velocity of the
velocity
object, and the horizontal axis represents the
At
time taken. Figure 3.7, shows the velocity-time
time
graph of a motion with a constant acceleration,
Figure 3.7: Slope of
i.e., the velocity increases by equal amount in
velocity-time graph
equal interval of time.
slope = Vertical increase At
Horizontal increase
This is just the expression for acceleration. So, the slope of a velocity graph represents
the acceleration of the motion. Because the slope is the same at all points on this
graph, the acceleration is constant.
We can also get the displacement travelled from the velocity vs. time graph by finding
the area of the region between the line and the time axis.
Note:
The slope of a velocity-time graph gives the acceleration.
The area between a velocity-time graph and the `time' axis gives the
displacement of the object.
The velocity-time graph for (a) uniform motion, (b) uniformly accelerated motion,
and (c) uniformly decelerated motion is shown in the Figure 3.8, below.
64
Grade 11
Velocity
Velocity
Velocity
Time
Time
Time
(For body moving
(For uniform
(For uniform
with constant velocity)
accelerated motion
accelerated motion
with increasing velocity)
with decreasing
velocity)
Figure 3.8: Some common velocity-time graphs:
Key terms
Slope of displacement-time graph give average velocity.
Slope of velocity-time graph give the acceleration of the motion.
The area under the velocity-time curve and the time axis gives the magnitude of
the displacement covered.
Exercise 3.4
By looking a velocity vs. time graph, you can tell if an object is accelerating,
decelerating, or moving at a constant velocity. Forming a group with 5 members
make a discussion and interpret the above three velocity vs. time graphs.
Example 3.6
Draw the velocity-time graph of a ball thrown directly upwards and caught when
it returns.
Solution:
The velocity of the ball decreases from
maximum height occurs
its initial positive (upward) value
at time I = u/g
to zero at a maximum height then
increases in the negative (downwards)
velocity
o
time
direction as it falls. Figure 3.9 shows
how the velocity of the ball changes
with time.
Figure 3.9 Velocity-time graph of a ball
thrown vertically up and came back to
the throwers hand
65
Physics
Student Text Book
Exercise 3.5
There is a difference between displacement vs. time graph and distance vs. time
graph of a motion, and also between velocity vs. time and speed vs. time graph
of a motion. Draw (a) distance vs. time, and (b) speed vs. time graph of a ball
thrown vertically upward and returns back to the throwers hand.
Acceleration-Time Graph
Acceleration-time graph shows how acceleration changes with time. In drawing
acceleration-time graph, we record acceleration and time for the motion, and
the acceleration (the dependent variable) is plotted on the Y-axis, and time (the
independent variable) is plotted on the X-axis. In this section, we will only deal
with objects moving at a constant acceleration, thus all acceleration-time graphs are
parallel to the time axis. Figure 3.10 below shows acceleration vs. time graph of a
uniform motion (a), a uniformly accelerated motion (b), and a uniformly decelerated
motion (c).
acceleration
acceleration
0
Time (s)
a)
time
b)
time
Figure 3.10 acceleration-time graph of (a) uniform motion, (b) uniformly
accelerated motion, (c) uniformly decelerated motion.
Example 3.7:
A car starts from rest and accelerates at a rate of 2.0m/s² for 5seconds, then
maintains its speed for 4 seconds. It then applied the brakes and stopped within
2 seconds. Then it moves at a constant speed of 15m/s in the opposite direction
until it reaches the starting point.
Determine the position of the car for each interval of time.
a) Draw the displacement versus time, velocity versus time and acceleration b)
versus time graph of the motion of the car.
c) From the velocity time graph, show that the displacement is zero.
66
Grade 11
Solution:
a) The car has different motions in the four intervals of time.
In the first interval of time between t = 0 and t = 5s it accelerates from
rest at a rate of 2.0m/s2. The displacement S in this interval will then be:
In the second interval of time, it maintains its speed for 4 seconds (i.e. between
t=5s and t = 9s). The constant speed it attained is the final speed at t = 5s. That
speed is
=
The displacement in the second interval will then be
s₂ = vt = (10m/ s)(4s) = 40m
Since S = X2 - X1 then the position of the car x² at the end of the second interval
will be
x =S₂+S₁=40m+25m = 65m
In the third interval of time, the car applied its brakes and reduces its speed at
a constant rate for 2 seconds until its velocity becomes zero from 10m/s. The
acceleration during this time interval is
0-10m/s
The displacement during this time interval will therefore be
S₃ -100m² / s² -10m/s² = 10m
The position of the car at the end of the third interval will be
x₃ = x₂ +s₂ = 65m+ 10m= 75m
In the fourth interval of time, the car moves at a constant speed of 15m/s in
opposite direction until it reaches Xf = 0 to the place where it started the motion.
(i.e. V = 15m/s since it is moving in the opposite direction.)
The final position xf = 0 and the time it takes to the initial position can be obtained
from the equation,
t = =
67
Physics I Student Text Book
b) The displacement vs time graph, and the corresponding velocity vs. time
graph is shown below.
The displacement-time graph will have
a parabolic shape in the first interval
x(m)
(speeding up); straight line with a positive
7
6
slope in the second interval (constant
2
speed); parabola inverted downward in
0
5
9
11
16
t(s)
the third interval which indicates the
v(m/s)
10
decreasing of speed in magnitude (slowing
0
5
9
11
16
t(s)
down); and in the last interval, it is a straight
line with a negative slope that indicates the
reverse in direction.
One of the three features of the velocity versus time graph is the area under the
curve is the displacement. From the lower part of the graph in Figure 3.18, the
sum of the area of the regions sum up to give us the displacement.
The area of the triangle in region 1 is: Area₁ = 2 1 = 25m
The area of the triangle in region 2 is: Area₂ = (10m/s)x(4s)=40,
The area of the triangle in region 3 is: Area₃ = 2 1 =
The area of the triangle in region 4 is: Area₁ = -(15m/s)(5s) = -75m
The total area is: Area₁ + Area₂ + Area₃ + Area₄ = 25m + 40m + 10m - 75m = O
This value of the displacement coincides with the value clearly seen in the
displacement vs. time graph.
Review Questions 3.4
1. Interpret the following the following velocity-time graphs.
2. Interpret the following displacement (s) VS. time graphs.
68
Grade 11
S
S
S
S
S
1
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
3. By finding the area of the region
Vf
between the velocity-time curve
and the time axis of the velocity
VS, time graph shown below, derive
Velocity
the equation for displacement:
Vi
S = vᵢ 2 t
Time
4. Starting from rest a car moves along a straight level road with uniformly
increasing velocity for 20 minutes, until its velocity becomes 15 m/s, north.
Then it maintained this velocity for half an hour. In the next 10 minutes, its
velocity uniformly decreases until it becomes zero. Then it continuous moving
in the opposite direction for 20 minutes until its velocity is equal to 20 m/s,
south. (a) Draw the velocity VS. time, and displacement VS. time graph of the
motion. (b) determine the distance and the magnitude of the displacement
covered during the motion.
?
Activity 3.4:
Phet simulation for motion graphs
Learning Objectives
Examine velocity-time graphs and compare them to position-time graphs.
In addition, compare the slopes of the position-time and velocity-time graphs, as
well as the area to the time axis of the velocity-time and acceleration-time graphs.
Procedure:
Use the following links to run the simulation. https://phet.colorado.edu/en/
simulation/legacy/moving-man for more information.
69
Physics
Student Text Book
Then navigate to https://phet.colorado.edu/en/legacy/moving-man.
Beginning at rest, a man walks eastward over a straight level road at a constant
velocity of 2 m/s for 10 meters. The object then goes continually in the opposite
direction at a constant velocity of 1 m/s, which is apparent in the simulation graph
below. In the simulation, the motion is represented by a displacement vs. time
graph and a velocity vs. time graph. The total required time is 15 seconds.
a. Compute the distance covered in each motion using the formula the area of
the region in the graph and compare them.
b. Determine the time required to go east, t₁ = , the time necessary to go
west,
t₂ = S₂ , and compute the total duration? V₁
c. Why is the acceleration V₂ 0 in the motion?
d. What are your thoughts on the computed and simulated st values?
Displacement-time graph
10.0
5.0
0.0
-5.0
-10.0
Velocity-time graph
4.8
2.4
0.0
-2.4
-4.8
3.4 Vertical Motion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
describe what vertical motion is.
solve various problems of vertical motion
describe the motion of objects that are in free fall.
calculate the time, position and velocity of an object given the initial velocity
of an object under vertical motion
solve problems related to an object thrown vertically upwards, downwards,
and a freely falling bodies.
Freely Falling Bodies
When things move vertically either up or down under the force of gravity alone,
the resulting motion is called free fall. The acceleration of a freely falling body is
constant and is known as acceleration due to gravity, denoted by the letter g. When
70
Grade 11
air resistance is negligible, all objects dropped under the influence of gravity near
Earth's surface fall toward Earth with this acceleration. Near the surface of the Earth
its magnitude is constant and is equal to 9.8 m/s². Therefore, for free fall near the
surface of the earth the equations of motion with constant acceleration discussed so
far can be applied. The only change in those equations is the replacement of a by g,
and taking care of directions.
The expression freely falling object doesn't necessarily refer to an object dropped
from rest. A freely falling object is any object moving freely under the influence of
gravity alone, regardless of its initial motion. Objects thrown upward or downward
and those released from rest are all considered freely falling
1.v=u+gt
3. v² = +
Note that these equations are vector equations, meaning that we need to take care
of the directions of the vector quantities such as velocities, displacements and
acceleration.
One way to investigate the free fall of an object is to make a multiflash photo of
the object's flight as it falls after being released from rest (Figure 3.11). As seen in
the figure the displacement the ball covered in equal intervals of time is increased
from time to time uniformly. That means the velocity of the falling ball is increased
uniformly through time and hence it is accelerating.
cm
orm
#4
10
5
#6
20
#7
30
#8
40
09
50
Figure 3.11: Motion of freely falling bodies
For an object thrown vertically upward the initial velocity, и is directed up and is
taken as positive, but because g is always directed down towards the center of the
71
Physics I Student Text Book
Earth it is taken as negative. Thus, for an object thrown vertically upward, the above
equation may be written in scalar form as follows:
v=u-gt
y=ut-18t²
v² = u² - 2gy
Here y is the height above the origin at time t, u is the initial velocity in the
y-direction at t = 0.
For an object thrown vertically downward, since both й and g have the same
downward directions, the above equations become:
v=u+gt
v² = u² + 2gy
Example 3.8:
Consider a particle projected vertically
LevelB
upwards with an initial velocity V₀ =20m/s
h
Vo
from the top of a 15m building as shown in
LevelA
the figure below. How long does it take for the
particle to reach to: A) level A, the initial
Level C
point, B) level B 5m above the initial point,
C) level C, 5m below the initial point and D)
Vi
LevelD
level D, the building bottom?
Figure 3.12:
Motion diagram of a particle thrown vertically upward from the top of a building
at level A passes through level B reaches to maximum height (hₘₐ), and finally hits
the ground at level C.
To find the time of flight at different levels: A, B and C, take the value of the y-
coordinate of y=0,a=-g
At level A: The kinematic equation for y then becomes,
20t - 5t² = 0
t = 0, = or t = 4s *
72
Grade 11
These two solutions of the time t indicate that the particle appears on the same place
at two different instants of time. The former one is the initial condition at the instant
the particle was projected. The later one is the one which is the time it takes to cover
the entire path to return to its original position.
At Level B: y = +5m a = - g = -10m/s²
The kinematic equation for t by replacing y= +5m then becomes
which is a quadratic equation of the form: 5t² - 20t +5 = 0.
Solving this equation with the general quadratic formula, we get two roots for t.
(What are the physical implications of the two roots for t in the solution?)
At Level C: y = - 5m, a = - g = -10m/s²
The kinematic equation for t by replacing y = -5m then becomes:
Which is a quadratic equation of the form 5t² - 20t - 5 = 0. The time solution can
be obtained from the general quadratic formula.
t =
-b = 4(5)(-5)
2a
2(5)
t = -5+22.36 2(5) = = 2(5) 22.36 = -2.73sec
Since, time is a scalar quantity, it can never be negative and the answer will be 1.73
seconds.
Exercise 3.6:
A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 10m/s from the balcony of a
tall building. The balcony is 15m above the ground and gravitational acceleration
is 10m/s². Find (a) the time required for the ball to hit the ground, and (b) the
velocity with which it hits the ground.
73
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 3.5:
Experiment
Measurement of acceleration due to gravity (g) using the freefall meth-
od
Objectives
The objectives of this experiment are as follows:
1. To know the meaning of free fall and the conditions under which it occurs.
2. To know the value for the acceleration of gravity (g).
3. Corelate the motion of a free-falling object to the graphical descriptions of its
motion.
4. To understand that the acceleration of gravity is independent of the mass of the
free-falling object.
5. To test the hypothesis that the acceleration of a freely falling object is uniform,
Apparatus: Millisecond timer, power supply, metal ball, trapdoor and electromagnet.
Diagram
Switch closed before
start so electromagnet holds ball
Off to start
Electromagnet
A
Timer
Steel ball
Off to stop
S
B
Figure 3.12: Laboratory set up to measure
Procedure
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 3.21. The millisecond timer starts
when the ball is released and stops when the ball hits the trapdoor at B.
2. When switch A is turned off the steel ball starts to fall and the timer starts. The
ball falls onto switch B and when it breaks the circuit the timer stops.
3. Measure the distance S using a meter stick.
74
Grade 11
4. Flick the switch to release the ball and record the time t from the millisecond
timer.
5. Repeat for different values of s.
6. Calculate the values for g using the equation 2h/t Obtain an average value
for g.
7. Draw a graph of h against t² and use the slope to find a value for g (g will be
twice the slope).
Precautions
1. For each height h repeat three times and take the smallest time as the correct
value for t.
2. Place a piece of paper between the ball bearing and the electromagnet to ensure
a quick release.
3. Remember to convert from milliseconds to seconds.
Note
Both points 1 and 2 above are associated with the problem that even though you
switch off the power for the electromagnet (and in so doing switch on the timer)
it will not lose its magnetism immediately, therefore the ball will not fall straight
away. This means that the reading on the timer will always be (slightly) longer than
the time for which the ball was dropping.
Purpose
The purpose of this laboratory activity is to measure the acceleration of a falling
object assuming that the only force acting on the object is the gravitational force.
Data
h (m)
(s)
t² (s²)
8=2h
g
gavg
75
Physics
Student Text Book
Conclusion: Report your findings.
?
Activity 3.6:
Drop two balls of different mass (basketball, and tennis ball) from the same
height. Which will hit the ground first?
Terminal velocity
When a solid body is inside a liquid or gas, its entire surface is in contact with the
particles of the fluid. For this reason, during its motion in a fluid, the body experiences
a resistive force. These resistance force which the fluid exerted on the body is called
fluid friction or drag force.
Thus, a body falling in air moves under the action of two forces (ignoring buoyancy):
the downward gravitational force (its weight) and the upward drag force.
At the beginning of the fall the downward gravitational force would be larger than
the drag force (mg > Fd) and hence it will make an accelerated downward motion,
which resulted to an increase in velocity. As the velocity the falling object increases,
so does the drag force. At some velocity, the drag force of resistance will be equal to
the gravitational pull on the object. At this point the object stops accelerating and
continues falling at a constant velocity called the terminal velocity. Thus, terminal
velocity is defined as the point at which the velocity of a falling object is no longer
getting greater. An object at terminal velocity has zero acceleration.
Besides weight, terminal velocity depends on other factors such as shape and cross
sectional area of the falling object and the nature of the fluid.
2ᵀ
force from
d
air resistance
force from
gravity
F
σᵀ
(a)
(b)
(c)
g
Figure 3.13: A free body diagram showing the forces on a particle at different times
during its fall: (a) at the start of the fall; (b) during the fall; (c) at the end of the fall.
76
Grade 11
Key term
Terminal velocity is the maximum velocity of a freely falling body where its
velocity no more increases, or the acceleration of the motion is zero.
?
Activity 3.7
Assume a drop of rain is falling from a height of 450m. If the drag force were not
there, what would be it velocity on reaching the surface of the Earth. Discuss the
effect of this velocity on living things on Earth.
Galileo Galilei and the Motion of Objects
In contrary to Aristotle (384-322 b.c.) view ofmotion,
which states that heavier objects fell faster than lighter
ones, Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) Italian Physicist
and Astronomer, postulated that, regardless of their
size and mass all bodies falling through empty space
(vacuum) have the same acceleration. He was the first
person to determine the correct mathematical law for
acceleration: the total distance covered, starting from
rest, is proportional to the square of the time.
Galileo also investigated the motion of an object on an inclined plane, established
the concept of relative motion, invented the thermometer, and discovered that the
motion of a swinging pendulum could be used to measure time intervals. After
designing and constructing his own telescope, he discovered four of Jupiter's moons,
found that our own Moon's surface is rough, discovered sunspots and the phases of
Venus, and showed that the Milky Way consists of an enormous number of stars.
He is also known for the assertion that the Sun is at the center of the Universe (the
heliocentric system), not Earth.
?
Activity 3.8: Experiment
Calculating Reaction time
Reaction time is the time a person takes to observe, think and act. Reaction time
is the time it takes you to react to a hazard. For example, if a person is driving and
suddenly a boy appears on the road, then the time elapsed before he/she applies
the brakes of the car is the reaction time. Studies reflect that a person's reaction
time is anywhere from one to three seconds. You can measure your reaction time
by a simple experiment.
77
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Materials required
You need two people (one dropper and one catcher), plus a meter ruler.
Procedure
The dropper holds the ruler, letting it dangle vertically. The catcher's hand should
be about chest high, with the ruler passing between the thumb and fingers as shown
in Figure 3.14. The thumb should be horizontal, so that the top of the thumb can
be used as a reference. To perform it, have your friend hold the ruler at the very
top and you hold your fingers at the zero mark. Your friend then drops it, and you
then catch it as fast as you can, as shown below.
Catch point
Figure 3.14: Measuring reaction time
The difference in distance between where your fingers initially were, at the zero
mark, and where you catch it, the catch point, gives you the total distance traveled.
Then, calculate the reaction time using the equation:
t =
g
Reaction distance is the distance you travel during your reaction time. It depends on
the reaction time and speed. It is calculated as:
Reaction Distance = Reaction Time x Speed
S = vt.
Key term
Reaction time is the time taken for a person to react to a sudden event.
78
Grade 11
?
Activity 3.9: Project work
Make a group containing 4 to 5 members in your class. Search internet or books
and came up comparing the difference between Aristotle's, Galileo's and Newtons
view of motion.
Review Questions 3.4
1. Describe the motion of a freely falling bodies.
2. A ball is thrown vertically upward with a velocity of 20 m/s from the top of a
building. The height of the point from where the ball is thrown is 25 m from
the ground. (a) how high will the ball rise? (b) how long will it take for the
ball to hit the ground?
3. A ball is dropped on the floor from a height of 10 m. It rebounds to a height of
2.5 m. If the ball is in contact with the floor for 0.01 sec, what is the average
acceleration during contact?
4. If a stone is thrown vertically downward into a well with a speed of 10 m/s,
how long will it take it to reach the water surface 60 m below?
3.5 Uniform Circular Motion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define a uniform circular motion
calculate for angular and tangential displacement, angular and tangential
velocity, and centripetal acceleration,
explain uniform circular motion in the horizontal plane,
identify the force required for circular motion to take place
?
Brainstorming Questions
1. When do we say an object is accelerating?
2. Can an object accelerate if it's moving with constant speed?
3. Mention an example in which an object accelerates due to a change in the
direction of velocity without a change in its magnitude.
Uniform Circular Motion
Uniform circular motion is a special type of curvilinear motion in which an object
travels in a circle with a constant speed but its direction of motion continuously
79
Physics
I
Student Text Book
changes. A mass attached to the end of a string and moves in a horizontal circle,
the second, minute, and hour hands of a watch, the motion of a turntable, and any
point on a propeller spinning at a constant rate are examples that could demonstrate
uniform circular motion.
Angular and tangential displacement
While moving in a circular path, the angle made by the radius 'r' of the circle is
known as angular displacement (Θ). It is a vector quantity, hence have a direction.
The direction of the circular arrow pointing from the initial position to the final
position will indicate the direction of angular displacement. It can be either clockwise
or anticlockwise.
Θ
S
Figure 3.15: Angular displacement
If the arc of the circle in which the body is moving is 's' and the radius of the circle
is 'r' then, angular displacement
After one complete revolution, the rotating object will travel a distance equal to the
circumference of the circular path. Which is equal to 2wr where r is the radius.
Therefore,
Θ = S r = r = radian
Thus, lrev = 2wrad = 360⁰.
The unit of angular displacement in the SI system is radian. Since angular
displacement is the ratio of these two quantities hence it is dimensionless.
On the other hand, tangential displacement (s) is the distance covered by the rotating
object along the curved path (circumference of a circle), see Figure 3.15
80
Grade 11
Key terms
Uniform circular motion is a circular motion with constant speed but continuously
changing direction.
Angular displacement is the angle swept by the rotating object.
Tangential displacement the tangential distance on the circumference of the circle.
Angular velocity and tangential velocity
Angular velocity measures the rate at which angular displacement changes. It is
denoted by Greek letter omega (w) and its standard unit is radians per second.
=
w
Angular velocity is a vector quantity. The direction of angular velocity is determined by
right hand rule. According to right hand rule, if you hold the axis with your right
hand and rotate the fingers in the direction of motion of the rotating body, then
thumb will point the direction of the angular velocity.
3
3
Right
Direction
hand
of rotation
Direction
of rotation
Figure 3.16: RHR for the direction of angular velocity
Vt
A tangent is a line that touches a curve at a single
point. As the name suggests, tangential velocity
describes the motion of an object along the edge
Γ
of the circle whose direction at any given point
(+)
on the circle is always along the tangent to that
point. It is the linear component of angular
velocity at any point along the circular path.
Figure 3.17: Tangential velocity
Tangential velocity is equal to the tangential distance divided by time.
v₁=f₁
81
Physics
I
Student Text Book
After one complete rotation, the tangential displacement is equal to the circumference
of the circle, and time taken for one complete circle is called the period, T. With this
the equation for tangential velocity will be:
v₁ = 2πr
The SI unit of tangential velocity is meters per second.
Key term
Centripetal acceleration is an acceleration in circular motion caused by the
change in the direction of velocity. Its direction is always towards the center of the
circle.
The relationship between angular and tangential velocity
There is a connection between tangential velocity and angular velocity. To find the
relationship between them let us start from the equation for tangential velocity:
where r is the radius, and w (omega) is the angular velocity of the rotating object.
Note that, angular velocity is the same for all points on the rotating object, while
tangential velocity depends directly on its distance from the axis of rotation.
Examples 3.9:
If the angular velocity of a wheel is 40 rad/s, and the wheel diameter is 60 cm.
Determine the tangential velocity of the wheel.
Solution:
v,= ~r = 40rad / sx0.3m = 12m/s =
82
Grade 11
Centripetal Acceleration: Acceleration in Uniform Circular Motion
We know from kinematics that acceleration is
caused by a change in velocity, either in
magnitude or in direction or both. Therefore,
an object undergoing uniform circular motion
ac
is always accelerating, because it always
changes it direction of motion. We call the
acceleration of an object moving in uniform
circular motion the centripetal acceleration,
ac. Centripetal means center seeking or Figure 3.18: Centripetal accelera-
towards the center.
tion
Centripetal acceleration is in the direction of the change in velocity, which points
directly toward the center of the circular path. Because ii is directed towards the
center of a curved path along the radius it is also called radial acceleration. This
direction is shown with the vector diagram in the Figure 3.18.
Key term
Centripetal acceleration is an acceleration in circular motion caused by the
change in the direction of velocity. Its direction is always towards the center
of the circle.
Is seen first at point P with velocity Vᵢ at time tᵢ and then at point Q with velocity
Vƒ at time where vi|=|vₛ that is they differ only in direction, thus
v1|=|v/|=v. In order to calculate the acceleration, we start with the definition of
average acceleration.
a
Where V can be obtained graphically by the property of parallel shifting of vectors
without affecting the direction and the magnitude; so that we can make a parallel
shift of the tail of Vf from Q to the tail of Vᵢ at P as shown as shown in Figure 3.19.
83
Physics
I
Student Text Book
2
DI
1,
&
(a)
(b)
(e)
Figure 3.19: (a) Circular motion with constant speed V. (b) Velocity vectors at P and Q. (c)
Graphical method of the application of vector subtraction so that, Since 0
is the same in (b) and (c), the ratio of the sides of the two triangles are equal.
The triangle OPQ in Figure 3.19 (b), which has sides and r, is similar to the triangle
ABC of Figure 3.19 (c), which has sides and ДѴ. Then the pair of corresponding sides
are proportional, i.e.,
Which we can obtain the expression for as:
Substituting this value in the equation for average acceleration we get:
at
and the average acceleration becomes r , the instantaneous
acceleration in the direction of V which is directed towards the center. Thus, the
equation for centripetal acceleration becomes:
a.=v²
Since, v = wr, in terms of angular velocity, the equation for tangential velocity is:
ac = w² r
The SI unit of centripetal acceleration is m/s².
?
Activity 3.10
Forming a group of 3 to 5 students discuss the following questions.
1. State some real-life examples of circular motion.
2. Mention the cases in which the effect of centripetal acceleration could be made
to be larger.
84
Grade 11
Example 3.10
An automobile moves with a constant speed of 50.4 km/h around a circular track
that has a diameter of 40 m. (a) what is the angular speed of the automobile? (b)
What is the period of the motion?
Solution:
v=504km/h=14m/s,r=d2=20m
(a) w v 14m/s = /
vₜ
(b) T vₜ 2x3.14 14m/s S
Exercise 3.7
By how much would the centripetal acceleration change if the speed of a car
changes from 30 km/h to 90 km/h?
Centripetal Force
The force which causes centripetal acceleration is called a centripetal force. Without
a centripetal force, an object would continue to travel in a straight line and never
deviate from its direction. Yet, with the centripetal force directed towards the center
of the circle, the object always changing its direction and undergoing a circular
motion. Centripetal force is perpendicular to the tangential velocity vector.
From Newton's second law: Centripetal force = mass X centripetal acceleration.
Fc = mac
Example 3.11
A 100 g ball is whirled in a horizontal circle of radius 40 cm. With what maximum
speed can it travel if the breaking strength of the rod is 50 N?
Solution:
m = 100 g = =0.1kg, r = 40 cm = 0.4m, F = 50 N
F
F = m²
V 50 0.1kg =14.14m/s
85
Physics I Student Text Book
Key term
Centripetal force is a force that causes centripetal acceleration. It is always
perpendicular to the direction of motion of the object.
Applications
A centrifuge is medical laboratory equipment that is used to separate particles
suspended in a liquid such as blood or urine according to particle size and density,
viscosity of the medium, and rotor speed.
Example 3.12:
(a)
Calculate the centripetal acceleration of a point 7.50
cm from the axis of a centrifuge spinning at 7.5x10⁴ rev / min.
(b)
Determine the ratio of this acceleration to the
acceleration due to gravity.
Solution:
r = 7.5cm = 075m
v = 7.5x10⁴ rev/min = 7.5 x10¹
1
= 589m/s.
(b) In order to compare centripetal acceleration, to that of acceleration due to
gravity, we need to compare the centripetal force with the weight of the object. i.e.
Substituting values gives:
& X
This last result shows that the centripetal acceleration is 472,000 times larger than
the acceleration due to gravity, g. Such high-speed centrifuges are called ultra-
centrifuges. The extremely large accelerations involved greatly decreases the time
needed to cause the sedimentation of blood cells or other materials in laboratory
examinations.
86
Grade 11
A merry-go round is a popular amusement ride
in many kids' play yards. In such play, kids feel
more uneasy when the wheels are rotated fast
in a short diameter wheel than when the wheels
are rotated slow in a long diameter wheel. This
is because of the fact that the radial acceleration
is very high for short diameter and high-speed
rotors.
Figure 3.20: In the merry go round play kids enjoy the feeling of the effect of
the radial acceleration as they go round.
Exercise 3.8
Suppose the diameter of the merry go round in Figure 3.20 is 4.0 m.
(a) What will be the radial acceleration of the kid if she rotates one rotation
every 3 seconds?
(b) Draw schematic circular path that shows the direction of the centripetal
acceleration of the circular motion by applying vector subtraction method.
Uniform Circular Motion in a Horizontal Plane
Horizontal circular motion indicates circular
motion across a horizontal surface. There are
various day-to-day examples such as the motion of
a mass attached to the end of a string and made to
rotate in a horizontal circle, Figure 3.21. In this case
the centripetal force is provided by the tension (T)
in the string. Hence,
T
Figure 3.21: Amass attached
the end of a string and rotate in
a horizontal plane
Example 3.13:
A string cam withstand a tension of 25 N. What is the greatest speed at which a
body of mass 1 kg can be whirled in a horizontal circle using a string of length
1.0m?
Solution:
F =T =25 N,m= 1kg,l= r = 1.0m
=5m/s
87
Physics
I
Student Text Book
When a car moves around a roundabout, Figure
N
3.22, the centripetal force is provided by the
frictional force between the road and the tires of the
car. Hence,
mg
Figure 3.22: A car travelling
on a roundabout
Where Fₙ is the normal force, ad exerts on the car.
?
Activity 3.11:
It is a common experience to see cars
skidding out of a roundabout and
collide with anything in the nearby
the road. Discuss in group about the
causes of such accidents and suggest
the remedy. Present your group's
opinion to the class and make class
level discussion.
Example 3.14
Find the maximum speed of a car with which it can be safely driven along a curve
of radius 40 m and the coefficient of friction between tires and road is
0.7. (Take g = 10 m/s²)
Solution:
r=10m,µ=0.2,v=?
Since the centripetal force is provided by frictional force,
Ff = m v²
µmg = m²
µmg = m²
v = µgr = X X 40m = 16.73m/ S
88
Grade 11
The conical pendulum
Suppose a particle of mass m is tied to a string of length l and then whirled round
in a horizontal circle of radius r, with O fixed directly above the center B of the
circle, Figure 3.23. If the circular speed of the particle is constant, the string turns at
a constant angle Θ to the vertical. This is called a conical pendulum.
0
F Cose
F
h
0
Sing
mg
Figure 3.23: A conical pendulum
The horizontal component of the tension in the string (T), points towards the center
of the circle, hence it provides the centripetal force.
T sin Θ = mv²
The weight (mg) of the particle is balanced by the vertical component of the tension
in the string.
T cos Θ = mg
Dividing the above equation by the lower one gives:
tan Θ = rg
Motion of a car Round a Banked Road
Suppose a car is moving round a banked road in a horizontal circular path of radius,
r, Figure 3.24. If the only forces at the wheels are the normal reaction forces Fₙ, that is
there is no side-slip or strain at the wheels, the force towards the center of the track is :
89
Physics
I
Student Text Book
N cos Θ
Nsin 0 = m²
N
A
The vertical equilibrium gives: N COS È = mg
Dividing the top equation by the bottom one gives:
Nsin 8
tan Θ =
00
mg
Figure 3.24: Banking of a road
The angle of banking is then,
Exercise 3.9
Calculate the maximum speed with which a car can be driven safely along a
curved road of a radius of 30m and banked at an angle of 30° with the horizontal.
(take g = 9.8m/s²)
Review Questions 3.5
1. What does it mean by uniform circular motion?
2. Define the terms centripetal or radial acceleration and force.
3. What is the direction of centripetal acceleration?
4. How it is possible for a body to be accelerated if its speed is constant?
5. What is (a) the tangential velocity? (b) the angular velocity? and (c) the
centripetal acceleration, due to the Earth's rotation, of a body on the equator?
Radius of Earth = 6,400 km.
6. The wheel of a bicycle has a radius of 40 cm. Calculate its period of revolution
if the bicycle moves with a speed of 20 km/h. How much is the angular
velocity?
7. Find the banking angle of the railway track with a radius of curvature of
1500m. If the train's maximum speed is 15m/s. If the distance between the
two tracks is 1.8m, calculate the elevation of the outer track over the inner
track.
90
Grade 11
SUMMARY:
c
Acceleration is a vector quantity, and is defined as the rate of change of velocity or
change in velocity per unit time. The SI unit of acceleration is m/s2.
C
Average acceleration:
a
C
Instantaneous acceleration, ains or acceleration at a specific instant in time. It is
determined by taking the time interval between the two points (t) approach zero.
c
A motion with a constant acceleration refers to a motion where, the velocity of the
object is changing by equal amount in equal interval of time.
C
The equations of motion with a constant acceleration:
v² = vᵢ² + 2as
Braking distance Stoppind distance = vt+2us v²
c
A displacement-time graph shows how displacement changes with time.
C
The slope of displacement-time graph gives velocity.
c
A velocity-time graph shows how velocity changes with time.
c
The slope of a velocity-time graph gives the acceleration.
c
The area between a velocity-time graph and the 'time' axis gives the displacement
of the object.
c
Acceleration-time graph shows how acceleration changes with time.
C
When things move vertically either up or down under the force of gravity alone,
the resulting motion is called free fall. The acceleration of a freely falling body is
constant and is known as acceleration due to gravity, denoted by the letter g.
c
Equations of freely falling
1.v=u+gt
3.v² = u² + 2gy
91
Physics I Student Text Book
c
Terminal velocity is defined as the point at which the velocity of a falling object is
no longer getting greater. An object at terminal velocity has zero acceleration.
Uniform circular motion is a special type of curvilinear motion in which an object
travels in a circle with a constant speed but its direction of motion continuously
changes.
c
While moving in a circular path, the angle made by the radius 'r' of the circle is
known as angular displacement (Θ).
c
Tangential displacement (s) is the distance covered by the rotating object along
the curved path (circumference of a circle).
c
Angular displacement 0=5
c
Angular velocity measures the rate at which angular displacement changes.
It is denoted by Greek letter omega (w) and its standard unit is radians per
second.
w=4θ
c
A velocity describes the motion of an object along the edge of the circle whose
direction at any given point on the circle is always along the tangent to that point.
state
Centripetal Acceleration that acceleration an object moving in uniform circular
motion the centripetal acceleration, ac. Centripetal means center seeking or
towards the center.
C
The force which causes centripetal acceleration is called a centripetal force.
Fc = mac
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS
1. Which one of the following pairs of concepts cannot both simultaneously be
constant and non-zero for a body?
A. The speed and velocity
B. Magnitude of acceleration and acceleration
C. Total distance and displacement
D. Velocity and acceleration
2. Can an object can have variable speed but constant velocity? Explain.
3. Can an object can have constant speed but variable velocity? Explain.
4. What do you mean by motion in one and two dimensions? Give examples of each type.
92
Grade 11
5. Can the displacement be greater than the distance travelled by an object? Give reason.
6. Can the direction of velocity of an object change, while its acceleration is constant?
Explain with example.
7. Is it possible for a body to be accelerated without speeding up or slowing down? If so,
give an example.
8. To get to school, a girl walks 1 km North in 15 minutes. She then walks 200 m South-
west in 160 seconds. What is the girl's average velocity for her walk to school?
9. Very large magnitude of acceleration can be achieved in some devices such as in a
gun. A bullet in a gun is accelerated from the firing chamber to the end of the barrel
at an average rate of 6.20 x 10³ m/s² for 8.10 x 10⁴ S. What is its muzzle velocity (that is, its
final velocity)?
10. It is very common for drivers when they
Mary
enter the express road, they increase
ADAMA
their speed. While entering to the ex-
press road on its travel from Addis Aba-
ba to Adama , a car accelerates from rest
at a rate of 2.40 m/s2 for 12.0 S.
(a) Draw a sketch of the situation.
(b) List the knowns in this problem.
(c) How far does the car travel in those 12.0 s? (d) What is the car's final
velocity?
11. A particle moving at 25 m/s in a straight line slows uniformly at a rate of 2 m/s every
second. In an interval of 10 s, find: (a) the acceleration, (b) the final velocity, (c) the
distance moved.
12. At the instant the traffic light turns green, an automobile starts moving with a constant
acceleration of 5.0 m/s2. At the same instant a truck, travelling with a constant speed
of 10 m/s, overtakes and passes the automobile. (a) How far beyond the traffic signal
will the automobile overtake the truck? (b) How fast will the automobile be at that
instant?
13. Describe the motion in each interval of the velocity-time graph shown in the figures
below.
velocity
(m/min)
80
60
40
20
time
(min)
-20
40
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 3.22
93
Physics
Student Text Book
14. On its way along a straight line, a car starts from rest and accelerated at a rate of 2.5
m/s2 for 10s. It maintained its speed for further 5 S and decelerated by 0.5m/s2 to
come to rest. What is the time taken for the entire motion? How far did it travel?
Draw the position vs time, and velocity vs time graph of the motion of the car.
15. On a user's manual of a motorbike you see a specification labeled as "the bike
can accelerate to 100km/h from rest in 4seconds." A) what can you say about the
maximum average acceleration of the bike? B) How far does it travel in this time?
16. The head quarter of Commercial Bank of Ethiopia
having a height of 198m is the tallest building in
Ethiopia and one of the top ten tallest buildings in
Africa. If the engineer's helmet is suddenly dropped
from the roof during the final topping, A) How long
does it take for the helmet to reach to the ground?
B) If someone needs to throw the helmet up to the
top, what minimum initial velocity is needed? Can
this initial velocity be achieved by a human being?
(neglect air resistance in all cases)
Figure 3.22
17. A stone strikes the ground with a speed of 25 m/s. (a) From what height was it
released? (b) How long was it falling? (c) If the stone is thrown down with a speed
of 10 m/s from the same height, then what will be its speed just before hitting the
ground?
18. Calculate the height of a building if it takes 4.0s for a ball to reach to the ground
when it is thrown straight up from the top of the building with an initial velocity
of 8.0 m/s. (Sketch the motion diagram.)
19. A kangaroo can vertically jump over an object
2.5m high.
A. What is its initial vertical speed to reach
this height?
B. How long will it stay in the air if it is jump-
ing on a level ground?
Figure 3.23
20. Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration of a particle moving in a circle of
radius r = 0.5 m with a constant speed of 10 m/s.
21. A 0.525 kg ball is attached to a 1.25 m string and swings in a circular path, making
2.00 revolutions per second. The angle of the string is nearly horizontal. Find the
tension in the string.
22. A 0.525 kg ball is attached to a 1.25 m string and swings in a circular path. The
angle of the string away from vertical is 30.0°. Find the centripetal force acting on
the ball and the speed of the ball.
94
T
R
S
S
