UNIT 2
VECTORS
Introduction
Many physical quantities in nature have both magnitude (size) and direction. To describe
the motion of an airplane for instance, we must state its speed and the direction of its
motion. To describe a force, we use a number to tell how big the force is and indicate its
direction of application. The principal aim of this unit is to discuss ways of describing
two dimensional 2-D vector physical quantities and the mathematical operations involving
vectors.
After completing this unit you should be able to:
familiarize themselves with basic principles of vector operations
interpret physical phenomena using the concept of vector
develop skills of using the concept of vector in solving various problems.
2.1 Vectors and Types of Vectors
After completing this section, you should be able to:
describe the difference between vector and scalar quantities.
list down the common vector quantities in our everyday life.
discuss geometric representation of vectors.
give the definitions of the different types of vectors.
?
Brainstorming
1. Why do we need to know the direction of some quantities in order to have a
complete sense of them? If a girl told you that the velocity of a delivery truck
was 50 km/h, has she fully expressed the motion of the truck?
17
Physics
Student Text Book
Some physical quantities such as mass, speed, distance, density, etc., can be expressed
completely by their magnitudes and units only. But many others that are common in
our day to day activities such as force, velocity, acceleration, displacement need both
their magnitude as well as direction for their specification.
To refresh your memory of category of vectors, the table below has some of the most
common physical quantities.
?
Activity 2.1
Categorize the quantities listed in Table 2.1 as scalars or vectors and prepare your
own list of vector and scalar quantities that are common in our daily practices.
Table 2.1 Table of physical quantities
Quantity
Scalar/vector
Quantity
Scalar/Vector
Area
Density
Distance
Weight
Pressure
Representation of vectors
In Grade 10 you have learnt that a vector can be represented graphically by an arrow.
Recall that the length of the arrow drawn to scale represents the magnitude and the
tip of the arrow represents the direction of the vector. When drawing diagrams with
vectors, we use a scale similar to those used for maps. For example, a displacement of
10 km might be represented in a diagram by a vector 1 cm long and a displacement
of 20 km by a vector 2 cm long. In a diagram for velocity vectors, a vector that is 1
cm long might represent a velocity of magnitude 5 m/s. A velocity of 40 m/s would
then be represented by a vector 8 cm long.
y
y
y units
D
0°
29.1°
90°
9 units
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.1 Representing a vector by an arrow drawn to scale. Ruler, Protractor and
Graph paper used
18
Grade 11
Illustration of the concept of vectors in practice
Typical forces for a dam
Weight
Head water
of Dam
Tail wa
Hydro power Dam
Heal
Toe
Uplift
Figure 2.2 Hydro power dam and force vectors
By researching the size and direction of all forces on a dam, engineers design a
structure that is able to resist all these forces, Figure 2.2
While rowing a boat, the person
F1
F2
pushes the water backward using
oars and the water exerts a
forward force on the boat. There
are also the weight of the boat
man rowing a Canoe boat
A Tug-of-war
and an upward force (upthrust)
(a)
(b)
exerted by the water on the boat,
Figure 2.3a.
Figure 2.3 Force vectors in action
In a tag-of-war the rope is the means to transfer forces, Figure 2.3b. The concepts of
vectors plays important role in analyzing all of the above situations
?
Activity 2.2
Ask your friend to stand at a mark in the middle of the volleyball field. Tell her to
walk through a certain distance in any direction she chooses. Use a measuring tape
to measure the distance between her starting point and the ending point. Take the
starting point as the origin of coordinates with the x axis pointing toward East and
the y axis toward North. Show the displacement of the girl graphically on a graph
paper.
Types of vectors
Parallel vectors: Vectors that are in the same direction are said to be Parallel,
Figure 2.4a.
19
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Antiparallel vectors: When vectors have opposite directions, whether their
magnitudes are the same or not, they are Antiparallel, Figure 2.4b.
Equal vectors: If two vectors representing the same quantity have the same
magnitude and the same direction, they are Equal vectors, Figure 2.4c, no
matter where they are located in space.
Collinear vectors: These are vectors that lie along the same line or parallel
lines. Two vectors are collinear if they are parallel to the same line irrespective
of their magnitudes and direction.
Co-planar vectors: Three or more vectors lying in the same plane or parallel to
the same plane are known as co-planar vectors.
Zero vector: A zero vector is a vector when the magnitude of the vector is zero
and the starting point of the vector coincides with the terminal point.
Orthogonal vectors : Vectors that are perpendicular to one another.
A unit vector: A vector which has a magnitude of unit length is called a unit
vector.
The vector-A in Figure 2.6d is not equal to vector À because its direction is
opposite to that of A. We define the Negative of a vector as a vector having the
same magnitude as the original vector but the opposite direction. The negative of
vector A is denoted as- A.
Á/B/C/₅/
À
B
(a) Parallel vectors
(b) Antiparallel vectors
Ã
À'
À
TO
(c) Equal vectors
(d) Negative of a vector B =
Figure 2.4 (a) Parallel vectors,
(b) Antiparallel vectors,
(c) Equal vectors,
(d) Negative of a vector
Example 2.1
Find the negative of each of the following vectors.
a. dosplacement vector= 60km toward North
b. Velocity vector = 100km/h towards 200 southeast.
20
Grade 11
Solution
The negative of a vector has the same magnitude as the original vector in opposite
direction.
(a) If S = 60 km, toward North, then - S = 60 km, toward South
(b) S = 100 km/h, toward 20o South of East, then - S = 100 km/h, toward 20o
North of West
Review questions 2.1
1. How do you represent a vector graphically?
2. Why do we use of scale diagram in vector drawing?
3. How does vector À differ from vector - À?
2.2 Graphical Method of Addition of Vectors in Two
Dimensions (2-D)
After completing this section, you should be able to:
define the term resultant vector.
explain the geometric method for addition and subtraction of vectors in a
plane.
apply geometric method of addition of vectors to find resultant of vectors in
two dimensions.
?
Brainstorming
1. In grade 10 physics you have studied the properties of vectors in one dimension.
Is it possible to add two vector quantities such as displacement vectors the
way we do with scalar quantities like mass? Share your answer with your
classmates.
N
W/O-E
There are two commonly used methods
B
2.0km
C
employed to determine the vector sum of
two or more vectors. The two methods that
1.2 km
ß
Resultant displacement
we will discuss in this unit are Graphical
A
method and Analytic (algebraic) method
Figure 2.5 A vector diagram with
of vector addition.
scale of a trip in a park
21
Physics
Student Text Book
In your physics lesson in grade 10 you have learnt about vectors in one dimension
(1-D). Here we are going to develop further the concept of vectors in two dimensions
(2-D) which in physics has physical representation and importance in our daily lives.
Graphical method of vector addition gives visual understanding of vectors and it is
commonly used in navigation. Figure 2.5 represents a trip that starts at point A then
to point B and ending at point C. You see that total distance traveled for the whole
trip is 1.2 km + 2 km = 3.2 km, but what is the displacement from A to C? How do
you get the resultant displacement given displacements from A to B and from B to C?
In this section we will discuss Triangle law, Parallelogram law and Polygon law of
addition of vectors.
When two or more vectors are added they must have the same units. For example,
it doesn't make sense to add a force vector carrying units of newtons, to a velocity
vector carrying units of meters per second. Scalars obey the same rule: It would
be similarly meaningless to add mass to volume or density to time intervals.
Graphical method of addition of vectors involves the use of equal vectors. As long as
its length is not changed, a vector is not altered if it is displaced parallel to itself. This
process is known as Translating a vector.
Triangle Law of Vector Addition
Suppose a particle undergoes displacement S₁ followed by a second displacement
S₂. The final result is the same as if the particle had started at the same initial point
and undergone a single displacement S.
We call displacement S the vector sum, or resultant, of displacements ASI S₁ and S₂ We
express this relationship symbolically as
S=S₁+S₂
This can be shown graphically by placing the vectors head to tail and then the arrow
drawn from the tail of the first vector to the head of the second vector represents the
resultant, Figure 2.6. This is known as Triangle Law of vector addition.
S1
S2
S,
S2
Figure 2.6 Triangle law of addition of vectors: S1 and S2 are placed head to tail.
22
Grade 11
?
Activity 2.3
1. Use graph paper, a protractor, and a ruler and apply triangle law of vector
addition to show that A+B=B+A. Use vector A of magnitude 5 units
and vector B of 9 units, and the angle between the vectors to be 60°.
Parallelogram law of vector addition
Two vectors can also be added graphically
by constructing a parallelogram using the
5₂
vectors as the sides of the parallelogram.
$
The vectors are now placed tail to tail
and the diagonal drawn from the tails of
the vectors to the opposite corner of the
Figure 2.7. Paralelogram Law of addi-
parallelogram represents the resultant,
tion of vectors: : S1 and S2 are placed
Figure 2.7.
tail to tail.
?
Activity 2.4
Discussion with your classmates
It's a common error to conclude that if C = A+B, then the magnitude C should
equal the magnitude. A plus the magnitude B. What is wrong with this conclusion?
When we need to add more than two vectors, we may start with one of the vectors
and then place the tail of the next vector to the head of the first and do the same
until all the vectors are included. The vector drawn from the tail of the first vector to
the head of the last vector represents the resultant. This is known as polygon law of
addition of vectors, Figure 2.8.
R=A+B+C+D
C
B
À
C
À
D
B
TO
TR
Figure 2.8 polygon law of vector addition
Exercise 2.1
What is the result of adding a vector to the negative of itself?
23
Physics I Student Text Book
?
Activity 2.5
How can you add individual displacement vectors to determine total displacement?
Materials
A 20 m tape measure, Field marker (or flag), Graph paper
ruler and Protractor
Procedure
Mark a point at the center of the field with a flag.
Indicate the North-South direction taking the marked point as the origin
Ask your friend to walk the following distances starting from the flag: 12
m toward North, and 16 m toward East, 10 m toward South-East.
Mark the final point and use the measuring tape to measure magnitude
of his/her displacement from the starting point.
Show your vector diagram on a graph paper
Use a scale of 1 cm for 1 m of displacement.
Use a protractor to determine the direction if displacement.
What is the magnitude and direction of the displacement?
Subtraction of Vectors
We can subtract vectors as well as add them. Recall that vector -B has the same
magnitude as B but the opposite direction. Subtracting a vector is the same as
adding a vector of the same magnitude but opposite in direction.
We define the difference A-B of two vectors and B to be the vector sum of À
and -B, Figure 2.9.
C=A-B=A+(-B)
®
A
B
C
B
A
Figure 2.9 Subtraction of vectors
24
Grade 11
Review questions 2.2
1. Which one of the vector diagrams (Figure 2.10) satisfies the vector equation
C=A+B?
B
(a)
(b)
B
(c)
B
À
C
À
C
À
C
Figure 2.10
2. Three displacement vectors A,B,C are specified by their magnitudes A = 10
cm, B = 7 cm, C=8 cm, respectively, and by their respective direction angles
(with the +x direction) of α = 53°, ß = 120°, γ = 210°. Choose a convenient
scale and use a ruler and a protractor to find the magnitude and direction of
the vector sum:
(a) R = À + B
(b) P=A-B (c) Q = A - 2B+C Q
a) the magnitude C equal to the sum of the magnitude A and magnitude B?
b) the magnitude C equal to the difference of magnitude A and magnitude B?
3. Suppose an insect lands on a sheet of graph paper at a point located 12 cm to
the right of the left edge and 8 cm above the bottom edge and walks slowly
to a point located 7 cm from the left edge and 4 cm from the bottom edge.
Choose the rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the lower left-side
corner of the paper and find the displacement vector of the insect. Use a ruler,
a graph paper and make use of graphical representation of vectors
4. What is the minimum number of vectors of equal magnitudes required to
produce a zero resultant?
25
Physics
Student Text Book
2.3 Algebraic Method of addition of vectors in Two
Dimensions (2-D)
After completing this section, you should be able to:
apply algebraic method to find the resultant of two collinear vectors, and
perpendicular vectors.
apply trigonometry to determine the direction of a resultant vector in terms of
the angle it forms with a reference direction.
compare the resultant of two given vectors as determined by way of geometric
construction and by analytic method.
resolve a vector into its components.
find the resultant of two or more vectors applying component method.
define unit vector and determine a unit vector in the direction of a given
vector.
apply the unit representation of vectors to determine the resultant of two or
more vectors.
?
Brainstorming
Do you recall the different ways in which vectors that represent similar quantities
can be added to/ subtracted from one another? Mention two ways of vector addition
based on your physics lesson in grade 10.
Adding two collinear vectors
As scalars are fully described by their magnitude, addition or subtraction of scalars
can be done by applying simple arithmetic. Vector addition, on the other hand
involves both the magnitude and direction of the vectors.
Before beginning to add vectors in two dimensions, let us review important points
about addition of vectors in one dimension.
Consider two force vectors F1 and F2 acting at a point along the same direction,
Figure 2.11a. The resultant of these vectors R has a magnitude equal to the sum of
the magnitude of each of the vectors and it is directed along the direction of any one
of the vectors, Figure 2.11b.
26
Grade 11
TW
THE
THE
F
(a)
a
Figure 2.11 Vectors in the same direction
We write the resultant vector R symbolically as
=
When force vectors F₁ and F₂ are acting in opposite directions, Figure 2.12a, their
resultant Ř will have magnitude equal to the absolute value of the difference in
magnitudes of the vectors and it is directed along the direction of the larger vector,
Figure 2.12b.
THE
F₁
THE
F2
&
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.12 Vectors in opposite directions
Exercise 2.2
The magnitudes of two vectors À and B are 13 units and 9 units, respectively.
What are the largest and smallest possible values for the magnitude of the
resultant vector R=A+B?
Example 2.2
A man rows his boat along the direction of flow of a river (downstream). If the
boat can sail in still water at 0.50 m/s, and the river flows at 0.30 m/s, what is the
resultant velocity of the boat?
Let the magnitude of velocity of the river be A and that of the boat be B.
A = 0.30 m/s
B = 0.50m/s
The resultant velocity is R=A+B
27
Physics
Student Text Book
Since both vectors are along the same direction, the magnitude of the resultant
velocity is given by:
R = A + B = 0.30 m/s + 0.50m/s.
R = 0.80 m/s.
The direction of the resultant is along the direction of the river flow.
Therefore, the resultant velocity is:
R = 0.8m/s, downstream
Exercise 2.3
If the man in Example 2.2 rows his boat upstream (in opposite direction to the
river flow), what would his resultant velocity be?
Example 2.3
Two men are pushing a block along a
horizontal surface by exerting oppositely
directed forces of magnitudes 200 N and
100 N respectively, as shown in Figure
2.13. What is the resultant force applied
on the block by the two men?
Figure 2.13 Two men pushing the block
in opposite directions
Solution:
The two men applied two different forces on the same block.
Let the magnitude of the force exerted by the man on the right be F1 = 200 N and
that of the man on the left be F2 = 100 N.
Ř = F₁+₂
The magnitude of the resultant force is
R = F 1 -F2 = 200N - 100N = 100 N
The direction of the resultant is along the direction of the 200 N (larger) force.
R = 100N, toward the right.
28
Grade 11
Adding two perpendicular vectors
The rules for addition of vectors that lie in a plane - that is, when they are in two
dimensions become more complicated than the rules for addition of vector in
one dimension. We have to use graphical method of vector addition to construct
resultant vectors, followed by trigonometry to find magnitudes and directions. To
get the resultant vector of two perpendicular vectors, A and Figure 2.14, we use
Pythagorean theorem for the magnitude of the resultant and apply trigonometry for
the direction of the resultant.
Recall
According to Pythagoras theorem applied on a
c
right angled triangle, Figure 2.14, the square of
the hypotenuse, c, is equal to the sum of squares
8
of the other two sides, a and b.
Figure 2.14 A Right-angled triangle
sin Θ = hypotenuse opposite b/c = c
a
Example 2.4
An ant, starting at a point, walked through a distance of 40 cm due South and then
50 cm due West. What is the resultant displacement of the ant from its starting
point?
Solution
Placing the tail of the vectors at the origin of coordinates, the vector diagram of
the motion is shown in Figure 2.15.
North
S₂ = 50 cm, East
East
0
$1 = 40 cm, South
S
Figure 2.15 Vector diagram of motion of the ant
29
Physics | Student Text Book
using pythagorean theorem, the magnitude of the resultant displacement is
S = S1² + S2 = /(40cm) 2 + (50cm) = /4100cm² = 64cm
Direction of the reultant displacement is shown by the angle Θ, where
tan Θ = adjacent = = 0.8, Θ = 38.6°
the resultant is $ = 64cm, 38.6° South of West
Components of a vector
In the previous sections we discussed addition of vectors by applying graphical
method (a scale diagram) and by using properties of right angled triangles. Graphical
method offers only very limited accuracy and calculations with right triangles work
only when the two vectors are perpendicular. This section introduces a simple but
general method for adding vectors known as Component Method.
In your mathematics lesson you have studied about rectangular (Cartesian)
coordinate system of axes. Consider a vector placed on the xy-plane with its tail at o,
the origin of the coordinate system, Figure 2.16.
The projection of the vector on the coordinate axes is known as component of the
vector. The projection of vector À on the X axis, Aₓ, is known as the X component
of vector À and that on the y axis, A,, is known as the y component of vector À
Components Ax and A y-, are numbers but they are not vectors. Aₓ and Ä, are the
vector components of A and in symbols
y
y
À
À
Ay
Ay
α
Θ
O
X
O
X
Ax
Ax
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.16 Vector \vec{A} in terms of its vector components Àₓ and Ä,
The x and y components of vector A (Figure 2.16a) have magnitudes of Aₓ = A COS Θ
and Ay = A sin Θ, respectively. In the arrangement shown in Figure 2.16a, both
components are positive numbers. But in a more general situations, components
may be positive or negative umbers depending on how the vector is oriented, i.e., the
angle it makes with the X axis. The process of breaking up a vector into its components
is known as resolution of a vector.
30
Grade 11
Note that: In finding the x- and y- components of a vector, we associate cosine
with the x-component and sine with the y-component, as in Figure 2.16a. This as-
sociation is due to the fact that we chose to measure the angle α with respect to the
positive x-axis. If the angle were measured with respect to the y-axis, as in Figure
2.16b, the components would be given by
Aₓ = Asin and Ay = Acos α
Key terms
Component of a vector: the projection of a vector on the coordinate axes.
Resolution of a vector: Breaking a vector into its components
Example 2.5
A force vector 1/4 of magnitude of 35 N is pushing on a box placed on the horizontal
ground as shown in Figure 2.17a. If the force makes an angle of 40° above the
negative X axis, what are the X and y components of the force?
Fπ
F,
(a)
E
Figure 2.17 A pushing force
Solution
Force F can be A placed on the xy plane as shown in Figure 2.17b. Remember that
translation of a vector does not alter the magnitude and direction of the vector.
The X component of the force is Fx = F cos 40° = 35 N x (0.766) = 26.8 N, and the
y component is Fy = -F sin 40° = -35 N X (0.643) = -22.5 N
Finding the resultant of vectors by component method
In order to determine the resultant of two or
more vectors using component method, we
resolve each of the vectors into their x and y
y
components. The X component of the resultant,
TB
Rx, will be the sum of the X components of
X
the individual vectors and the y component
of the resultant, Ry, will be the sum of the y
Figure 2.18 Vectors \vec{A} and
components of the individual vectors, Figure
\vec{B} added by Component
2.18.
Method
31
Physics
I
Student Text Book
In terms of the vector components we write
R = Rx + Rᵥ, where Rx = + Bₓ, and Ry = Äᵥ + By
The magnitude of the resultant vector will be;
Rx = Ax + Bₓ, and Ry=Ay+By (taking the signs of the components into consideration)
The direction of the resultant is given in terms of the angle it makes with the X axis.
Place Řₓ and Ry on the xy-plane and find the angle as
tan Θ = R
Attention
if both Rx and Ry are positive numbers, angle Θ is above the +X axis
if Rx is negative number and Ry is positive number, angle Θ is above
the -X axis
if both Rx and Ry are negative numbers, angle Θ is below the -x axis
if Rx is positive number and Ry is negative number, angle Θ is be-
low the +X axis
Exercise 2.4
Under what circumstances would a vector have components that are equal in
magnitude?
Exercise 2.5
A vector has an x-component of - 35 units and a y-component of 40 units.
Find the magnitude and direction of the vector considering that the positive X
direction indicates East and that the positive y direction indicates North.
Example 2.6
Consider two displacement vectors À and B of magnitudes 100 m and 200
m respectively, Figure 2.21 Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant
displacement vector.
32
Grade 11
y
y
B
À
R
30°
50°
X
Ry
Θ
X
Rx
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.19
Solution
We first resolve the vectors into their X and y components.
Using trigonometry, we get Ax = A cos 50° = 100(0.643) m = 64.3 m, and
Ay = A sin 50° = 100(0.766) m = 76.6 m
Bx x = -B cos 30° = -200 (0.866) m = - -173.2 m, and
By = B sin 30° = 200(0.50)m = 100 m
The vector components of the resultant are Rx = Àₓ + Bₓ, and Rᵥ = Ä, + By
,
where Rx = Ax + Bx = 64.3 m + (-173.2 m) = -108.9 m and Ry = =Ay + By = 76.6
m + 100 m = 176.6 m.
Then we place the components of the resultant on the xy-plane as in Figure 2.19
(b). The magnitude of the resultant is
= √(- 108.9m) 2 + (176.6m)² = 207.5m
and Θ = tan -1 176.6m 108.9m = tan -1 (1.62) = 58.3°
Therefore, Ř = 207.5m, Θ = 58.3° above the negative x axis
Exercise 2.6
Vector À has a magnitude of 30 units and points in the positive y-direction.
When vector B is added to A, the resultant vector À + B points in the
negative y-direction with a magnitude of 10 units. Find the magnitude and
direction of B.
33
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 2.7
A girl walked across a large field through the following distance in the given
order:72 m toward 32° East of North, 57 m toward 37°South of West, 18 m toward
South. Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant displacement of the girl?
Solution
The displacement vectors are placed on the xy-plane as shown in Figure 2.20.
Y
37°
57m
B
A
À
N
72m
3Z
18
C
W-O-E
32°
I
S
7
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.20 (a) The actual path the girl followed, (b) Vector diagram
Solution
The components of the displacement vectors are calculated as in Table 2.2 below.
Table 2.2
X component
y component
S₁
72 (sin 32°) m = 38.2 m
72 (cos 32°) m = 61.1 m
S₂
-57|cos 37°) m = - 45.6 m
-57 (sin37°) m = -34.2 m
S₃
O m
-18 m
Rx = S₁y + S₂y + S₃y = 8.9 m
R =
= 7.4m)² + (8.9m)² = 11.6m
and Θ = tan⁻¹ (8.9m) (7.4m) = tan⁻¹ (1.2) = 50.2° above the nagative x axis
Therefore, R = 11.6m, Θ = 50.2° N of W
Did you know?
Analytic methods of vector algebra are used routinely in mechanics, electricity, and mag-
netism. They are important mathematical tools of physics.
34
Grade 11
Exercise 2.7
A car travels 20 km due north and then 25 km in a direction 60° West of North.
Use both graphical and algebraic methods to find the magnitude and direction of
a single vector that gives the net effect of the car's trip.
Unit Vectors
As we have seen in the previous discussion we defined a unit vector as a vector of
magnitude one, with no unit. Unit vectors are used to represent the direction of
vectors in space. The symbol of unit vectors is denoted by a 'hat' (^) to distinguish it
from ordinary vectors.
In an xy-coordinate system we define a unit vector i that points in the direction of
the positive x-axis and a unit vector \hat{j} that points in the direction of the positive
y-axis, see Figure 2.21.
Y
Y
À
Aⱼⱼ
j
,,
X
X
O
i
O
i
Axi
Figure 2.21 Unit vectors on the xy-plane
Vector components of vector \vec{A} and its components are related as
Äₓ = Aₓᵢ
Ä, = Aᵥⱼ
Vector A can be written in vector equation as
=
Using the unit vectors the resultant of two vectors A and B can be expressed as
R=A+B
=
35
Physics I Student Text Book
The unit vector along the direction of a given non-zero vector is defined as the vector
divided by its magnitude.
If vector A À = Aₓᵢ + Aⱼⱼ, then the unit vector along À is
Example 2.8
Given force vector F = (12i 16ⱼ) N, what is a unit vector along F ?
solution
of
See that the magnitude of ÜFis UF = √(0.6)² + (0.8)² = 1
Example 2.9
Vector À has X and y components of 4 units and 2 units, respectively and vector
B has the corresponding components of -9 units and 3 units respectively. Find
(a) the vector components of their resultant,
(b) the magnitude and direction of their resultant.
solution
Given À = + = (4i units
The resultant
Ř = i + (Ay = (4 9) i + (2 + 3) = (-5j+5j) units
(a) The X and y components of
(b) the magniture of
R is R = + R² = 2 + 5² = 50 = 5 √2 units
As Ř is along the negative X direction and Ry is along the positive y direction, we
see that Ř is in the second quadrant and it makes angle of 45° above the negative X
axis.
36
Grade 11
Example 2.10
An unknown vector D is added to vector C = (- 4i + 5j) units and the resultant
R = C+D has X and y components of each -1 and 1 units, respectively Find the
magnitude of the unknown vector.
Solution
Given C = (- 4ᵢ + 5ⱼ), D = and Ř = (-î+j)
For Ř = C + D, we have Rx = Cₓ + Dx, - 1 = - 4+Dx, Dₓ = 3 units
Ry = C₄ + Dy, 1 = 5 + Dy, Dy = 4 units
Vector D = (3i 4)) units
Exercise 2.8
The vector sum P + Q is a unit vector along the positive X axis. If Φ = i - j,
find Q.
Exercise 2.9
If vector 0.4 i + b j j is a unit vector, then what is the value of b?
Example 2.11
Traditional Maresha
A farmer is ploughing the field using traditional Maresha (plow) pulled by two
oxen Figure 2.24a. The two animals are pulling the beam (Mofer) with a force F2
of 1200 N at angle of 40° from the horizontal and the farmer's force F1 on the
handle (Erf) is 150 N at 60° above the horizontal as shown in Figure 2.24b. Find
the resultant horizontal pulling force exerted by the farmer and the oxen on the
Maresha? At this point assume all the forces are acting at point K.
For the whole system to work the resultant downward vertical force must be
slightly greater than the upward. Explain why.
37
Physics
I
Student Text Book
60
F2
k
Mofer
Erf
Figure 2.22 (a) A farmer plowing his
(b) Schematic diagram of the Maresha
farm
Solution
The forces that are acting on the Maresha are the force exerted by the farmer on the
Erf, F1, and the pulling force on the Mofer, F2.
Both F1 and F2 have X components and the sum of these components gives the
resultant horizontal pulling force. Both F1x and F2x are along the positive X direction.
Fx = F₁ₓ + F₂x = F₁ cos Θ₁ + cos
= 150N cos 60° + 1200N cos 40°
= 75N + 919N = 994.3 N.
If the upward forces on the marseha exceed the downward focrces(which is the
sum of weight of the plow and the downward component of the force exerted on
the Erf), the maresha will be lifted above the ground and plaughing will not be
possible.
Review Questions 2.3
1. Two vectors give a resultant of magnitude 8 units when are parallel and 2
units when they are antiparallel. Determine the possible values of each of the
vectors.
2. State the condition where the vector sum of two vectors is a null vector.
3. Suppose you are in a large hall and that you mark a point on the floor and
start walking the following distances in the given order: 50 m [forward],
10 m [backward], 10 m [forward], 10 m [backward], 20 m [forward], 10 m
[backward], 40 m [forward], and 10 m [backward].
A. What is the total distance you traveled?
B. What is the magnitude and direction of your displacement from the starting
point?
4. What vector must be added to vector C of 10km, East in order to give a
resultant vector of
A. 15 km, East?
B. 15 km, West
38
Grade 11
5. A sailor boards a paddle boat and heads the boat Westward directly across a
river. The river flows South at 50 cm/s and the woman paddles the boat with
a speed of 100 cm/s.
A. Determine the resultant velocity of the boat - - both magnitude and direction.
B. How far down stream relative to the straight-across direction will woman
be when she reaches the opposite shore?
6. Given three displacement vectors B, C, and D such that
B = i + 2j) m, C = 3i 2j) m D of unknown components, determine
the magnitude and direction of D for 3B - C + D = 0
7. Given displacement vectors of $₁ and √ₛ₂ as S₁ = (3ᵢ+ 6ⱼ) m, =
S₂ = 2i - 4j) m, find a unit vector along the direction of
8. Five displacement vectors A,B,C,D and È are placed on the coordinate
axes as shown in Figure 2.23. Fill Table 2.3 with the correct values of the
components of the vectors. (Hint: A vector on either of the coordinate axis has
only one component).
y
X component
y component
B
À
B
À
37°
X
30°
C
C
53°
È
D
DI
È
Figure 2.23 The five vectors on the xy plane
2.4 Product of Vectors
After completing this section, you should be able to:
define dot product of a vector
apply the technique of dot product to solve practical problems
In the previous sections you have learnt about different techniques of finding a
resultant vector. We can also express many physical relationships by using products
of vectors. Vectors are not ordinary numbers, so we can't directly apply ordinary
multiplication to vectors.
There are two different kinds of products of vectors: Scalar (Dot) product and Vector
(Cross) product. The scalar product of two vectors yields a result that is a scalar
quantity while the vector product of two vectors yields another vector. In this section
we will discuss the scalar product of two vectors.
39
Physics
I
Student Text Book
?
Brainstorming
Do you know any physical quantity that can be
expressed as a product of two vector quantities?
Multiplying or dividing a vector by a number or scalar
A vector quantity such as a force can be multiplied by a scalar quantity (an ordinary
number). Multiplying a vector by a number gives a vector. When we multiply a
vector À by a scalar c, the result c À has a magnitude equal to |c| À (the absolute
value of c multiplied by the magnitude of vector A). If c is positive, À and c À are in
the same direction (they are parallel) but if c is negative, A and c À are in opposite
directions (they are antiparallel).
For example, if vector À is multiplied by a scalar number 2, the result, represented
by 2 A, is a vector with magnitude two times that of À pointing along the direction
of À. On the other hand, if vector À is multiplied by a scalar number -2, the result,
represented by -2A, is a vector with magnitude two times that of À pointing in
opposite direction to A, see Figure 2.24.
À
À
2À
-2A
Figure 2.26 (a) À and 2\ À are parallel (b) À and -2 À are antiparallel
Example 2.12
Displacement vector given as $ =35km, towards 6060° North of east. Find the
magnitude direction of a) 1.2 S and b) -1.2 S ?
Solution
Given $ =35km, towards 6060° North of east
a) Vector 1.2 S is a displacement with magnitude 1.2 times that of S along the
direction of S.
1.2S= 1.2 X 35=42km and =42km, 60° North of East.
b) Vector -1.2 $ a displacement vector with magnitude 1.2 times that of $
pointing opptisite to the direction S. Therefore -1.2 $ =42km, 60° South of West.
40
Grade 11
Dot product
The scalar product of two vectors is denoted by A.B. Because of this notion, the
scalar product is also called the dot product. Although À and B are vectors, the
quantity A.B is a scalar.
The dot product of vectors À and B is defined as
A.B=ABcosΘ
where Θ is the angle between the vectors, Figure 2.25 notes that the righthand side
of the equation is a number (without direction).
B
Place the vectors tail to tail
Θ
À
Figure 2.25 Vectors are placed tail to tail to form angle Θ
The angle between the vectors ranges from 0° to 180° and it is the angle formed
when vectors are joined tail to tail.
Depending on the value of the cosine of the angle between the vectors, the scalar
product A B may be positive, negative, or zero.
Key terms
Scalar (dot) product: product of vectors that yields a scalar.
Angle between vectors: the angle two vectors form when placed tail to tail
As shown in Figure 2.26a, or the magnitude of the component of B in the direction
of À , as shown in Figure 2.26b.
B
Acos Θ
B
RO
RO
A
A
B cos Θ
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.26: Alternative ways of finding the dot product of À and B
41
Physics I Student Text Book
Exercise 2.10
The dot product of À and B can be defined alternatively as the magnitude
of multiplied by the component B of in the direction of À. Find the angle
between each of the following pairs of vectors.
a) 3i - jandi - 2j
b) 3i - 2j and i - 2j
c) 3i — 2ⱼ and 4i + 6ⱼ
?
Activity 2.6
Group discussion
Apply the definition of dot product to show that the dot product of a unit vector
with itself is one (unity) while the dot product of a unit vector with another unit
vector is zero, and use the result to prove that
P Q = where P = + and
Note that
There are two ways of writing the dot product of two vectors:
A.B=ABcos0
A.B=AB+AB
y
Exercise 2.11
Given a position vector What is the cosine of the angle between P
and (a) the x-axis? (b) the y-axis? (The cosine of the angle between a vector and
the positive coordibate axis is called direction cosine of the vector.
Example 2.13
Vector À = i + and vector B + 3j.
What is (a) the scalar product of À and B?
(b) the nagle between À and B?
Solution
(a) A.B = + Ay.By = (1) + (1) (3)
(b) From A.B = AB cosΘ = A.B AB
=
cos AB AB = 1 = 0.196, A = (0.196) = 78.7ᵃ
42
Grade 11
Example.2.14:
Force and displacement
Consider a block placed on a horizontal surface and that force F is applied on the
block to move the block through displacement S. The work done by the force is
defined as the dot product of the force and the displacement. If F = (5i + 3j) N
and $ = (- 2î + 4ⱼ) m, what is the work done by the applied force?
solution
Work W = F.S = (5i + 3j) N. 2i + 4j) m = 2) + 3 (4) = 2Nm = 2J
Example 2.15:
Force and velocity
Consider force F of a certain machine is applied on a body to move the body
with an average velocity V. The power developed by the machine is defined as
the dot product of the force and the average velocity. If F = (50i + 30j) and
V = (3î+4j) m/s, what is the power developed by the machine?
Solution
The power
= 50 (3) + 30 (4) = 270Nm/s = 270W
Review Questions 2.4
1. What is the dot product of vector À with itself?
2. Show that the dot product of two vectors obeys:
(a) commutative property, A.B=B.A?
(b) distributive property, A. (B + C) = (A. B) + (A C)
3. Is B = B.A?
4. For what angle between À and B will A.B be equal to B.A
5. The force applied on a body and the displacement it underwent are given
respectively as F = (25i 30j) N and $ = (-2î-3j) m. What is the work
done by the force?
6. For what values of the angle between À and B will the dot product A.B be
positive, negative or zero?
7. If D = (5î-3j) N and È = (2î+j), what is the angle between D+E and
the X axis?
8. If P.Q = PQ, what is the angle between P and Q ?
43
Physics I Student Text Book
UNIT2SUMMARY
c
When a physical quantity is described by a single number, we call it a scalar
quantity. In contrast, a quantity described by both a magnitude (the "how much"
or "how big" part) and direction in space is a vector.
c
Depending on their direction, magnitude and orientation we can categorize
vectors as collinear, coplanar, parallel, antiparallel, equal, null, unit vector etc.
c
Graphical method of vector addition makes use of translation of vectors.
c
Triangle law - Vectors are connected head to tail to form a triangle.
c
Parallelogram law - vectors are connected tail to tail and a parallelogram is
constructed using the vectors as its sides.
c
Polygon law - used to find the resultant of more than two vectors. The vectors are
joined head to tail without regard to the order they are taken. The vector drawn
from the tail of the first vector to the head of the final vector represents the resultant.
C
Analytic methods of vector addition/subtraction allow us to find resultant of sums
or differences of vectors without having to draw them. They are exact, contrary to
graphical methods which are approximate.
c
The resultant of two vectors in the same direction has a magnitude equal to the
sum of the magnitude of each of the vectors and it is directed along the direction
of any one of the vectors.
C
The resultant of two vectors at right angles has a magnitude equal to the square
root of the sum of the squares of the magnitude of each of the vectors and the
direction of the resultant is determined by the angle it makes with respect to a
reference line (commonly the X axis).
C
A unit vector vector along the X axis is denoted by i and that along the y axis is
denoted by j A vector that is represented by its vector components as À = Aₓ Aᵥ
can also be represented interms of its components as =
c
If Ř is the resultant of À and B then Ř = Rₓᵢ + Rⱼⱼ, where
Ry = Aᵥ + By. The angle that Ř makes with the X axis is Θ = tan -1 (R)
c
The scalar product of two vectors À and Bis defined as A.B = AB COS and also
c
The scalar product of two vectors can be used to determine the angle between the
vectors and it can also be used to determine the component of one of the vectors
in the direction of the other.
44
Grade 11
END OF UNIT 2 QUESTION
1. Identify the following quantities as vectors and scalars: Speed, velocity, Displace-
ment, Volume, Acceleration, Power.
2. Which one of the following is not true about the three vectors shown in Figure
2.27?
a. -A=B+C
À
B
c. c=-A-B
C
d. A+B-C=0
Figure 2.27
3. If you and your friend have to apply a force to move an object, what would be the
best way to apply the forces to maximize your resultant force?
4. What is the least number of unequal vectors required to produce a zero resultant?
5. If you and your friend have to apply a force to move an object, what would be the
best way to apply the forces to maximize your resultant force?
6. What is the least number of unequal vectors required to produce a zero resultant?
7. Suppose you are adding two vectors P and Q, how would you add them to get the
resultant with the least magnitude?
8. What will happen to the magnitude of the resultant of two vectors as the angle
between them increases from 0° to 180?
9. A vector À lies in the xy plane. For what orientations of À will both of its compo-
nents be negative? For what orientations will its components have opposite signs?
10. Two vectors have unequal magnitudes. Can their sum be zero? Explain.
11. Given
displacement
vectors
S₁ = + 3j) m. Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant displace-
ment
12. Three force vectors A, B and C are acting at a point. If À = 4i 3j, B = 2i
, ,andA+B-C=0.Find
a) the magnitude and direction of vector C and
b) a unit vector along C.
13. Determine a velocity vector that has a magnitude of 5 m/s directed along the di-
rection of vector D=1.5î+2ⱼ.
14. The angle between vector À and vector B is 20°. If the magnitude of vector À is
6 units and that of B is 4 units, what is the component of vector along the direc-
tion of vector B
15. The initial position vector of a particle on the xy plane is (5,2) and its final position
vector is (-2,-3). If distance is measured in centimeter,
a) what is the displacement of the particle?
b) what is the magnitude and direction of the displacement?
45
Physics
I Student Text Book
16. A postal employee drives a delivery truck
N
STOP
W-O-E
along the route shown in Figure 2.30. De-
S
2 km
termine the magnitude and direction of the
4 km
45°
resultant displacement by drawing a scale
diagram.
3 km
N
W-O-E
START
S
Figure 2.28 Path of the truck
17. A girl pushes a box placed on the floor with
a force of 50 N at an angle of 37° below the horizontal. If the box moves toward the
positive X direction, what are the vector components of the force?
18. The Tug-of-War Game
Four dogs nicknamed A, B, C, and D play a tug-of-war game with a toy, Figure
2.31. A pulls strongly with a force of magnitude A = 160 N. B pulls even stronger
than A with a force of magnitude B = 200 N, and C pulls with a force of magnitude
C = 140 N. When D pulls on the toy in such a way that his force balances out the re-
sultant of the other three forces, the toy does not move in any direction. With how
big a force and in what direction must D pull on the toy for this to happen? (Hint:
If the toy does not move, the vector sum of the four forces, FA + FB + Fc + FD = 0.
North
У
y = 55°
ß = 60
C
B
East
A
a = 55°
D
Figure 2.29 Dogs enjoying the tug-of-war game
19. Given two vectors X and Y such that X = 4i + and Y = 6i + 3j, ,
(a) what is the angle between the two vectors?
(b) Find the component of X along the direction of Y ?
20. What is the vector product A.B of the
vectors shown in Figure 2.30?
y
130
À
i
Figure 2.32 Vectors on the xy
53.°
x
plane - x axis as a reference line
i
for measuring angles
46
HAILE
