UNIT 6
+
+
ELECTROSTATICS
+
AND ELECTRIC CIRCUIT
Introduction
In this unit we will study the two branches of electricity, namely electrostatics
(static electricity) and current (dynamic) electricity. Under electrostatics we study
the properties of electric charges at rest and under current electricity we study the
properties of charges in motion. The main difference between static and current
electricity is that with static electricity, the charges are stationary and build on
the surface of an insulator, while in current electricity electron flowing through a
conductor form what we call an electric current.
Learning outcomes: Students will be able to:
calculate the electric field resulting from a point charge.
determine the magnitude and direction of the electric force among any
point charges.
acquire knowledge and understanding in electrostatic phenomenon
demonstrate an understanding of the components and functions
of electrical circuits that are commonly found at home and in the
workplace
construct, analyze, simple electrical circuits, using schematic
diagrams, working with electrical tools and components, and
examining small everyday electrical devices and appliances
define a capacitor and explain some of its applications in life.
apply Kirchhoff's rules to solve circuit problems.
217
Physics
Student Text Book
6.1 Coulomb's Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
state Coulomb's law.
calculate the magnitude and direction of electric force between any two
charges.
solve problems involving Coulomb's law.
explain Coulomb's law using the idea of vectors.
explain the meaning of a coulomb.
?
Brainstorming Questions
1. What are the compositions of an atom?
2. What are the two types of charges and what are their origin?
3. How can a body be charged positively and negatively?
4. What does the law of electrostatics say?
Properties of Electric Charges
Charge
Before we go into discussing Coulomb's law, we need to revise what you have
learnt in the previous grades about charge and its properties. Charge is the
fundamental property of matter associated with electrons and protons which are
found in any atom. There are only two types of charges: negative and positive
charges. By convention, negative charges are carried by electrons and positive
charges are carried by protons.
When the number of electrons and protons in an object are equal that object is
said to be electrically neutral. However, if this electrical balance is disturbed, then
the object is said to be electrically charged. A negatively charged object contains
more electros than protons, but a positively charged body contains more protons
than electrons.
Properties of charges
Property I: There are two kinds of electric charges: Positive and Negative.
Property II: Two similarly charged bodies repel each other and two oppositely
charged bodies attract each other.
218
Grade 11
—
+
+
+
Figure 6.1: Like Charges repel and unlike charges attract each other.
Property III: Electric charge is always conserved, i.e., it cannot be created
or destroyed. In any charging process, the number of electrons gained by one
object is equal to the number of electrons lost by the other.
Property IV: Electric charge is quantized. Charge comes in discrete packets, it
means that charge (q) always occurs as some integral multiple of the charge of
an electron, e. It can be written as: q = ±ne (where n = 1,2,3,...)
The smallest unit of charge that is carried by one electron or proton is called the
elementary charge, e. The magnitude of the charge of an electron is:
1e=-1.6x10⁻¹⁹C
The charge carried by a proton is also the same as that of the charge carried by an
electron except it is positive.
1p=+1.6x10⁻¹⁹C
Example 6.1
What number of protons needed to make a charge of +1.0 C?
Solution:
n = q e = 1.6x10⁻¹⁹ 1.0C = 6.25x10¹⁸ X protons
Similarly, the number of electrons needed to make a charge of -1.0 C is
6.25x10¹⁸ electrons.
219
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 6.1:
Discuss in pair about the following questions. Present what you have
agreed in your group to the class.
1. What would happen if electrons were positively charged and protons
negatively charged?
2. Is the Earth charged or neutral? Discuss why is so.
3. Is there a force of attraction or repulsion between a charged and a neutral
body?
4. Can positive charges move and create electric current electrostatically?
Exercise 6.1
(a) How many electrons are needed to form a charge of -2.0 nC?
(b) How many electrons must be removed from a neutral object to leave a net
charge of +0.50 µC?
Electrostatic Force
A force of attraction or repulsion between two charged bodies, is known as the
electrostatic force. Electrostatic force is either attractive or repulsive, unlike the
gravitational force which is only attractive. If the objects have opposite charges
they attract each other, while if their charges are similar, they repel each other.
F
q₁
q₂
F
q₁
F
F
q₂
+
+
+
r
r
a)
b)
Figure 6.2: Like charges repel and Unlike charges attract each other.
In 1785, the French physicist Charles Coulomb, proposed a law that describes the
force that one charged particle exerts on another. This law is remarkably similar
in form to Newton's law of gravitation. Coulomb's law states that any two-point
charges exert an electrical force on each other that is directly proportional to the
product of their charges and inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them. where q₁ is the charge on the one particle, q₂ is the charge on the
second, and r is the distance between the two.
220
Grade 11
q₁
q₂
Figure 6.3: Coulomb's Law
Then, the magnitude of the electrostatic force between two point-charges is given
by:
The proportionality constant k is called the electrostatic, or Coulomb constant.
It can also be written in terms of the permittivity of free space E₀ whose value is,
ε₀ = 8.85 X 10⁻¹² C² / N.m². With this, the value of k becomes:
1 = 4x3.14x8.85x10⁻¹²C² / N.m² 1 /
Example 6.2:
Two tiny spherical water drops with identical charges of -, have a center-to-center
separation of 1.0cm. a) What is the electrostatic force acting between them? b)
How many excess electrons are on each drop giving it its charge imbalance?
Solution:
Step I: Conceptualize the problem: There are two identical negative charges of
water drops. We are required to find the electrostatic force from Coulombs law (a)
and the number of excess electrons that gives this charge imbalance by the charge
is quantized property of electric charges.
Step II: Identify the given and required quantities:
What you have is: q₁ = q₂ = X r = =
what you need to determine is: a) F =?
b) n = ?
=
Step III: Apply the appropriate equation that best fits for the solution.
F = k 0
q
221
Physics
I
Student Text Book
That means 6.25 X 10⁸ electrons give this charge imbalance so that the two charged
water drops exert 9.0x10⁻¹⁷ N of repulsive force to each other.
Exercise 6.2:
1.
What are the similarities and differences between Newton's law of universal
gravitation and Coulomb's law?
2.
Which force is greater between an electron and a proton, the gravitational or
the electrostatic? By how much is one larger than the other?
?
Activity 6.2:
1. Take a balloon or plastic comb and rub against your hair. Then take it near a
stream of water falling from a tap. Discuss and try to explain what you observe.
Figure 6.4: A charged body (balloon) attracts a neutral body (stream of water)
?
Activity 6.3
A positively charged light metal ball is suspended between two oppositely charged
metal plates on an insulating thread as shown below. Describe the motion that the
ball undergoes.
Figure 6.5: Coulomb's Law in Vector Form
222
Grade 11
Force on a Charge due to Multiple Electric Charges
Electrostatic force is a vector quantity. Therefore, if there are more than one force
acting on a charged particle, then the resultant force acting on the particle will be the
vector sum of all these forces. This is known as the superposition principle.
Consider a system of n stationary charges q₁,q₂, q₃....qₙ in vacuum. The force on
q₁ due to q₂, q₃ qₙ is obtained by taking the vector sum of the individual forces.
Where, F₁₂ is the force that charge q₂ exert on q₁, F₁₃ is the force that q₃ exert on q₁
,
F₁ₙ is the force that qₙ exert onq₁.
Example 6.3:
Three point charges are placed on the x-axis: q₁ = +6µC at x₁ = 5.0cm
, q₂ = -5µC at x₂ = -3.0cm, and q₃ = = +2µC at the origin (x=0). = What is
the magnitude and direction of the total electrostatic force acting on q₃?
Solution:
The first step should be determining the magnitude of the force each charge exerts
on q₃, using Coulomb's law:
The force charge q₁ exerts on charge q₃ is given by:
Similarly, the magnitude of the force charge q₂ exerts on charge q₃, F₂₃ is given
by
After the magnitude of each force is determined the next step will be determining
the directions of the forces exerted on q₃ due to q1 and q2 by considering the sign of
the pair of these charges.
q2
q₃
q₁
+
+
x = - 3 cm =
x = 0 =
x = 5cm
223
Physics I Student Text Book
Charge q₁ (positive) repels charge q₃ (positive) towards left: F₁₃ = 43.2N - i
Charge q₂ (negative) attracts charge q₃ (positive) towards left: F₂₃ = 100.0N i
Therefore, since these forces act in the same direction (both to the left), the resultant
force, Fᵣ acting on charge q₃, will be their sum.
Fᵣ = F₁₃ = 143.2Nᵢ + 100.0Ni) = - 143.2Nᵢ
Thus, the magnitude of the resultant force acting on charge q₃ is 143.2N, and the
force is directed along the negative x-axis.
Exercise 6.3:
Referring to the question on the above example 6.3, determine the magnitude and
direction of the total electrostatic force acting (a) on q₁, and (b) on q₂.
Review questions 6.1
1. State Coulomb's law in your own words.
2. Write Coulomb's law mathematically both in a scalar and vector form.
3. What is the meaning of a Coulomb?
4. Two charges +3µC and +12µC are fixed 1 m apart, with the second one to the
right. Find the magnitude and direction of the net force on a -2 µC charge
when placed halfway between the two.
5. Two small, identical conducting spheres repel each other with a force of 0.050
N when they are 0.25 m apart. After a conducting wire is connected between
the spheres and then removed, they repel each other with a force of 0.060 N.
What is the original charge on each sphere?
6. In the picture below, X is a small negatively charged sphere with a mass of
1.0kg. It is suspended from the roof by an insulating rope which makes an
angle of 60 degrees with the roof. Y is a small positively charged sphere
which has the same magnitude of charge as X. Y is fixed to the wall by means
of an insulating bracket. Assuming the system is in equilibrium, what is the
magnitude of the charge on X?
224
Grade 11
60°
10kg
Y
X
+
50cm
Figure 6.6: Question 6
6.2 Electric Fields
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define the terms, electric field, and electric flux.
sketch electric field lines.
solve problems involving electric field.
Tap an electric field lines pattern using electric lines of force.
calculate the magnitude and direction of electric field due to a point charge
and two point charges.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is a gravitational field?
2. What causes gravitational field?
3. Discuss the concepts and recall the equations of (a) gravitational field lines,
and (b) gravitational field strength.
225
Physics
I
Student Text Book
An electric field is a region in space
where one charge experiences a force
from another charge. Let us consider a
q
point charge Q placed in vacuum, at point
P
O. If we place another point charge q at a
point P, where OP = r, then the charge Q
+
Q
will exert a force on q as per Coulomb's
law. We say that the charge Q produces an
electric field in its surrounding.
Figure 6.7: Electric field of a charge Q
Electric field lines
The electric field produced by a charged particle can be represented by lines of force
called electric field lines. It is drawn in the direction that a positive charge would
move if placed at a point in the field. Electric field lines are helpful to visualize the
vector nature of an electric field. The Figures 6.8 (a) to (f) shows the electric field
lines for different arrangement of charges.
9
4
(a)
(b)
q
q
4
4
N.
Z
Neutral point
(e)
(d)
q
9
+
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.8: Electric field lines of (a) a positive point charge, (b) a negative point charge,
(c) two equal positive charges, (d) two equal negative charges, (e) an electric dipole, and
(f) a uniform field of oppositely charged parallel plates.
226
Grade 11
Properties of electric Field lines
Electric field lines have the following properties
1. Electric field lines do not cross each other.
2. Electric field lines begin on positive charges and radiate away from them toward
negative charges, where they terminate.
3. Electric field lines are always perpendicular to the surface of the charged body.
4. The closer the lines, the stronger the electric field, and the farther apart they are the
weaker is the field.
5. Equally spaced electric field lines indicate the field is uniform. The electric field
between two parallel plates, shown in Figure 6.8, is a common example of a uniform
electric field.
?
Activity 6.4:
1. Form a group containing 3 or 4 members. Discuss in your group on the
mechanism to investigate the nature of electric field lines between two similar
and opposite charges.
2. What would happen when (a) a conductor and (b) an insulator is placed in an
electric field?
The Electric field strength
The magnitude and direction of the electric field is expressed by a quantity
called electric field strength or electric field intensity (E). Electric field strength, is
the force acting per unit positive charge for a stationary point charge. In equation
form:
E=Fg
q
Electric Field of Point Charge: The electric field of a point charge can be obtained
from Coulomb's law. From Coulomb's law, the equation for the force between two
electric charges is:
F=k9Q F
The electric field strength is then the force per unit of charge.
where E is the electric field strength due to a point charge Q, and r is the distance
from charge Q to the point of interest. From the above equation of electric field
227
Physics I Student Text Book
strength, we see that the electric field is depend only on the source charge Q and the
distance r; it is independent of the test charge q.
The SI unit for the electric field strength is newton per coulomb (N/C). The direction
of the electric field will be in the direction of the force the source charge exerted on
a positive test charge. Thus, electric field lines will direct away from a positive source
charge and towards a negative source charge.
Example 6.4:
Calculate the strength and direction of the electric field E due to a point charge of
2.0 nC (nano-Coulombs) at a distance of 5.0 mm from the charge.
Solution:
Step I: Conceptualize the problem: the strength of the field is its magnitude at a
distance of 5mm = 5x10⁻³m. We are therefore required to find the magnitude of
the electric field.
Step II: Use appropriate equation that best fits for the required quantity.
E
Since the source charge is positive in sign, the field is directed away from Q.
Exercise 6.4:
What electric force does the electric field found in the above example 6.4. would
exert on a point charge of -0.25 µC?
Electric field for multiple point charges
The electric field from multiple point charges can be obtained by taking the vector
sum of the electric fields of the individual charges. Consider n number of charges
whose electric fields have magnitudes of E₁ E₂ at a given point. The net
electric field is found by taking the vector sum of each electric field:
Note that the direction of E₁ is the direction of the force q₁ exerted on the positive
test charge placed at that point, and the direction of E₂ is the direction of the force
q₂ exerted on the positive test charge placed at that point, and so on.
228
Grade 11
Example 6.5
Two-point charges q₁ = 5nC and q₂ = -4nC are separated by a distance of 10 cm.
What is the magnitude of the electric field in between the charges?
Solution:
q₂ = - 4nC
The magnitude of the electric field at point P due to q₁ is:
Since q₁ is positive it exerts a repulsive force to the right on the positive test charge
placed at point P.
Thus,
Similarly, the magnitude of the electric field at point P due to q₂is:
Since q₂ is negatively charged it exerts an attractive force to the right on the positive
test charge placed at point P.
Thus, E₂ =1.44x10⁺N/mᵢ
Finally,
Exercise 6.5:
Repeat example 6.5, if (a) both q₁ and q₂ are positively charged, and (b) they are
both negatively charged.
Electric flux
One of the properties of electric field lines is that, the number of field lines crossing
a unit area, placed normal to the field at a point, is a measure of the strength of
electric field at that point. This means that the number of field lines per unit area, is
proportional to the magnitude of the electric field, or E ~ N/A. We can rewrite this
proportion as the number of field lines is proportional to the product of E and A, N
~ EA.
229
Physics
I
Student Text Book
We can now define electric flux. Electric flux is a measure of the number of electric
field lines that crosses a given area. The product of the electric field and the surface
area, A, perpendicular to the field is called the electric flux and represented by the
symbol Φ.
Φ = EA
If the surface under consideration is not perpendicular to the field, as in Figure 6.9
(b), the expression for the electric flux became,
Φ = EAcosΘ
E cosΘ is the projection of area normal to E. In a vector form, the above equation can
be written as the dot product of the electric field vector and area vector.
Φ=E.A
The area vector of a flat surface of area A has the following magnitude and direction:
Magnitude is equal to area of the surface (A)
Direction along normal or perpendicular to the surface.
This means, if the electric field vectors are tangent to the surface at all points, that
is if they don't penetrate the surface, the electric flux through the surface is zero.
Electric flux Φ is a scalar quantity, whose SI unit is N.m2/C.
Area = A
A
ar-
Θ
E
Electric
field
Figure 6.9: Field lines of a uniform electric field penetrating a plane of area A perpendic-
ular to the field. The electric flux Φ through this area is equal to EA.
Example 6.6:
A 2cm X 2cm square lies in the xy-plane. Find the electric flux through the square
for the electric field vectors, E = (50k + N /
Solution:
In this case direction of the area vector, which is perpendicular to the surface, is
in the z-axis. Because the square lies in the xy-plane.
230
Grade 11
A=(2cmx2cm)k=4cm²k,
Φ = A = À = 4x /
= 4 X 10⁻⁴ X 50 + / = 0.02N. / C
Exercise 6.6:
Find the electric flux through the surface with sides of 15cmx 15cm positioned in
a uniform electric field of E = 150N/C as shown in the figure below.
n
E
30°
Review Questions 6.2
1. Define the following terms, (a)electric field, (b) electric field strength, (c)
electric field lines, and (f) electric flux.
2. Map electric field lines for different arrangement of charges.
3. Compare and contrast the following gravitational quantities with their
counterpart electrical quantities:
A. gravitational field and electric field.
B. Gravitational field strength and electric field strength.
4. For the following figures find the possible region where the electric field could
be zero.
I
II
III
I
II
A.
P
P
B.
P
5. How field lines indicate the magnitude of the field they represent?
6. What is the net electric field strength at point P in the system shown below.
2.0 m
1.0 m
1.0 µC
-3.0 µC
P
231
Physics
Student Text Book
7. A particle of charge 2 X 10-8C experiences an upward force of magnitude 4 X
10-6 N when it is placed in a particular point in an electric field. (a) What is
the electric field at that point? (b) If a charge q = -1.0 X 10-8 C is placed there,
what is the force on it?
6.3 Electric Potential
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the terms electric potential, equipotential surface.
Solve problems involving electric potential.
Explain the meaning of a volt, potential difference, and emf.
?
Brainstorming Questions
U
Discuss the concepts and recall the equations of (a) gravitational potential,
and (b) gravitational potential energy.
U
What is the relationship between the following pair of quantities?
a. electric potential and electrical potential energy?
b. electrical potential energy, and electric work?
C. Electric potential and potential difference?
d. Potential difference and electric field?
e. Electrical potential and gravitational potential?
Electric Potential Energy
The concept of electric potential energy is similar to that of gravitational potential
energy. In raising a ball with mass m to any height, you are giving it gravitational
potential energy. Electric potential energy is similar but with charges instead of
masses. Instead of raising a ball in the gravitational field of the Earth, you move a
charge in the electric field of another charge.
In order to move one positive charge closer to another positive charge, (charge q
closer to charge Q in Figure 6.10) work has to be done by an external agent. This is
simply because there is a force of repulsion between the charges. In the process of
doing work, energy is transferred from you to the charge that you are pushing. As a
result, the charges gain electrical potential energy.
We define electrical potential energy of a test charge q in terms of the work done on
the charge q. Work done by external force in bringing a unit positive charge from
232
Grade 11
point A to B, in Figure 6.10 is the electrical potential energy of q.
W
If we take point A to be at infinity, i.e., rA ≈ inf inity
W = k r
A
B
q
Q
Figure 6.10: Work must be done to push one positive charge towards another.
Thus, the potential energy of a test
U = ?
charge 'q' in the vicinity of a source
r
q
charge 'Q' will be:
U=k9Q U
Q
Figure 6.11: Electric potential energy
Electric Potential
Electric potential is another concept which helps us to visualize the behavior of
electric fields. In unit 4, gravitational potential is defined from the idea of potential
energy. The potential at a point is the potential energy of unit mass at that point.
We will approach the idea of electrical potential in the same way. Electric potential
(denoted by V) is equal to the work done per positive charge in carrying it from
infinity to that point in an electric field. The work to be done is equal to the change
in the potential energy of the test charge in the field of the source charge.
The potential due to a single point charge
In electrostatics the zero of potential is at infinity, at a larger distance from the source
charge, because the electric field and force approach zero there. In the same way as
we consider gravitational potential energy at the ground to be zero, electric potential
233
Physics I Student Text Book
is defined as the work done per unit positive charge to move a positive test charge
from infinity to its current position within an electric field.
Mathematically:
Q
k
W
r
Q
V =
=
k
q
r
V=?
r
Thus, the equation for electric potential at a distance r
+
from a source charge Q is given by:
Q
Figure 6.12: Electric Po-
tential
V = k Q r
Electrical potential is a scalar quantity. Its SI unit is Volt (V) in the honor of
Alessandro Volta. 1V=1C 1V 1C
Electrical Potential Difference
Consider a positive test charge +q placed at
A in the electric field of a source charge Q.
The test charge moves towards B under the
influence of the electric field of the source
B
+Q
charge. In the process the test charge loses
+q
electrical potential energy and gains kinetic
energy. Thus, at A, the test charge has more
potential energy than at B, A is said to have a
higher electrical potential than B.
Figure 6.13: Potential Difference
The potential difference between two points (A and B in this case) in an electric field
is defined as the work required to move a unit positive test charge from the point of
lower potential to that of higher potential.
If an amount of work W is required to move a charge Q from one point to another,
then the potential difference between the two points is given by,
AV=W W
234
Grade 11
?
Activity 6.5:
A difference in height is needed for water
to flow, see the figure below. What is then
needed for current to flow? Discuss in pairs.
Figure 6.14: Gravitational potential
difference
Example 6.7
Determine the electric potential produced by a charge of 1µC at a distance of
1mm from it.
Solution = kq Nm² / X X 10⁻⁶ C
r
1x10⁻³m
=9x10°J/C =9x10°V X
= 9MV
Potential difference in a uniform electric field
+
Figure 6.15, below shows a uniform
+
+
electric field produced between two
+
Ed
+
equally and oppositely charged parallel
+
plates.
+
+
V
Figure 6.15: Potential difference in a
uniform electric field
To measure the potential difference between two points in the field, we equate the
work done in moving a charge from one point to the other with the gain in electrical
potential energy.
W = ДРЕ
Fd = qV
qEd = qV
V = Ed
235
Physics I Student Text Book
Thus, the electrical potential difference between the two plates is expressed as, the
electric field strength times the distance between the plates.
From the previous section, we already know the units for electric field is newtons
per coulomb. We now got the unit of electric field to be volt per meter. Thus, the
following relation among units is valid:
1N/C = 1V / m
Potential due to a system of point charges
Consider a system of charges q₁,,,, ..., qₙ with position vectors r₁, r₂, rₙ relative
to some origin (Figure 6.16). The potential at P due to the charge q₁ is V₁=kₙ.
Similarly, the potential at P due to q₂ is and the potential at P due to q₃
are given by
where r₁ is the distance between q₁ and point P, r₂ is the distance between q₂ and
point P, and so on. By the superposition principle, the potential V at P due to the
total charge configuration is the algebraic sum of the potentials due to the individual
charges.
The total potential at P is:
q3
q4
q1
q2
q5
p
Figure 6.16: Potential of multiple charges
(for n po ch arg es)
Note that the sum in this equation is an algebraic sum. It is not a vector sum. It means
the signs of the charges are used in calculating the potential. As a result, the potential
of a positive charge is positive and the potential of a negative charge is negative.
236
Grade 11
Example 6.8
Two charged particles are placed on the x-axis of a coordinate system. The first (
q₁ = 2µC) is at the origin. The second (q₂ = -5µC) is at x = 1.0m. Determine the
potential at x = 0.2 m.
Solution:
V
V = k
1
V = 3.375x10⁴V
Exercise 6.7:
Referring to example 6.8, (a) determine the potential at x = 1.5m. (b) At what
point in between these two charges the electric potential is zero?
Example 6.9
Calculate the change in electrical potential energy in moving a from 5 cm to 0.1
cm from a charged sphere with a charge of.
Solution:
X
W = 7.2x10⁻¹ = 72mJ
Equipotential line or surface
We can represent electric potentials (voltages) pictorially, just as we drew pictures to
illustrate electric fields. Equipotential lines are lines connecting points of the same
electric potential. When these points lie on a two- or three-dimensional surface,
such as the surface of a metallic sphere, they are called equipotential surfaces. If a
charge moves along the equipotential line then, there is no change in its potential
and hence, no electrical work is done.
237
Physics I Student Text Book
Characteristics of equipotential lines/surfaces:
1. Two equipotential surfaces never intersect each other.
2. The equipotential lines of a uniform field are parallel to each other and the equipotential
lines of a point charge are concentric sphere (see Figure 6.17)
+
Figure 6.17: Equipotential lines of (a) a uniform field, (b) a point charge.
3. Since the electric field (E) is stronger near the charge, so equipotential surfaces of
point charge are crowded near the charge as shown in the Figure 6.17.
4. No work is required to move a charge along an equipotential line because there is no
change in potential.
5. Equipotential lines are always perpendicular to the electric field lines.
W=F.S=Fscos0=qEscos0
Since the work done is zero,
qEscos)=0
Key term
Equipotential lines are lines connecting points of the same potential
238
Grade 11
Review Questions 6.3
1. Write the definition of the following terms in your own words. (a) electric
potential, (b) potential difference, (c) volt, and (d) equipotential line/surface.
2. Write two units of electric field strength.
3. If the potential is constant in a certain region, what is the nature of the electric
field at that region?
4. What would happen to its electrical potential energy (a) when an electron
is released in a uniform electric field, and (b) when a proton is released in a
uniform electric field?
5. How are electric field lines and equipotential lines drawn relative to each
other?
6. What is the strength of the electric field between two parallel conducting plates
separated by 1.0 cm and having a potential difference between them of 1.5V?
7. Two-point charges are located on the corners of a rectangle with a height oh
0.05 m and a width of 0.15 m. The first charge (q₁ =- 5µC) is located at the
upper left-hand corner, while the second charge ( q2 =+ 2µC) is at the lower
right-hand corner. (a) Determine the electric potential at the upper right-hand
corner of the rectangle. (b) What is the potential difference for a point at the
right-hand corner of the rectangle relative to the lower left-hand corner?
8. Two charges 3 X 10⁻⁸ C and -2 X 10⁻⁸ C are located 15 cm apart. At what point
on the line joining the two charges is the electric potential zero? Take the
potential at infinity to be zero.
9. What are the signs and magnitudes of a point charge that produces a potential
of -2.0 V at a distance of 1.0 mm?
10. Two point charges 10pC and -2pC are separated by a distance of 1.0 Find
the potential mid-way between them.
239
Physics
Student Text Book
6.4 Electric Current, Resistance and ohm's law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define the terms electric current, current density, resistance, conductivity,
resistivity and drift velocity.
explain the effect on the current (brightness) and potential difference of
connecting light bulbs in series.
explain the effect on the current (brightness) and potential difference of
connecting light bulbs in parallel.
draw electric circuits consisting of three resistors connected in series and
parallel.
determine equivalent resistance of resistors connected in series and parallel.
describe the principles of potentiometer and wheatstone bridge.
describe how to convert galvanometer to a voltmeter and ammeter.
explain the meaning of an ohm, resistance.
explain the si units of electric current, current density, resistance, resistivity,
conductivity.
state and apply Kirchhoff's laws.
solve problems involving network of resistors.
?
Brainstorming
U
Write down what you understand, from previous grades, by the terms current,
potential difference, emf and resistance.
U
Set up a simple circuit to measure the current in a lamp and the potential
difference across it? Sketch the circuit and swap it with a classmate to check.
U
What drives the current in a conductor?
U
How the flow of electrons are produced through a conductor?
U
Why does current flows through a conductor but not through an insulator?
Electric Current, Resistance and Ohm's law
Electric current
Electric current is a flow of charge. In metals, current is due to a flow of electrons.
When a voltage source is connected to a conductor, it applies a potential difference
V that creates an electric field. The electric field in turn exerts force on the free or
conduction charges of the conductor, causing current. Even though it is electrons'
motion that produces current, for historic reason, what we call electric current is the
conventional flow of protons. Hence, it flows from the '+' terminal of a battery or
power supply through the circuit to the '_' terminal.
240
Grade 11
Electric current is defined as the rate of flow of charges through some cross-sectional
area. if is the net charge that flows through a cross-sectional area A in time (t),then
the current I is given by the equation:
I=At =
The SI unit of electric current is ampere, denoted by A. One ampere is a flow of
one coulomb (1 C) of charge in 1 S. Small currents are measured in milliampere
(mA), and microampere (µA). 1mA = 10⁻³A and A=10⁻⁶.
?
Activity 6.6:
Discuss in group what is needed to store water in a tanker and distributed to the
needy. Compare it with how current is distributed to resistors using the source of
voltage, see the Figure below.
Electric Circuit
Battery
+
electron flow!
Figure 6.18: Analogy of water current (a) and electric current (b)
Electric current and current density
Current density is a quantity which is used to describe the density of an electric
current. It is denoted by the symbol J, and defined as the magnitude of the electric
current per cross-sectional area.
J = A I
The SI unit of current density is amperes per square meter. Current density is a
vector quantity, which means it has both magnitude and direction.
Current density is also assumed to be proportional to the electric field, (E), that
produces it, and the conductivity (σ) of the conductor through which it flows. The
conductivity of a conductor is a measure of its ability to conduct electricity, whereas
resistivity is the reverse of conductivity. With this, the relationship between electric
field E and the current density J became:
241
Physics | Student Text Book
J=0E=E
Where σ = conductivity of the conductor, and p resistivity. The SI unit of Pis Ohm-
meter (Ω.m), where 1 Ω.m = 1 V/A, and the SI unit of p is Siemens per meter (S/m),
or Ω-¹.
Example 6.10
A current of 6 mA, flows through a copper wire of correctional are 12 mm². What
is the current density?
Solution:
X
Exercise 6.9
Since current density is a vector quantity it has both magnitude and direction.
What is then its direction?
Drift velocity
A conductor contains a large number of loosely bound electrons which we call free
electrons or conduction electrons. The remaining material of which the conductor
is made keep on vibrating about their mean positions. The average amplitude of
vibration depends on the temperature. While the free electrons are moving through
the conductor, they collide with these materials/ions. As a result, the speed and
direction of the electron changes randomly at each such collision, causing the
electron to move in a zig-zag path as shown in the Figure 6.19, below.
Figure 6.19: Motion of electrons through a conductor
The potential difference provided by the source creates an electric field inside the
conductor. This field exerts a force on each electron in the direction opposite to the
field. In every collision the electrons lose their kinetic energy and start to drift. The
242
Grade 11
average velocity by which the free electrons move through a conductor is called their
drift velocity.
Conductor
Free electron
Current flow
Electron flow
-
I
-
+
Figure 6.20: When a conductor is not connected to source, the free electrons will make a
random motion (a), but when a pd is applied they will make a directional motion (b).
In a time interval t, an electron moves a distance d=vAt along the wire. If the
number of electrons per unit volume of wire is n then the number of electrons in the
shaded cylinder of Figure 6.15 is nAvAt. Therefore, the total charge on this volume
of electrons is nAvAte, where e is the charge of one electron.
A
d
V
Figure 6.21:
The current in the circuit will then be:
I = At Q = nAve.
J = A I = nvde
243
Physics
|
Student Text Book
Exercise 6.9
1.
Calculate the mean drift velocity of the electrons in a copper wire of cross-
sectional area 5.0x10⁻⁶m² carrying a current of 1.0 A. There are 8.5 x10-6m²
free electrons in one m³ of copper.
2.
What are the directions of the following quantities in an electric circuit? (a)
electrons, (b) electric current, (c) current density, (d) electric field, and (d)
drift velocity.
?
Activity 6.7:
The drift speed of electros in a copper wire is very slow, a fraction of a millimeter
per second, but as a generator is switched on in a power plant, far away from our
house, a bulb gives off light almost instantly. How could this happen? Discuss in
group and present your group's opinion to the class.
Resistance and Ohm's Law
Resistance
An electric wire is made of metal. Inside a metal, there are negatively charged
electrons that are free to move about. We call these conduction or free electrons,
because they are the particles that allow a metal to conduct an electric current. The
atoms of a metal bind tightly together; they usually form a regular array, as shown
in Figure 6.21. In a typical metal, such as copper or silver, one or more electrons
from each atom breaks free to become conduction electrons. Since there are equal
numbers of free electrons (negative) and ions (positive), the metal has no overall
charge - it is neutral.
When electrons are moving through a conductor, they collide with each other and
with the fixed positive ions of the material. This electric property that impedes
current is called resistance. Resistance is therefore defined as a measure of the
opposition to current flow in an electrical circuit.
ions
electrons
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 6.22: In a metal, conduction electrons are free to move among the fixed positive ions.
244
Grade 11
Ohm's Law
The German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787-1854) demonstrate experimentally
that the current in a metal wire is directly proportional to the potential difference
between its ends, provided that physical conditions, such as temperature, remain
constant. This means that, for a metal at constant temperature, the graph of I against
V will be a straight line through the origin.
V
<
Figure 6.23: Current vs. voltage for an ohmic and non-ohmic conductors
Whenever one quantity is proportional to another quantity, there must always be
some constant that relates the two quantities. In this case the constant that relates
voltage and current according to Ohm's law, is the resistance, R. Thus, for a conductor
(resistor) which passes current I when the pd across it is V, its resistance R is given
by the equation
R = V
The SI unit of resistance is Ohm denoted by'Ω, a Greek letter read as Omega.
1Q = 1V / A.
Large resistances are measured in Kilo Ohm (KΩ) and Mega ohm (MΩ).
1KΩ=103Ω Ω and 1MΩ=106Ω.
Note that this equation is valid for wires and resistors at constant temperature, which
are called ohmic. For non ohmic conductors, such as a filament lamp, the current is
not directly proportional to the potential difference. Filaments are materials used in
lamps that are composed of metals that glow when a certain amount of current flows
through them. The resistance of a filament depends on its temperature. A filament
bulb gives a curve with a decreasing gradient because its resistance increases with
temperature, Figure 6.23 (b).
245
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 6.11
What is the resistance of an automobile headlight through which 2.50 A flows
when 12.0 V is applied to it?
Solution
Rearranging Ohm's law for R and substituting known values gives
2.5A 12V 4.8Ω.
Exercise 6.10
The current through a component is 2.0 mA when connected to a source which
provides 12 V. Assuming its resistance is unchanged, what pd is required across the
component when the current is 2.0µA?
?
Activity 6.8:
1. The potential difference (PD) across a resistor means that there is a change in
potential across the resistor. Is there any change in current as it passes through
a resistor? Explain
2. How is the potential difference (PD) drop in a resistor similar to the pressure
differencein a fluid flowing through a pipe.
Resistors
An object of conducting material, having a resistance of desired value, is called a
resistor. In an electric circuit, a resistor is represented by symbol shown in Figure
6.24.
or
or
Figure 6.24: Symbol of (a) resistor and (b) variable resistor
Combination of Resistors
Usually, we find circuits where more than two components are connected together.
There are two basic ways in which to connect more than two resistors. They are
series and parallel.
246
Grade 11
Resistors in Series.
In series connection components are connected end-to-end in a line to form a single
path for electrons to flow. The defining characteristic of a series circuit is that there
is only one path for electrons to flow.
R₁
R2
R3
V₁
V₂
V₃
V
Figure 6.25: Three resistors (R₁, R₂, and R₃), connected in series.
In series circuit the amount of current is the same through any component in the
circuit.
I=I₁=I₂=I₃...
Using Ohm's law (V = IR), the potential difference across each resistor is given
by:
The potential difference V across all three resistors is given by
The total resistance R of the three resistors is then given by
R=R₁+R₂+R₃
Resistors in parallel
Figure 6.26 below shows a circuit
R1
containing three resistors of resistances
R₁, R₂, and R₃ connected in parallel. In
i1
P
N
parallel connection, there are more than
12
R₂
one path for electrons to flow. The defining
characteristic of a parallel circuit is that all
i₃
i
R3
components are connected between the
same set of electrically common points
(P and N). In a purely parallel circuit, the
IV
potential difference across any resistor is
the same,
Figure 6:26 Resister connected in parallel
V=V₁=V₂=V₃.
247
Physics | Student Text Book
To find the equivalent resistance of the combination, let us apply a potential difference
V between the points P and N. The current 'I' is divided at the junction P. Suppose a
current I₁ goes through R₁, I₂ through R₂ and I₃ through R₃. These combine at N to
give a total current. Therefore, I=I₁+I₂+I₃.
So,
V = V₁ + V₂ + V
R R₁ R₂ R₃
Since the pd across each resistor is the same, V = V₁ = V₂ = V₃. This gives
-=-+-+- V V V V
R R₁ R₂ R₃
V cancels throughout to give
-=-+-+- R 1111 R₁ R₂ R₃
For only two resistors connected in parallel, the equivalent resistance can be
determined by the equation.
?
Activity 6.9:
Discuss in group and give a mathematical reason for the following fact.
1. For resistors connected in series, the total resistance is larger than the resistance
of the resistor with the largest resistance, but for resistors connected in parallel,
the total resistance is smaller than the resistance of the resistor with the smallest
resistance.
Example 6.12
For the circuit shown in the figure below, determine (a) the equivalent resistance
of the circuit, (b), the current through each resistor, and the potential difference
across each resistor.
248
Grade 11
R1=5n
R₂=
=
R3=
=
24V
4A
12 A
R4=8n
We start by combining resistors R₂ and R₃ in parallel.
Then, all the three are connected in series, Therefore,
Ω
The current from the battery can then be determined by using Ohm's law.
24V 16Ω =1.5A
Since R₁, R₂₃ and R₄ are in series with the source, they will have the current of
the source. Thus,
Using Ohm's law:
V₂₃ = I₂³R₂₃ = 1.5 Ax3Q= 4.5V
I₂ = V₂₃ R2 = 4.0Ω 4.5V = 1.125 A and I₃ = V₂₃ R₃ = 4.5V 12Ω = 0.375 A
249
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Exercise 6.11
1. For the circuit shown below, list resistors that are connected (a) in series, and (b)
in parallel.
R₂
R3
R₁
R₄
2. What is the equivalent resistance of the circuit shown in the figure? (b) What
current flows through the 5Ω resistor?
5.5 Ω
10:52
159
24 V
52
200
10Ω
?
Activity 6.10:
Use the links below to perform virtual experiment on DC Circuits. You may
need your teacher's guidance on how to use it.
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/circuit-construction-kit-dc
http://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/circuit-construction-kit-dc-virtual-lab/
latest/circuit-construction-kit-dc-virtual-lab_en.html
Title: Verification of the laws of combination of resistance
250
Grade 11
Objectives:
1. To study the characteristics of resistances connected in series.
A. Compare the measured value with the calculated value or resistors connected
in series.
B. Verify that the same current flows through all resistors that are connected in
series.
C. Verify that voltage is added for resistors connected in series.
2. To study the characteristics resistances connected in parallel.
A. Compare the measured value with the calculated value for resistors connected
in parallel.
B. Verify that the same potential difference is found is across resistors that are
connected in parallel.
C. Verify that current is added for resistors connected in parallel.
Theory:
Materials Required:
Digital multimeters (2)
DC power supplies, 0-15 V (2)
Resistors and connecting wires (3)
Circuit board (1)
Procedure:
Series Circuit
I. Record the resistances of three resistors (R₁, R₂ and R₃) determined by mea-
surement
II. Construct a series circuit with these resistors.
III. Measure the equivalent resistance Rₑq' of the circuit by connecting the termi-
nals of the multimeter across the beginning of R₁ and end of R3. Then compare
your measured value with that determined by the equation: R eq = R₁ + R₂ + R₃
Connect power supply. Using the multimeter measure the potential differences
across all the resistances and the current flowing in the circuit. Then apply ohms
law (R= V/I). Finally, compare your result with what you have found in number
iv.
251
Physics I Student Text Book
V. Measure the potential differences across each of the resistors. Add the poten-
tial differences. Do they add up to the voltage across the power supply?
Calculation: In Series circuit
I. Experimental value of Req =
ohm
II. Theoretical value of Req =
ohm
III. Difference (if any) =
ohm
Note the following.
Have your lab instructor approve the circuit before plugging in the
power
supply.
Whenever you use the multimeter, do not forget to adjust the scale of
the multimeter to the quantity being measured.
Parallel Circuit
I. Connect the above three resistors in parallel with each other on the circuit
board. Have your instructor check the circuit before plugging in the power
supply. After approval, plug in the power supply.
II. Record this voltage. Now measure the potential difference across the resistor
R1 and record this voltage. Do the same for the R2 and the R3 resistors. Are
the values the same?
III. Measure current vs. potential as before. Graph current vs. voltage on the
same plot as the series graph and determine the total equivalent resistance of
the circuit.
IV.Disconnect the power supply from the circuit and measure the total resistance
of the circuit with the multimeter as before.
Calculations in parallel circuit
(a) Experimental value of R eq =
ohm
(b) Theoretical value of R eq =
ohm
(c) Difference (if any) =
ohm.
252
Grade 11
Measuring Instruments
Measurement of Current
An ammeter is a device used to measure current flowing in a circuit. To measure the
current flow in a circuit the ammeter must be connected in series with the resistor, so
that the same current passes through both the resistor and the ammeter. The internal
resistance of an ammeter should be as small as possible, so that little energy is dissipated
in it.
A
+
Ammeter
Ipc
+
CIGITAL
VOLT&
AMVETER
Source
Load
****
Figure 6.27: Ammeters and How to connect them.
Exercise 6.12:
In the circuit, shown below, an ammeter has a resistance of 0.5Ω. Determine
the current in the circuit, (a) before an ammeter is introduced, and (b) after it is
introduced. (c) Based on your result of question (b), discuss the effect of inserting
the ammeter.
6.0V
4.052
Figure 6.38: Investigating the effect of ammeters
Measurement of Voltage
Voltmeter is a device used to measure the potential difference between two points in
the circuit. For this reason, they are connected in parallel. It could be voltage across
the terminal of a battery or across a resistor or any other circuit element. Voltmeters
253
Physics
Student Text Book
should have a very high resistance to take as little current as possible. The ideal
resistance of a voltmeter would be infinite.
Digital Voltmeter
Voltmeter
+
Line.10
220
ε
R
V
Line.20
V,
AC 50-400V
AH-076
Figure 6.29: Voltage measuring devices
Exercise 6.13
A voltmeter shown in the figure below which can measure up to 6V has a
resistance of 50 k Ω. Determine the pd across the 20 k Ω in the circuit, (a) when
the voltmeter is not in place, and (b) when the voltmeter is in place. (c) Based on
your result of question (b), discuss the effect of inserting a voltmeter.
6.0V
E
kΩ
20 kS2
Figure 6.30: Investigating the effect of a voltmeter
Conversion of galvanometer to ammeter and voltmeter
A galvanometer is an instrument used for measuring small electric current in electric
circuit. It works by deflecting a pointer in response to an electric current flowing
through a coil in a constant magnetic field. A galvanometer has a coil pivoted (or
suspended) in a magnetic field. When an electric current passes through the coil, it
deflects. The deflection is proportional to the current passed.
There are different types of galvanometers. The most common type, shown in
Figure 6.31, is the moving coil galvanometer in which it consists of a light coil of
wire suspended from a metallic ribbon between the poles of a permanent magnet.
254
Grade 11
Scale
Pointer
N
S
Permanent
Soft
Current
Magnet
Iron Core
Carrying Coil
Figure 6.31: The moving-coil galvanometer
converting a galvanometer into an ammeter?
Since a galvanometer is a very sensitive instrument it can't measure heavy currents.
In order to convert a galvanometer into an ammeter, a very low resistance known as
"shunt" resistance is connected in parallel to it, as shown in Figure 6.32. The shunt
allows most of the current passes through it and the remaining small current through
the galvanometer.
RG
I
RG
G
G
I g
Galvanometer
Ish
Rsh
Ammeter
Figure 6.32: Converting galvanometer to an ammeter
Let R₈ be the resistance of the galvanometer and I₈ be the current for full scale
deflection in the galvanometer. The value of the shunt resistance required to convert
the galvanometer into an ammeter is,
V₈ = Vₛₕ
Rₛₕ = 1
255
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 6.14
A galvanometer of full-scale deflection 5 mA is to be converted into a 10 A
ammeter. If its coil has a resistance of 50 Ω, what value shunt must be fitted?
Solution:
Rₛₕ (1
Converting a galvanometer into voltmeter
A galvanometer can be converted
I₈
RM
Rg
into voltmeter by connecting
G
with it with a very high resistance
called multiplier in series with it
as shown in Figure 6.33.
V
Figure 6.33: Converting a galvanometer into voltmeter
Let R₈ be the resistance of a galvanometer and Rₘ the resistance of the multiplier
connected in series with it. Let V volt be the potential difference to be measured by
the voltmeter and I₈, be the current. Potential difference across the two resistors
in the circuit is the sum of potential difference across galvanometer and potential
difference across the multiplier.
This is the required value of multiplier resistance which must be connected in series
to the galvanometer to convert it into a voltmeter.
256
Grade 11
Example 6.14
A galvanometer has a resistance of 40 Ω and is of 3 mA full scale
deflection.
How would you modify it to a 0 - 10 V voltmeter.
Solution:
Rₛₕ = V R₈ = 5 X 10 10⁻³ 40
g
Rₛₕ = 1960 Ω
Exercise 6.14
Explain how you will convert a galvanometer into (a) an ammeter, and (b) a
voltmeter.
The Potential divider
A potential divider consists of two or more
resistors in series with each other and
R1
with a source of fixed potential difference.
The potential difference of the source is VIN
+
divided between the components in the
R2
circuit, as they are in series with each
Vour
other, Figure 6.34.
Figure 6.34: Potential divider circuit
For the potential divider circuit in Figure 6.34
The total resistance of the combination is: Rπ = R₁ +R₂
The current through the resistors is: I = Rπ V = R₁ V + R₂
The potential drop across resistor R₁: V₁ = IR₁ = R₁ R₁ + R₂ V
The potential drop across resistor R2 : V₂ = IR₂ = R₁ R₂ + R₂ V
257
Physics
Student Text Book
Potentiometer
A potentiometer is a three-terminal resistor with a sliding or rotating contact that
forms an adjustable voltage divider. It works by varying the position of a sliding
contact across a uniform resistance wire. In a potentiometer, the entire input voltage
is applied across the whole length of the resistor, and the output voltage is the
voltage drop between the fixed and sliding contact as shown in Figure 6.35. Thus, a
potentiometer is essentially a type of potential divider circuit.
Object, whose linear
displacement is to be measured
Slider/Wiper
Mandrel
Resistance wire
+
eᵢ
Figure 6.35: Potentiometer
The Potentiometer can also be used for the following purposes.
to measure the emf of a given cell,
to measure the internal resistance of a cell,
to compare the emf of different cells, and
as a variable resistor.
Figure 6.36 shows the two symbols of a potentiometer in an electric circuit.
or
Figure 6.36: Symbols of a potentimeter
Potentiometer to measure the emf of a cell
A potentiometer consists of a piece of resistance wire, usually 1 m in length, stretched
horizontally between two points. In Figure 6.37, the ends of the wire are labelled A
and B. A driver cell is connected across the length of wire. Suppose this cell has an
emf of 2.0V. We can then say that point A is at a voltage of 2.0V, B is at OV and the
258
Grade 11
midpoint of the wire is at 1.0 V. In other words, the voltage decreases steadily along
the length of the wire.
cell
Y
jockey
5,
Figure 6:37 A potentiometer connected measure the e.m.f. of cell X,
Now, suppose we wish to measure the emf. Eₓ of cell X (this must have a value less
than that of the driver cell). The positive terminal of cell X is connected to point A.
(Note that both cells have their positive terminals connected to A.) A lead from the
negative terminal is connected to a sensitive galvanometer, and a lead from the other
terminal of the galvanometer ends with a metal jockey. This is a simple connecting
device with a very sharp edge that allows very precise positioning on the wire.
If the jockey is touched onto the wire close to point A, the galvanometer needle will
deflect in one direction. If the jockey is touched close to B, the galvanometer needle
will deflect in the opposite direction.
Clearly, there must be some point Y along the wire that, when touched by the jockey,
gives zero deflection. In finding this position, the jockey must be touched gently
and briefly onto the wire; the deflection of the galvanometer shows whether the
jockey is too far to the left or right. It is important not to slide the jockey along the
potentiometer wire as this may scrape its surface, making it non-uniform so that the
voltage does not vary uniformly along its length.
When the jockey is positioned at Y, the galvanometer gives zero deflection, showing
that there is no current through it. This can only happen if the potential difference
across the length of wire AY is equal to the emf. of cell X. We can say that the
potentiometer is balanced. If the balance point was exactly halfway along the wire, we
would be able to say that the emf. of X was half that of the driver cell. This technique
- finding a point where there is a reading of zero - is known as a null method.
259
Physics
I
Student Text Book
To calculate the unknown emf. Eₓ we measure the length AY. Then we have:
where E₀ is the emf. of the driver cell.
Potentiometer to compare the emf of two cells
Suppose we have two cells whose emfs
Eₓ and Eₓ we want to compare. Each is
connected in turn to the potentiometer,
C
giving balance points at C and D, see
A
e
Figure 6.38. (In the diagram, you can
t
see immediately that Eₓ must be greater
than Eₓ because D is further to the
1
right than C.)
Figure 6.38: Comparing two emfs using a potentiometer.
The ratio of the emfs of the two cells will be equal to the ratio of the two lengths AC
and AD:
Eₓ Eₓ = AD AC
If one of the cells used has an accurately known emf, the other can be calculated with
the same degree of accuracy.
Measurement of Resistance
Resistance can be measured directly by using ohmmeter. Experimentally resistance
is measured using the following two methods.
1. The ammeter-voltmeter method.
In this method the current is measured using an ammeter and the voltage using
the voltmeter, see Figure 6.39. Then, using Ohm's law (R=V), resistance will
be determined. The variable resistor is used to adjust the current and voltage as
necessary.
260
Grade 11
Source
Variable
resistor
Resistor
A
V
Figure 6.39: Circuit to measure resistance
2. Using Wheatstone bridge
Another more precise method of measuring resistance is using a Wheatstone bridge.
A Wheatstone bridge is an arrangement of four resistances which can be used to
measure one of them in terms of the rest. The arrangement is shown in Figure 6.40.
C
i₁
R1
i₁
i
R₂
A
G
B
i₂
R3
D
i₂
R4
Figure 6.40: A Wheatstone bridge
Four resistors with resistances R₁, R₂, R₃ and R₄ are connected to form a loop.
There are four joints A, B, C and D. A battery is connected between two opposite
joints A and B and a galvanometer is connected between the other two opposite
joints C and D.
The current i from the battery is divided at A in two parts. A part i₁ goes through
R₁ and the rest i₂ goes through R₃. When no current is flowing through, the bridge,
it is said to be balanced. In this case, the current in R₂ is the same as the current in
R₁ and the current in R₄ is the same as that in R₃. As there is no current through the
galvanometer, the potential difference across its terminals is zero.
This is the condition for which a Wheatstone bridge is balanced. To measure the
resistance of a resistor, it is connected as one of the four resistors in the bridge. Given
the other three resistors, the value of the fourth unknown resistor will be easily
determined.
261
Physics
I
Student Text Book
?
Activity 6.11:
In a small group, research some applications of a Wheatstone bridge. Present your
findings to the rest of the class in a form of your choice.
Example 6.15:
Find the value of R in the figure below so that there is no current in the 50 Ω
resistor.
10Ω 0
20 Ω Ω
50 Ω
R
40 Ω
Solution:
R₁ = 4Ω, R₂ = R, R₃ = 20Ω, R₄ = 40Ω
R2 = R₁R₄ R₃ = 10x40 20 = 20Ω
?
Activity 6.12:
Experiment, WHEATSTONE BRIDGE
OBJECTIVE
The objective of this experiment is to determine the unknown resistance
using Wheatstone bridge.
APPARATUS
Galvanometer, various medium resistors, multimeter, power supply (DC)
THEORY:
262
Grade 11
A
I₂
I₁
R₁
R₂
SW₁
C
G
D
1₃
I₄
E
R₃
R₄
B
Figure 6.41: Wheatstone bridge
Setup the circuit that is shown in the figure.
Do the required measures to complete the table with the results of your
experiments.
Determine the resistances of any unknown resistors using a multimeter.
Compare those values to the value obtained using the balancing equation.
Parameter
Rx
Experimental
Theoretical
% of error
% of error = Theoretical Experimental - Experimental x100%
DATA ANALYSIS
Compared to the direct measurement of resistance using a multimeter, what
level of accuracy may be expected when applying a Wheatstone bridge?
Comparing the Brightness of Bulbs
?
Activity 6.13:
What are you referring when you buy a light bulb from electric shops? Discuss in
pairs.
We usually see the wattage to buy a bulb that give us a brighter light. Watts are not
a measure a brightness, they're a measure of energy consumption per unit time. It
measures, how much electricity a bulb uses. The amount of light emitted by a bulb
(brightness) is measured in Lumens. So, when buying light bulbs see their Lumens
263
Physics
Student Text Book
instead of their wattage. The higher the lumens, the more light the bulb emits.
Of course, we can use power (watts) to compare the brightness of bulbs. The higher
the wattage rating, the more energy consumed, and brighter the bulb will be. From
the equation for electric power, P = R, we see that brightness depends on current
and resistance.
Key term
The amount of light emitted by a bulb (brightness) is measured in Lumens.
Example 6.16
Compare the brightness of two lamps arranged in parallel with the brightness of
similar lamps arranged in series (Both arrangements having one cell)?
Solution:
In parallel, both the bulbs will have the same voltage across them as that of the
battery. However, in series connection, the voltage gets divided between the two
bulbs. So, the bulbs which are connected in parallel will glow brighter.
Example 6.17
Compare the brightness of the following the three lamps A, B, and C in the figure
below.
A
B
C
Figure 6.42:
Solution:
Of all the three bulbs, Bulb A is brightest, because it gets the full current from the
battery. At the junction, the current then splits, resulting to the current in bulbs
B and C to be half of that in A (assuming the bulbs to be identical). Thus, Bulbs B
and C will have the same brightness but less than that of A.
264
Grade 11
Exercise 6.15:
What would happen to the brightness of the bulbs in example 6.17, if another
bulb D is connected in parallel to that of bulbs B and C, See Figure 6.43 below?
A
B
C
D
Figure 6.43:
?
Activity 6.14:
Look at the data in the table below. The Lumens, and wattage of Incandescent,
compact fluorescent light (CFL) and Light Emitting Diodes (LED) bulbs are given.
Discuss in group the advantages and disadvantages of using CFL od LED lamps
over the incandescent lamps.
Table 6.2: Comparing Incandescent, CFL and LED lamps.
Lumens
Incandescent
CFL Watts
LEDs Watts
Watts
450
40W
8 - 12W
6 7W
800
60W
13 - 18W
7 - 10W
1100
75W
18 - 22W
12 - 13W
1600
100W
23 - 30W
14 - 20W
2600
150W
30 - 55W
25 - 28W
Kirchhoff's Rules
The following two circuit rules, which are called Kirchhoff's rules, can be used to
analyze any dc circuit, regardless of how many loops and cells are in the circuit.
265
Physics I Student Text Book
Kirchhoff's First Rule (Junction rule)
Kirchhoff's first rule states that, at any junction
in a circuit, the total current entering the
i4
junction is equal to the total current leaving
the junction. This means, the sum of all the
i1
i₃
currents directed towards a junction in a circuit
is equal to the sum of all the currents directed
i₂
away from that junction.
Figure 6.44: Kirchhoff's junction rule
Thus, in Figure 6.44, the currents I₁ and I₂ enters into the junction, while the
currents I₃ and I₄ leave the junction.
Thus,
I₁+I₂=I₃+I₄
Kirchhoff's junction rule is based on the law of conservation of charge. The fact that
no point in a circuit keeps on accumulating charge or keeps on supplying charge,
the net charge coming towards the point should be equal to that going away from it
in the same time.
Exercise 6.16:
The figure below is part of a circuit.
wire X
Calculate the current in the wire X. State
the direction of this current (towards P
3.0 A
P
2.5 A
or away from P).
7.0 A
Kirchhoff's Second Rule (Loop Rule)
Kirchhoff's loop rule is stated as:
For any complete loop of a circuit, the sum of the emfs round the loop is equal to the
sum of the potential drops around the loop.' It follows from the law of conservation
of energy.
When using this rule, one starts from a point on the loop and goes along the loop,
either clockwise or anticlockwise, to reach the same point again. In using Kirchhoff's
loop rule consider the following points.
266
Grade 11
1. Assume all voltage sources and resistances are given. (If not label them
V₁, V₂, R₁, R₂ etc
2. Label each branch with a branch current. (I₁, I₂, I₃ etc)
3. Apply junction rule at each junction.
4. Applying the loop rule for each of the independent loops of the circuit.
5. Solve the equations by substitutions.
For Kirchhoff's loop rule, the following convention is used:
1. The e.m.f of the cells is taken as positive when the direction of motion is from
negative terminal to the positive terminal, but negative when traversing from positive
to negative terminal.
2. The potential difference across a resistor (IR) is taken as positive if we move in the
opposite direction to the current, and negative when moving in the direction of the
current.
Example 6.17:
Find the currents I₁, I2 and I₃ in the circuit shown below.
7V
10
B
C
4
20
l₃
80
A
D
b
F
E
10
30
36V
Solution:
Applying Kirchhoff's first rule to junction A: I₁+I₂=I₃ (1)
Applying Kirchhoff's second rule for loop ABCDA (clockwise)
-7 +I₁(1) +1₁(2) +I,(8) =0
3I₁+8I₃=7
(2)
Applying Kirchhoff's second rule for loop ADEFA (clockwise)
-I₃ 3 (8) - I2 (3) + 36 - I₂ (1) = 0
21₃+ I₂ = 9
(3)
Substituting I₁ = I₃ - I2 into equation 2
111, - 31, 7
(4)
267
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Solving equation (3) and (4) simultaneously yields I₃ = 2A
Substituting for I3 into equation (3) yields I2 = 5A
Substituting for I2 and I₃ into equation (1) yields I₁ = -3A
The negative sign tell us that I₁ is opposite in direction to that shown in Figure 6.3:
Exercise 6.17:
By using Kirchhoff's second law determine the resistance R of the resistor shown
in the circuit below.
R
0.5 A
30 V
10 Ω
20 Ω
10 Ω
0.2 A
10 V
Review Questions 6.4
1. Write the definition of the following terms using your own words: electric
current, current density, resistance, conductivity, resistivity and drift velocity.
2. Write the SI units of the following quantities. Electric current, current density,
resistance, resistivity, and conductivity.
3. What is the meaning of one ohm?
4. Explain how a potentiometer works.
5. What is the use of a Wheatstone bridge? Discuss how it works.
6. Describe how to convert galvanometer to a voltmeter and ammeter.
7. State Kirchhoff's first and second laws.
8. A cell of emf 1.5 V and internal resistance 0.5 Ω is connected to a 2.5 Ω
resistor. Calculate: (a) the current, (b) the terminal pd, (c) the power delivered
to the 2.5 Ω resistor, and (d) the power wasted in the cell.
9. The pd across the terminals of a cell was 1.1 V when the current from the cell
was 0.20 A, and 1.3 V when the current was 0.10 A. Calculate: (a) the internal
resistance of the cell, (b) the cell's emf.
268
Grade 11
10. The figure shown below is part of an electric circuit. Determine the value of
the unknow current Iₓ.
0.3 A
0.5 A
B
0.1 A
A
X
11. Determine the electric current that flows in the circuit below.
20Ω
6V
10Ω
40Ω
12 V
20Ω
12. A galvanometer with a resistance of 36Ω is converted into an ammeter using
a shunt resistance of 4Ω. What fraction of the total current passes through
the galvanometer?
13. Determine equivalent resistance between points A and B in circuit shown
below.
2Ω
4Ω
A
1Ω
60
20
B
269
Physics
Student Text Book
6.6 Capacitors and Capacitance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the terms capacitors, capacitances, dielectric.
Explain the effect of inserting dielectric in the gap between the plates of a
capacitor.
Solve problems related to capacitance of parallel plate capacitor.
Calculate the equivalent capacitance of capacitors connected in series and
parallel.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the function of a capacitor?
2. How is a capacitor is charged?
3. Mention devices that we use in daily life which uses a capacitor for storing
energy.
Capacitor and Capacitance
A combination of two conductors
+
-
placed close to each other but
+
-
not touching form a capacitor. In
+
-
charging a capacitor one of the plates
+
-
is connected to the positive terminal
Electrons
and the other to the negative terminal
of a DC source. The electric field
created forces electrons to flow from
the positive plate to the negative plate
until the potential difference between
Figure 6.46: A capacitor, with the positive
the plates of the capacitor becomes
plate carrying a positive charge and the
equal to the emf of the battery.
negative plate an equal amount of negative
charges.
Finally, positive charges will be accumulated on the positive plate and negative
charges on the negative plate, see Figure 6.47.
270
Grade 11
The following are circuit symbols for capacitors.
Figure 6.47: Circuit symbol of a capacitor
For a given capacitor, the charge Q stored on the capacitor is proportional to the
potential difference V between the plates, QαV. Thus,
Q = CV C C=V V
The proportionality constant C is called the capacitance of the capacitor. It is
independent of Q and V but depends on geometrical factors. The SI unit of
capacitance is farad (F). Small values of capacitances are measured in micro, nano
and pico farads. 1 µF = 10⁻⁶, 1 nF =10⁻⁹F, = and 1 pF =10⁻¹²F.
Key terms
A capacitor is a device used to store electric charge, and hence electric energy.
A capacitor is a device used to store electric charge, and hence electric energy.
Parallel-plate Capacitor
A parallel-plate capacitor consists of two large
Separation of
plane plates placed parallel to each other with
a small separation between them (Figure
6.48). Suppose, the area of each of the facing
surfaces is A and the separation between the
place area
two plates is d. Also, assume that the space
between the plates is filled with vacuum.
Figure 6.48: Capacitor
If a charge Q is stored on the positive plate, a charge -Q will be stored on the
negative plate. The charges will appear on the facing surfaces. The charge density
on each of these surfaces has a magnitude
σ = Q A
271
Physics I Student Text Book
The electric field between the plates is given by the equation
E
The potential difference between each plate is given by:
V = Ed
Therefore
V=Ed=2d Ed
Substituting this into our defining equation for capacitance we get:
This equation gives the capacitance of two parallel plates in a vacuum. If a dielectric
material of dielectric constant k is inserted between the plates, the equation for
capacitance became:
C
Hence, the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor depends on the size, distance of
separation of the plates, and the medium between them.
Example 6.19
Consider a parallel plate capacitor with plates of area 200 cm² and separated by a
sheet of mica thickness 2mm and dielectric constant 6. If the capacitor is connected
to 12V source, determine the charge stored on the plates of the capacitor.
Solution:
=5.31x10⁻¹⁰F
Q=CV=5.31x10⁻ F x12V = 6.37x10°F = 6.37nF
Key term
A dielectric is an insulator such as a glass, paraffin, wood or pastic that is inserted
in the gap between the plates of a capacitor.
272
Grade 11
Exercise 6.18
The dimensions of a parallel plate capacitor are 5cm by 10m, they are separated
by a distance of 2mm, and connected to a 24V dc source. If an insulator of
dielectric constant 5 is inserted between the plates, determine the amount of
charge stored on the plates.
?
Activity 6.15:
Discuss in group about the following questions.
If you were asked to design a capacitor with large capacitance, how are you going
to design?
Dielectrics
A dielectric is an insulating or
nonconducting materials such as glass,
paraffine, wood or plastic, that is inserted
in the gap between the plates of a capacitor.
When a dielectric is inserted in the electric
field between the plates, there will be some
charge distribution in it. The positive
charges within the dielectric are displaced
lightly towards the negative plate, and the
negative charges are displaced slightly
Figure 6.49: Polarization in a dielec-
towards the positive plate.
tric inside an electric field of a capac-
itor
This slight separation of charge is known as polarization. Due to polarization the
potential difference and hence the electric field between the plates will decrease.
Since, the dielectric is not disconnected from the source, the potential difference
between the plates finally will be that of the source. As a result, the capacitor can
hold more charge, and thus, its capacitance increased, C = kC₀.
A dielectric constant, k, also called relative permittivity or specific inductive
capacity, measures the ability of a capacitor to store charge. It is the property of
the dielectric. It is equal to the ratio of the capacitance of a capacitor filled with the
given material to the capacitance of an identical capacitor in a vacuum without the
dielectric material.
Capaci tan ce with dielectric
C
k =
=
Capaci tan ce without dielectric
C₀
273
Physics
Student Text Book
The dielectric constant is a number without dimensions. The value of the dielectric
constant for vacuum is one and for any other material is it is greater than one.
Inserting a dielectric always increases the capacitance of the capacitor.
Example 6.20
If a dielectric is inserted in the gap between the plates of an isolated capacitor, what
are the effects on (a) the capacitance of a capacitor, (b) the potential difference
between the plates of a capacitor, (c) amount of the charge stored on the plates,
and (d) the electric field in the region between the plates of a capacitor.
Solution:
When inserting a dielectric in a capacitor its capacitance always increases.
Due to polarization the potential difference between the plates decreases.
Since the capacitor is isolated (disconnected from the source) the amount
of charge stored on the plates remains the same.
From the equation E = V/d, the electric field in the region between the
plates decreases.
?
Activity 6.16:
1. Discuss in group the effect of inserting a dielectric on a capacitor which is not
disconnected from the source on (a) the capacitance of a capacitor, (b) the
potential difference between the plates of a capacitor, (c) the charge stored on
the plates, and (d) the electric field in the region between the plates.
2. What about if a dielectric is withdrawn from a capacitor?
Dielectric strength
For any insulator, there is a maximum electric field that can be maintained without
ionizing the molecules. This means that there is a maximum allowable voltage
that that can be placed across the conductors. This maximum voltage depends
on the dielectric in the capacitor. The corresponding maximum field Eb is called
the dielectric strength of the material. It is the maximum electric field that the
material can withstand without undergoing electrical breakdown and becoming
electrically conductive (i.e. without failure of its insulating properties). The table
below shows the dielectric strength of some materials.
274
Grade 11
Table 6.3: Dielectric constant and dielectric strength of some materials
Material
Dielectric Constant
Dielectric strength (V/m)
Air
1.0
3x10⁶
Glass
4.8 10
30 X 10⁶
Mica
4.8 10
200x10⁶
Paraffin paper
2.0
40 X 10⁶
Rubber
3.2
21 X 10⁶
Water (distilled)
78.5
3 X 10⁶
?
Activity 6.22: Project
Search an internet or read books on how to make a capacitor, and construct it using
locally available materials. Demonstrate your capacitor to your class by showing a
practical work, like charging your cell phone.
Combination of Capacitors
Capacitors are manufactured in a certain standard capacitance and working voltages.
But these values may not be compatible with the ones that we effectively need for
a particular application. In such cases we obtain the desired values by combining
capacitors in different ways. Two or more capacitors may be connected either in
series or in parallel.
Capacitors connected in parallel
Consider three capacitors connected in parallel as shown in Figure 6.50.
+
+
+
C₁
C₂
C₃
Figure 6.50: Three capacitors C1, C2 and C₃ connected in parallel.
The same potential difference is provided for each capacitor.
a
V = V₁ = V₂ = V₃
275
Physics I Student Text Book
Charges Q₁ is stored on capacitor C₁, and charge Q₂ ₀n on capacitor C2 and so on. The
total charge will therefore be:
Q=Q₁+Q₂+Q₃
Since potential difference across the capacitors is the same, V. Then,
Q₁=C,V,Q₂=C₂V and Q₃ =C₃V .
From which,
But we know that V Which yields
For any number of capacitors connected in parallel then
Capacitors Connected in Series
Consider three capacitors of capacitances C₁, C₂, and C₃ connected in series to a
potential difference of V as shown in Figure 6.51.
+
C₁
V₁
+
+
C₂
V₂
+
C₃
V₃
Figure 6.51: Three capacitors C1, C2 and C₃ connected in series
Since the capacitors are connected in series and are charged by induction, they will
all carry the same amount of charge. Thus, the magnitude of charge on all plates is
the same. That is,
276
Grade 11
Therefore, if V₁ is the voltage across C₁, V₂ is the voltage across C2, and V₃ is the
voltage across C₃, then
V₁ = C₁ Q , V₂ = C₂ Q and V₃ = C₃ Q
V =V₁+V₂ + V₃
V = C₁ Q + C₂ Q + C₃ Q = Q C₁ 1 + C₂ 1 + C₃ 1
From which,
V 1 + 1 + 1
Q C₁ C₂ C₃
The equivalent capacitance of the capacitors is given by
Cₑ₄ C = V Q Q
Combining these equations, we get
For any number of capacitors in series therefore,
The above equation indicates that the equivalent capacitance of a series combination
of capacitors is always less than any individual capacitance in the combination.
Exercise 6.19:
For each circuit in the following figure, are the capacitors connected in series,
in parallel, or in neither mode? What is your reason to say about their mode of
connection?
a)
b)
c)
277
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Equivalent capacitance for multiple capacitor circuits
In most electronic circuits, capacitors are connected in series, in parallel or in
combinations of series and parallel as well. Consider a capacitor network shown in
Figure 6.54.
C2
C₁
a
C₃
b
Ca
C₆
5
Figure 6.54: A capacitor network.
We can see in the upper portion of the circuit, C₁ is connected in series to the
combinations of C2 and C3. But, C2 and C3 are connected in parallel. Again, in the
lower portion of the circuit, C₆ is connected in series to the combinations of C₄ and
C₅. Again, C₄ and C₅ are connected in parallel to each other. Therefore, the circuit
can be reduced as follows.
Figure 6.55: Reduced equivalent circuit of the network shown in
Figure 6.54.
C₂₃ = C₂ +C₃ and C₄₅ = C₄ + C₅ (Since they were connected in parallel)
Now, refer to the capacitors in upper portion of the circuit in Figure 6.55. C₁ and C₂₃
are connected in series to each other. Similarly, the capacitors in the lower portion of
the circuit C₄₅ and C₆ are connected in series. So, the circuit can further be reduced
as in Figure 6.56.
Figure 6.56: The equivalent capacitance of the network in Figure 615
278
Grade 11
and
(Since they are connected in series)
The equivalent capacitance of the six capacitors between a and b is therefore the
parallel combination of these two capacitors is
Cₑ₉ = C₁₂₃+C₄₅₆...
When numerical values for each capacitors are given, it is advisable to substitute the
numerical values in each step.
Exercise 6.20:
For the network of capacitors shown in the figure below, determine (a) the
equivalent capacitance, (b) the charge stored on each capacitor, and (c) the
voltage across each capacitor.
3uF
I
4uF
200 V
6uF
?
Activity 6.18
Mention the different applications of a capacitor.
Review Questions 6.5
1. Write the definition of the following terms using your own words. capacitors,
capacitances, dielectric.
2. Mention the factors that affect the capacitance of a capacitor.
3. Explain the effect of inserting dielectric in the gap between the plates of a
capacitor on the following quantities. Its capacitance, (b) the amount of charge
stored on the plates, (c) the potential difference between the plates, and (d) the
electric field in the region between the plates.
4. A pair of parallel flat metal plates are placed a distance of 10 mm apart. The
279
Physics
I Student Text Book
plates are circular, with a radius of 10 cm. How much charge must be placed
on each plate to produce an electric field of 500 V/m between them?
5. For the network of capacitors shown in the figure below, determine (a) the
equivalent capacitance, (b) the charge stored on each capacitor, and (v) the
voltage across each capacitor.
6
µF
2 µF
4
µF
9V
6. Calculate the equivalent capacitance between points A and B for the circuit
shown in the figure below.
5.0 uF
24 uF
A
4.0 UF
12 UF
B
6.0 UF
8.0 UF
6.7 Electric Circuits in Our Surroundings
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
apply the knowledge about electric circuits to explain household electric
installation.
?
Brainstorming
Make a list of electrical appliances in your home.
Group them into three, (a) electric power powered, (b) battery powered, and (c)
280
Grade 11
heat powered.
Household Electric Installations
In our country Ethiopia, the voltages of the mains are 220 V - 240 V. Heating
appliances include electric kettle, immersion heater, electric irons, hair driers
and electric stoves. All heating appliances contain a heating element that converts
electrical energy into heat energy.
?
Activity 6.19:
Have you visited the new national Science Museum located Addis Ababa? If so,
present a report about the smart house you visited. If not arrange a means to visit
this fantastic museum.
Color Code of Resistors
Resistors and capacitors that we discussed so far are frequently used in many
electronic devices and they are said to be the major circuit components for many
electronic systems. The value of the resistance of resistors in electronic devices is
labeled by a color code. There are colored rings in any resistor. According to the
international standard organization ISO, the orders of the rings are arranged and
each color is represented by a number.
Band A
Band B
Band C
Band D
1st Digit
2nd Digit
Multiplier
Tolerance
Figure 6.56: Color code of resistors
The first band represents the first digit number, the second band the second digit
number and the third band represents multiplier to the base 10. The fourth band is
the tolerance (the permissible percentage error ± of the value.
The trick in reading color code is noticing that the first three digits (numerical
values) in a four band resistor are closer in equal gap, whereas the fourth band (the
tolerance) on the other end is in a bit wider gap! In a five band resistor, the first four
digits are closer in equal gap and the fifth band (the tolerance) is a bit further
For example in the illustrated resistor, the numerical value of the resistor can be
calculated by referring the color code chart and replace the corresponding number
281
Physics
Student Text Book
for each color. The first three closer bands are: brown, black and red, which represent
first digit number, second digit number and the multiplier respectively. Referring
the color chart, the first band is brown =1 the second band is black =0, the third
band is red=2. Therefore, the numerical value of this resistor is
10 X 10²= 1000 Ohms =1KO
The color of the fourth band is gold, the tolerance value of gold in the chart is ±
5%. This resistor has a value of 1K Ω ± 5%.
The following chart depicts the ISO standard for each color in the resistor.
Colour
1st Band
2nd Band
3rd Band
Multiplier
Tolerance
Black
0
0
0
10
Brown
1
1
1
100
± 1% (F)
Red
2
2
2
1000
± 2% (G)
Orange
3
3
3
1KQ
Yellow
4
4
4
10KQ
Green
5
5
5
100KQ
± 0.5% (D)
Blue
6
6
6
1MΩ
± 0.25% (C)
Violet
7
7
7
10MQ
± 0.10% (B)
Gray
8
8
8
± 0.05%
White
9
9
9
Gold
0.10
± 5% (J)
Silver
0.010
± 10% (K)
?
Activity 6.20:
Given the following resistor as the color of the first three bands in order are: green,
blue and yellow, the last band (the tolerance) is silver. What is the numerical value
of this resistor?
?
Activity 6.21: Project
Go to a nearby radio, television or computer repair house them. Ask them for a
used electronic components like resistors or capacitors. Read their values by using
the color code and present as a demonstration to your class
282
Grade 11
UNIT SUMMARY
C
Electric charges are quantized and are integral multiples of a fundamental charge
e.
C
There are two types of charges: positive and negative. Unlike charges attract each
other and like charges repel each other.
C
The electrostatic force between two charges is directly proportional to the product
of the two charges and inversely proportional to the square of the separation
between them. This law is called Coulomb's law.
c
The electrostatic force is positive if the force is repulsive and negative if the force
is attractive.
c
Electric field lines originate from the positive charge and terminate into the
negative charge.
c
Electric field lines do not cross to each other and are perpendicular to the surface
of the charge source.
c
The total resistance of an electrical circuit with resistors wired in a series is the sum
of the individual resistances:
c
Each resistor in a series circuit has the same amount of current flowing through it.
c
The total resistance of an electrical circuit with resistors connected in parallel is
less than the lowest resistance of any of the components and can be determined
using the formula:
R
C
Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same full voltage of the source applied to
it.
C
The current flowing through each resistor in a parallel circuit is different, depending
on the resistance.
c
If a more complex connection of resistors is a combination of series and parallel,
it can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance by identifying its various parts
as series or parallel, reducing each to its equivalent, and continuing until a single
resistance is reached.
c
Total capacitance in series 1 = C₁ 1 + C2 1 Cₙ 1
c
Total capacitance in parallel Ceq=C₁+C₂+C₃+.
283
Physics Student Text Book
c
If a circuit contains a combination of capacitors in series and parallel, identify
series and parallel parts, compute their capacitances, and then find the total.
c
Capacitors are devices that store charge and electrostatic energy.
c
A capacitor consists of two isolated conductors (the plates) with equal and opposite
charges +q and -q. Its capacitance C is defined from , where V is the potential
difference between the plates.
c
The SI unit of capacitance is the farad. (1 farad = 1 coulomb per volt)
c
Other practically applicable units of capacitance are: micro Farad, nano Farad and
pico Farad.
c
When two or more capacitors are connected in series, the reciprocal of the
equivalent capacitance is the sum of the reciprocals of the individual capacitance
of the capacitors.
c
When two or more capacitors are connected in parallel, the equivalent capacitance
is the sum of the capacitance of each capacitor.
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS
1. If two charges separated by a distance d, have an electrostatic force F, What will be
the magnitude of the new electrostatic force if their separation is doubled to 2d.
2. What is the source of an electric field in a certain region?
3. Which one of the following cannot be the unit of electric field
a) Volt/meter
b) newton/ coulomb
c) newton.coulomb
4. When resistors are connected in series which property of the resistor is practically
changed?
a) The length
b) the thickness
c) the resistivity
5. When resistors are connected in parallel, which property of the material is changed?
a) The length
b) the thickness
c) the resistivity
6. Two charges Q₁ = -5µC and Q₂ = +2µC are separated by a distance of 4cm.
Calculate the electrostatic force between these charges. Is the electrostatic force an
attractive or repulsive force? Why?
284
Grade 11
7. In the above question, what is the electric field produced due to Q2 at a point where
Q₁ is placed? What is the direction of the electric field? Similarly, determine the
electric field produced by Q₁ at a point where Q2 is placed. What is the direction of
the electric field?
8. What are the largest and smallest resistances you can obtain by connecting a 36.0
Ω, a 50.0 Ω, and a 700 Ω resistor together?
9. What is the resistance of ten 75 Ω resistors (a) when connected in series? (b) when
connected in parallel?
10. When do you get a brighter light, connecting bulbs in series or in parallel?
11. Why heating coils like an electric kettle is made of materials with large resistivity?
12. Why and how the resistivity of conductors depends on its temperature?
13. Why temperature dependence of the resistivity differs for conductors, semicon-
ductors and superconductors?
14. What is the difference between emf and terminal voltage?
15. What is internal resistance?
16. How do you connect resistors so as to get larger/smaller equivalent resistance?
17. How do you connect resistors so as to get larger current from the circuit?
18. A battery of unknown emf ε and internal resistance r is connected in series with
an ammeter and a resistance box. The current was 2.0 A when R = 4.0 Ω and 1.5
A when R = 6.0 Ω. Calculate ε and r.
19. A 12 V battery causes a current of 3.0 A to flow into the circuit shown in the figure
below. Find (a) the value of the unknow resistor R2, and (b) the potentiial differ-
ence across the 3Ω resistor.
2.0 Ω
3.0 A
R2
3.0 Ω
12 V
20. Determine the current that flows through the ammeters, A₁, A2. and A₃ in the cir-
cuit below.
100 mA
A
A1
A3
30 mA
A
A
80 mA
A2
285
Physics
I Student Text Book
21. In the circuit shown below, If V1 = 1V, V2 = 2V, V3 = 3V, and let each resistor has
a 1 Ω resistance. Determine the value of the currents I₁, I₂, and I₃.
A
R1
R3
I₃
I₁
R₂
V1
V3
I₂
R₄
V₂
B
22. If you want to store a large amount of energy in a capacitor bank, would you con-
nect capacitors in series or parallel? Explain.
23. Find the total capacitance of capacitance between points A and B, for the network
shown in the figure below?.
2C
2C
3C
A
B
4C
3C
286
Pressuriser
Control rods
Steam
Steam
generator
