UNIT 7
Steel
pressure
Y
vessel
Water
elements
NUCLEAR PHYSICS
einforced concrete
tainment and shield
Introduction
Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies atomic nuclei and their constituents
and interactions that hold them together. Nuclear interactions include radioactive decay,
the break-up of a nucleus (fission), and the merging of nuclei (fusion).
The main driving strong nuclear force produced by the nucleus of an atom acts within
a very short distance - just a few femtometres ( metres) across. The strong nuclear
force is the force that is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons into atomic
nuclei. The strong binding energy will help to produce strong radiation upon different
reaction processes and radiation decay.
Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies atomic nuclei and their constituents
and interactions that hold them together. Nuclear interactions include radioactive decay,
the break-up of a nucleus (fission), and the merging of nuclei (fusion).
The main driving strong nuclear force produced by the nucleus of an atom acts within
a very short distance - just a few femtometres (10⁻¹⁵ metres) across. The strong nuclear
force is the force that is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons into atomic
nuclei. The strong binding energy will help to produce strong radiation upon different
reaction processes and radiation decay.
A nuclide may be stable or unstable. Unstable nuclides emit radiations spontaneously.
These radiations have different forms which are known as α, ß and Y radiation with
charges similar to proton, electron, and neutron in the atomic system.
Through research, nuclear physicists are leading us on a journey of discovery into the
nucleus of the atom - the very heart of matter. The goal is a roadmap of matter that will
help unlock the secrets of how the universe is put together. Significant efforts have been
made from the early 19th century on the observation of different subatomic systems by
different scientists. Nowadays, the research reactor (RR) and the power reactor (PR) are
widely in use globally. Research reactors are small nuclear reactors that are primarily
287
Physics
Student Text Book
used to produce neutrons, unlike nuclear power reactors, which are larger and used to
generate electricity. The two reactors are based on the fission processes. However, the
fusion is still in progress in laboratories and computer work. In all these processes, it is
important to aware that the fuel elements for nuclear reactions are heavy unstable nuclei
such as U, Th, K, Pt and so on.
Nuclear radiations have very powerful ionization effects; some of which is fatal to
human beings if proper precautions are not in use. It is mandatory to use the nuclear
safety rules of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the proper use of
nuclear instruments and materials. There should be a separate inspection bodies for
both the RR and PR once any country has these reactors in use.
The purpose of this unit is studying the different properties of nuclei so far you have
seen above, uses and quantitative measurements of nuclear energy; and precautions to
be taken to take care of ionization radiations.
At the end of the unit, students will be able to:
appreciate the basic concept of the atomic nucleus.
describe qualitatively the basic nuclear processes (concepts of
radioactivity, and nuclear reaction).
discuss the types of nuclear forces.
explain application of radioactivity and nuclear reaction to society.
describe the application of radioactivity and nuclear reaction to explain
the energy source of stars.
define terms like nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, and isotope.
gain the basic knowledge of nuclear medicine.
demonstrate high level of awareness to protect themselves and their
community from radiation hazard.
7.1 The nucleus
At the end of this topic, you should be able to:
identify particles inside the nucleus
discus the historical origins of the particles of the nucleus
define and discuss isotope of an atom
describe the relationships between nuclear mass and binding energy of
isotopes;
calculate binding energy of the nucleus of different isotopes;
identify the nuclear forces, (strong nuclear force, weak nuclear force)
288
Grade 11
?
Brainstorming:
Discuss in small groups and tell to the whole class about the following.
1. Discus about the volume and the mass of the nucleus compared to that of
the atom; about constituting particles of the nucleus and their charges.
2. Who discovered the nucleus? How?
3. What force keeps protons and neutrons at the center of the atom? What
force keeps the electrons and the nucleus together?
About the Atom
Atoms are the basic building blocks of matter. An atom consists of a positively
charged central nucleus that is surrounded by one or more negatively charged
electrons. The nucleus contains one or more relatively heavy particles known
as protons (positively charged) and neutrons (electrically neutral), which are
collectively called nucleons. Table 7.1 summarizes charges and masses of the
three subatomic particles.
Proton
Nucleus
Neutron
Electron
Figure 7-1: Structure of an atom- Every atom has these particles except the smallest
isotope of hydrogen which has no any neutron.
Table 7-1: Mass and charge of subatomic particles
Subatomic particles
Charge (in C)
Mass
(in kg)
(in u)
Electron
0.00054858 U
- 1.602 X 10⁻¹⁹
9.1094 X 10⁻³¹
Proton
1.0072766 U
+1.602x10⁻¹⁹
1.6726 X 10⁻²⁷
Neutron
O
1.0086654 U
1.6749 X 10⁻²⁷
Note: Where 1 amu (atomic mass unit) = 1.660 X 10⁻²⁷ kg.
289
Physics I Student Text Book
Since the mass of an electron is comparatively very small, only the nucleus contributes
to the mass of an atom, which typically contains more than 99.9% of the mass of
the atom. Thus, the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus is
expressed as mass number (A) and the number of protons is its atomic number (Z)
for a neutral element. A neutral element in the periodic table of chemical symbol X
is uniquely designated by:
AX
Some examples of designation of elements are oxygen 16, helium 4 2 He and carbon
1². Although the nucleus contains much of the mass of the atom, it is very dense
and occupies only less than 0.01% of the volume of the atom. The atom and the
nucleus are assumed spherical and the atomic radius is estimated by:
where A is the mass number of the atom; R₀ is the radius of the nucleus which is
roughly equal to R₀ = 1.2fm and 1 femtometer (1 fm) = 10⁻¹⁵ m.
Isotopes
An element may have atoms with different number of neutrons. Atoms with the same
number of protons but different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes.
They share almost the same chemical properties, but differ in mass and therefore
in physical properties.
Key terms:
Atomic nucleus consists of electrically positively charged particles called protons
and electrically neutral particles called neutrons. These are held together by the
strongest known fundamental force called the strong nuclear force.
Isotopes are members of a family of an element that all have the same number of
protons but different numbers of neutrons.
Some examples of isotopes of elements:
Carbon isotopes: ¹², ¹³C and 14.
Hydrogen isotopes: (protium), (deuterium) and ³H(tritium).
Uranium isotopes: 232 90 U, 233 90 U, 234 90 U, 235 90 U, 236 90 and 238 90 U.
290
Grade 11
Example 7.1
Calculate the radii of the smallest isotope of hydrogen (|H) and uranium-238.
Compare the volume of U-238 atom with the volume of its nucleus.
Solution:
The radius of1H is
The radius of U-238 becomes
The volume of U-238 atom is,
The volume of the nucleus of U-238 atom,
Taking the ratio of the first to the second one, we obtain
V -
The volume of the nucleus is 0.0565% of the volume of the atom.
7.1.1 Historical origins of the nucleus and its constituting particles
?
Activity 7.1:
Collect pictures and diagrams showing particles of the nucleus, important
physicists who contributed to the discovery of the nucleus and its constituent
particles; illustrations of experiments related to the nucleus.
Discus in groups why electrons could not be part of the nucleus.
291
Physics
Student Text Book
Discovery of the nucleus
In 1909, two of Lord Rutherford's students, Geiger and Marsden, aimed positively
charged particles (stream of helium at an extremely thin piece of gold
foil (100 nm thickness). In order to study the deflection caused by the a-particles,
they placed a fluorescent zinc sulfide screen around the thin gold foil. They used the
apparatus similar to that shown in Figure 7.2.
zinc sulphide
Most CL particles travel
screen
through the foil
undeflected
vacuum
Gold
Foil
Some CE particles are
Detector
deflected by small
angles
Beam of a particles
Occasionally, on X
particle travels back
from the foil
Radioactive
Source
Figure 7-2: Rutherford's scattering experiment apparatus
Rutherford repeated the experiment many times, and come up with the same result.
His evidences and conclusions are summarized as follows.
Evidences
Conclusions
Most of the -particles passed through the gold
Most of the space in an atom is empty.
sheet with no or small deflection (0°-10°).
Some of the particles were deflected by very
The positive charge in an atom is not uniformly
small angles (10° 90°)
distributed, but concentrated in a very small volume.
Very few of the -particles were deflected back
Most of the mass of the atom, and all the positive
towards the source (90°-180°), only very few
charge, is concentrated in a tiny central space, what
being at 180°.
Rutherford called the nucleus.
292
Grade 11
Based on his observations, Rutherford proposed a new atomic model in 1911, called
the solar system model as all the positive charge and most of the mass is concentrated
in a tiny central nucleus. Most of the atom is empty space, and electrons orbit at the
edge. He also claimed that the electrons surrounding the nucleus revolve around it
with very high speed in circular paths. He named these circular paths as orbits (See
Figure 7.3).
Nucleus
Electron
+
Figure 7-3: Rutherford's atomic model
What are the drawbacks of the Rutherford atomic model? Rutherford's atomic
model failed to explain the stability of electrons in a circular path. He stated that
electrons revolve around the nucleus in a circular path, but electrons in motion
would undergo acceleration and cause energy radiation. Eventually, electrons should
lose energy and fall into the nucleus.
Discovery of the proton
Rutherford thought that a hydrogen nucleus must be the fundamental building block
of all nuclei, and also possibly a new fundamental particle. Rutherford postulated the
hydrogen nucleus to be a new particle in 1920, which he called proton. Rutherford
named it the proton, from the Greek word "protos," meaning "first."
Discovery of the neutron
The British physicist James Chadwick discovered the neutron in 1932. He conducted
experiments very similar to those of Rutherford. In Chadwick's case, he fired his
atomic bullets at the element beryllium, not gold. The resulting collisions produced a
new kind of particle that was just as massive as the proton, but it penetrated through
several inches of lead.
293
Physics
Student Text Book
If you can take a particle and penetrate several inches of lead, it implies, first of
all, that the particle is moving very fast; and second, that the particle is electrically
neutral, it has neither a positive nor a negative charge. So Chadwick found that the
neutron is indeed electrically neutral, and he also found that its mass is slightly
greater than that of the proton. Finally, he determined the mass of the neutron using
the law of conservation of energy and momentum as well.
7.1.2 What keeps the nucleus together?
You know that the positively charged protons and electrically neutral neutrons
are packed together in the nucleus. Then, what is holding the cluster of nucleons
together instead of repelling each other due to the electrostatic force and fly apart?
This question takes you to consider the two fundamental forces of nature: the strong
and weak nuclear forces.
The strong and the weak nuclear forces
The strong nuclear force is a very short-range attractive force that acts between
nucleons: protons and neutrons. The strong nuclear force is strong enough to
withstand the electrical repulsion up within a distance of slightly more than the
radius of a nucleon, 10⁻¹⁵ m. Both nucleons are affected by the nuclear force almost
identically.
Look at the difference!
At the range of 10⁻¹⁵ m (slightly more than the radius of a nucleon), the strong force is
approximately 100 times as strong as electromagnetism, 10⁶ times as strong as the weak
interaction, and 10³⁸ times as strong as gravitation.
The weak nuclear force acts inside of individual nucleons, which means that it is
even shorter ranged than the strong nuclear force. The weak nuclear force can split
the electrically neutral neutron into a proton and an electron. In this process, sub-
atomic particles are released near the speed of light. These fast particles allow nuclear
fusion reaction- combination of two or more nuclides to form a single nuclide- by
then releasing enormous energy.
Key terms:
The Strong Nuclear Force is an attractive force between protons and neutrons that
keeps the nucleus together.
The Weak Nuclear Force is responsible for the radioactive decay of certain nuclei.
Nuclear binding energy is the energy required to separate an atomic nucleus
completely into its constituent protons and neutrons, or, equivalently, the energy
that would be liberated by combining individual protons and neutrons into a single
nucleus.
294
Grade 11
Nuclear binding energy
Nuclear binding energy is the energy that holds nucleons together. Another equivalent
definition of binding energy is the minimum energy that is required to disassemble
the nucleus of an atom into its constituent nucleons. Now the question is how can we
determine the binding energy of a nuclide?
The mass of an atomic nucleus is less than the sum of the individual masses of the
free constituent protons and neutrons. This difference in mass (L) is known as the
mass defect. Once the mass defect is known, the nuclear binding energy (BE) can
be calculated using Einstein's special theory of relativity, which states that mass and
energy are equivalent. The remarkable equivalence between matter and energy is
given in one of the most famous equations given by E = mc²; where m is the mass
converted in to an amount of energy E and c =3x10⁸ m/s is the speed of light. From
this theory, we can deduce that the mass defect is an amount of mass released in
the form of energy during the formation of the nucleus. This energy is equal to the
binding energy, which is then given by
BE = Amc2
Masses of subatomic particles are measured in "atomic mass unit (amu or u)";
1 amu (or 1 u) = 1.660 10⁻²⁷ kg
Nuclear energy is measured in "atomic energy unit (aeu)"; or "megaelectron volt
(MeV)";
1aeu = c² x1 amu = 1.44x10¹J
1MeV = =1.602 J, and laeu = 931.1MeV
The mass defect of an atom can be calculated by:
where Zmₚ is the total mass of the protons; (A Z)mₙ n is the total mass of the neutrons,
and M is the mass of the nucleus.
Using this into the former equation, we obtain:
Therefore, when mass is given in amu, the nuclear binding energy of a nucleus in
MeV becomes,
BE=[Zm,+(A-Z)m₁-M]x931.1MeV
295
Physics I Student Text Book
Masses of subatomic particles
mₚ = 1.0072766u, mₙ = 1.0086654 u, and mₑ = 1836 mₚ = 0.00054858 u
Binding energy per nucleon: Binding energy per nucleon (BEN) is the average
energy required to remove an individual nucleon from a nucleus. It is one of the
most important experimental quantities, which is defined by
BEN = BE BE BE A
where BE is the binding energy and A is the atomic number of the atom.
Example 7.2
You know that an atom of oxygen has the form 16.
a) What is the mass defect in oxygen nucleus?
b) What is the binding energy per nucleon in Oxygen?
Solution
Z = 8, A = 16, mₚ = 1.00728 u, mₙ = 1.00867 u, mₙₙc = 16u
a) The mass defect is
Am = 8x1.00728 u + 16u
Am = 0.1276 u
b) The mass defect in amu is 0.1276. The binding energy in Oxygen is, then:
BE = =[Zm,+(A-Z)m₁-M]x931.1MeV=Amx931.1Me\
BE=0.1276x931.1MeV = = 118.808MeV
The binding energy per nucleon in Oxygen:
BEN = BE A = 118.808 16 ≈7.4MeV ≈
296
Grade 11
?
Activity 7.2
Select few isotopes of some elements in the periodic table.
Let individual students of your group do the calculations for the binding
energy of different isotopes and the rest members of the group come up with
a set of biding energy.
Contribute your result in a whole class discussion about the least and highest
binding energies.
Give explanation about how the binding energy varies from isotope to isotope
and from element to element
Nuclear stability
Nuclear stability is determined by the binding energy per nucleon. The net binding
energy of a nucleus is that of nuclear attraction, minus the disruptive energy of the
electrostatic force.
9
34S
⁵⁶Fe
84Kr
119Sn
¹⁶O
8
¹²C
205Ti
235U
14N
Most stable nucleus
7
4He
238U
Binding energy per nucleon (MeV)
6
7Li
5
6Li
4
Region of very
stable nuclides
3
3H
³He
2
1
2H
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
Mass number (A)
Figure 7.4: A plot of the binding energy per nucleon as a function of mass number A.
297
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Any system will always try and move to a state of lower energy (or more stable state).
As nuclei get heavier than helium, their net binding energy per nucleon grows more
and more slowly and reaches its peak at iron (Fe- 56), which is 8.8 MeV/nucleon,
,
as shown in Figure 7.4. As nucleons are added, the total binding energy increases
but so does the total disruptive energy of the electrostatic forces and, once nuclei are
heavier than that of iron, the increase in disruptive energy has more effect than the
increase in binding energy. For example, the binding energy per nucleon of uranium,
which is at the end of the periodic Table, decreases to about 7.6 MeV.
N
160
Stable nuclei
150
Unstable nuclei
25
140
OO
210
130
190
120
180
110
160
170
100
150
Number of neutrons
AD
90
130
80
170
120
70
0.0
100
N Z
60
50
?O
80
40
50'
60
30
to
20
OF
10
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Z
Number of protons
(atomic number)
Figure 7.5: Graph of neutron number vs atomic number
298
Grade 11
Review Questions 7.1
1. Two nuclei have mass numbers in the ratio 27:125. What is the ratio of their
nuclear radii?
2. Consider the atoms ¹⁶, 18 O, 18 F, 18 Ne and 20 Ne.
a. Which atoms are isotopes of the same element?
b. Which ones have the same number of neutrons?
3. X and Y are two elements with the same mass number but different atomic
numbers 28 and 30, respectively. If X has a mass number of 58, what is the
number of neutrons in Y? Are X and Y isotopes of the same element?
4. In his experiment of gold foil, when Rutherford bombarded the alpha particles
on a very thin sheet of gold foil, only very few of the projectiles were observed
deflecting back.
a. Which force was responsible for the deflection?
b. What does it imply that most of the alpha particles were passed undeflected?
5. What were failures in Rutherford's planetary model of the atom?
6. Describe how neutrons were discovered.
7. What are differences between strong nuclear force and weak nuclear force?
8. What are the major differences between the electrostatic and nuclear forces?
9. Calculate the binding energies per nucleon of the nuclei 26 56 Fe and 209 83 Bi in
units of MeV. Use the following data: m(Fe-56) = 55.934939u, m(Bi-209) =
208.980388u, mp= m(H-1)=1.007900 u, m (neutron)=1.008665 u.
10. Explain factors affecting nuclear stability of isotopes.
7.2 Radioactivity
By the end of this section you should be to:
define the terms radio-activity, and distinguish between the three types of
emissions, alpha radiation, beta- radiation and gamma- radiation
recognize and discuss dangers of ionizing radiation;
discuss radioactive dating and radiation detectors;
identify radioactive sources in the school, home, and workplace and
recommend protective measures to the school community.
299
Physics
Student Text Book
In 1896, the French physicist Antoine Henri
Do you know
?
Becquerel (1852-1908) accidentally found that
uranium-rich mineral called pitchblende emits
Pierre and Marie were award-
invisible, penetrating radiations that can darken a
ed the Noble Prize in Physics in
photographic plate enclosed in an opaque envelope.
1903 for their work on radio-
Later it was found that there are some unstable
activity. Marie Curie became
isotopes that are emitting particles to be stable.
the first woman to be awarded
the Nobel Prize and the first
Larger nuclides tend to have more neutrons than
person to obtain two Nobel
protons to reduce the disruptive energy and
prizes when she won the prize
stay stable. To reduce the disruptive energy by
for the discovery of Polonium
increasing number of neutrons and reducing
and Radium in 1911. She later
number of protons, the weak nuclear force converts
discovered two new radioac-
proton to neutron; or at some stage the only way
tive elements: Radium and
for the nucleus to reach a lower energy state will
Polonium which took her sev-
be to emit particles. All these processes that lead
eral years since these elements
unstable atoms to decay by particle emission are
are difficult to extract and
what we call radioactivity. unstable isotope is said
extremely rare. Unfortunately,
to be a radioisotope, and the energy that is released
the Merry Curie died young.
is called radiation. After an atom expels energy
She died of aplastic anemia,
from the nucleus, the composition of the nucleus
almost certainly a result of
changes, and we are left with a different element
radiation exposure.
that is more stable.
Key term:
Radioactivity is the phenomenon of the spontaneous disintegration of unstable
atomic nuclei to atomic nuclei to form more energetically stable atomic nuclei.
Radioactive decay is a highly exoergic, statistically random, process that occurs
with a small amount of mass being converted to energy.
Types of nuclear radiation
There are three types of nuclear radiations: alpha (a), beta (ß) and gamma (y)
radiation. Each of these comes about through a different process in the decaying
nucleus, each one is composed of different particles and each one has different
properties.
Alpha Particles Radiation
Alpha particles are subatomic fragments consisting of two neutrons and two protons,
or helium nuclei (He-4). Alpha radiation occurs when the nucleus of an atom
300
Grade 11
becomes unstable (the ratio of neutrons to protons is too low) and alpha particles
are emitted to restore balance. Alpha decay occurs in elements with high atomic
numbers, such as uranium, radium, and thorium. The nuclei of these elements are
rich in neutrons, which makes alpha particle emission possible.
When a radioactive atom decays by a-emission, it leaves a daughter nucleus of atomic
number two less than the parent atom of atomic mass number four less than that of
the parent atom. Thus,
where X and Y are chemical symbols of the parent and the daughter nuclei,
respectively.
For example, the abundant isotope of uranium, U-238, decays by alpha emission to
give a thorium atom which can be written in a form:
238U
Some sources of α radiation are americium-241, plutonium-236, uranium-238,
thorium-232, radium-226, radon-222 and polonium-210.
Beta-particle Radiation
Unlike alpha radioactivity, beta radioactivity requires the weak nuclear force. There
are two beta decay types; beta minus (-) and beta plus (+). Beta minus particles are
energetic electrons emitted from a radioactive nucleus. Beta minus particle emission
occurs when the ratio of neutrons to protons in the nucleus is too high. An excess
neutron transforms into a proton and an electron. The proton stays in the nucleus
and the electron is ejected energetically. This process decreases the number of
neutrons by one and increases the number of protons by one. Thus,
As we see in this reaction equation, any decay by beta-emission accompanies
emission of an antineutrino, V. Take a look at the decay of the uranium daughter
product thorium-234 into protactinium-234:
Some beta negative emitters are tritium, cobalt-60, strontium-90, technetium-99,
iodine-129, iodine-131, and cesium-137. There is also positron or beta plus
emission. Like the beta particle, a positron is immediately rejected from the nucleus
upon its formation. For example, potassium-38 decays by positron emission,
301
Physics
Student Text Book
becoming argon-38. Positron emission decreases the atomic number by one, but the
mass number remains the same. Thus,
AX
Gamma-particle Radiation
Gamma rays are high energy, high frequency, electromagnetic radiations. Gamma
radiation usually accompanies alpha or beta decay. They have no charge and no
mass so they rarely interact with particles in their path, so they have the least ionizing
power of the three radiations. They are never completely absorbed, although their
energy can be significantly reduced by several centimeters of lead, or several meters
of concrete. If the energy is reduced to a safe level, gamma rays are often said to have
been absorbed.
Gamma emitting radioisotopes are the most widely used radiation sources. The
three radionuclide's by far useful are: cobalt-60, cesium-137, and technetium-99 m.
?
Activity 7.3
Discharge flame and radioactivity:
Hold a candle flame near a charged electroscope and it discharges leaves of the
electroscope. The reason is that the Flame produces ionization of nearby air.
Repeat demonstration with opposite charge on electroscope. Holding weak
radioactive source near electroscope may also cause discharge.
Ionization and penetration powers of nuclear radiations
When alpha, beta and gamma radiations, they produce ions and molecular fragments
by knocking electrons from them. The greater mass presents the greater the ionizing
power. Thus, alpha-radiation has the highest and gamma radiation has the least
ionization powers.
On the other hand, gamma-radiation has the highest and alpha- radiation has the
least penetration powers. Alpha radiation can be stopped by paper and skin, beta
radiation by aluminum sheet and gamma radiation can be blocked by 2 inches thick
lead. Figure 7.6, compares penetrating powers of these radiations.
302
Grade 11
Alpha
+
Beta
Neutron
Gamma
Paper
Metal
Water
Concrete
Lead
Figure 7.6: Penetration of the alpha, beta, and gamma radiations. Neutron is added to
show impact of charge on penetration power.
Dangers of ionizing radiation
When radiation passes through cellular tissue, it ionizes water molecules which
change into free radicals. These radicals are highly reactive and can interact with the
important genetic material in the cell, the DNA. In addition, the DNA may also be
ionized directly. Damage caused by these interactions may be fully repaired, in which
case, the cell remains viable. However, if the damage is not successfully repaired and
the DNA is not restored completely, the cell may either die or mutate.
Because the radiations ionize to different extents, the hazard level is also different for
each one. The extent of the potential damage depends on several factors, including:
the type of radiation
the sensitivity of the affected tissues and organs
the manner and length of time exposed
the radioactive isotopes involved
Characteristics of the exposed person (such as age, gender and under-
lying condition).
303
Physics
Student Text Book
The depth of radiation damage is summarized below.
Radiation
Effect inside body
Effect outside body
type
Alpha
Highly ionizing - very dangerous
Absorbed by surface layer of dead skin cells -
radiation poisoning and cancer
no danger
possible.
Beta
Moderate ionization and danger
Moderate SO exposure ionization and danger,
should be minimized
close exposure should be minimized
Gamma
Minimal ionization, cancer danger
minimal ionization -cancer danger from long-
from long-term exposure
term exposure
Effective Dose
The risk of developing adverse health
1 Gy is the deposit of a
effects depends on the radiation dose. The
joule of radiation energy
higher the dose the higher is the risk of
per kilogram of matter or
adverse effects. Absorbed dose describes
tissue.
the amount of energy deposited per unit
1 Sv = 1 joule/kilogram -
mass in an object or person. The units
a biological effect. The
for absorbed dose are gray (Gy, sievert
sievert represents the equiv-
(Sv) and rad; where 1Gy = 1J/kg and
alent biological effect of the
1rad = 0.01 Gy = 0.01 J/kg.
deposit of a joule of radia-
tion energy in a kilogram of
human tissue.
Radiation doses above 3 Gy (300 rad) can be fatal and doses above 6 Gy (600 rad)
are almost certain to be fatal, with death occurring within several months (in shorter
times at higher doses). For gamma rays and electrons, above 1 Gy, radiation causes
a complex of symptoms, including nausea and blood changes, known as radiation
sickness. For doses below 1 Sv (100 rem), there is little likelihood of radiation
sickness, and the main danger is an increased cancer risk.
Safety precautions when using radioactive sources
Radioactive sources which may be used in schools are usually very weak. They can
only be used in the presence of an authorized teacher. They are kept in a sealed
container except when they are being used in an experiment or demonstration. They
are immediately returned to the container when the experiment or demonstration
is finished.
304
Grade 11
When using the radioactive source it should be:
1. handled with tongs or forceps, never with bare hands.
2. kept at arm's length, pointing away from the body.
3. always kept as far as possible from the eyes.
Hands must be washed after the experiment and definitely before eating.
Radiation Detectors
A radiation detector is a device that measures the ionization of radiations (i.e.,
creating electrons and positively charged ions), such as beta radiation, gamma
radiation, and alpha radiation with the matter. There are different types of radiation
detectors, most widely ones of which are discussed below.
Scintillators: A scintillator is a general term for substances that emit fluorescence
when exposed to radiations of high energy- it is a type of phosphor. When a
radiation collides with this substance, it absorbs its energy and internal electrons
move from the ground state (stable state) to the excited state. When this electron
returns to the original stable state, it releases its energy in the form of light emission
(visible light or ultraviolet light), and this phenomenon called scintillation.
The incident radiation can be measured quantitatively by photo-electrically
converting/ amplifying the emitted fluorescence with a photomultiplier tube (PMT)
or the like Figure 7.7 shows a type of a scintillation detector. Scintillation detectors
represent the best means for detecting gamma or x-radiation and are the second-
most common detector type after G-M tubes. They have the ability to distinguish
between alpha, beta, and gamma radiation, and can be configured to produce
correspondingly different sounds through a meter.
Radiation
Light
Photomultiplier Tube
Measuring
Device
Sodium-lodide
Crystal
Anode
Photocathode
Optical Window
Figure 7.7: Scintilator
305
Physics
Student Text Book
Geiger counter: A Geiger counter, also known as the Geiger-Muller tube, is used
to quickly detect and measure radiation. It exploits the natural process of ionization
to detect and measure radiation. When exposed to radioactive radiations, the stable
gas within the chamber ionizes. This generates an electrical current that the counter
records over a period of 60 seconds.
When ionization occurs and the current is produced, a speaker clicks and a reading
is given - often in millisieverts (mSv). The central wire in between a gas-filled
tube at high voltage is used to collect the ionization produced by incident radiation.
Geiger counters can detect alpha, beta, and gamma radiation. However, they cannot
differentiate which one is beta, or gamma or alpha radiation.
B
inert gas
Y
A
HV
Figure 7.9: Geiger counter
?
Activity 7.4: Demonstrations
Work in a small group. Before you begin, make sure that you know the safety
precautions that you must follow when using radioactive materials. Set up the
equipment as shown in the figure below in cooperation with your teacher.
data-logging computer
absorbing material
recording counts
568
radioactive source
G-M tube
paper
aluminium
holder for
lead
absorbing material
The Geiger-Muller tube can detect all the three types of radiations. Place absorber
sheets which progressively increase in density between the source and the detector,
and record the average count rate in each case. You can also carry out the experiment
306
Grade 11
using computer software to remove all risk of exposure to radiation hazards.
Note that:
Some counters can separate betas from gammas by absorbing the betas
in a metallic cover.
Few have windows thin enough to detect alphas.
If you can detect betas and gammas, use aluminum sheets and lead
sheets to show that betas are stopped by aluminum but lead is required
to stop gammas.
If there is no any detector in your school, it might be possible to contact a local
hospital regarding the use of nuclear medicine for analysis or treatment. If a tour
cannot be arranged, perhaps your teacher may invite a specialist and He/she can
speak to the class.
Use either a prism or diffraction grating spectrometer to show the difference
between continuous or line spectra. A simple absorption spectrum can be shown
by crushing leaves in alcohol. The chlorophyll solution will absorb at both ends of
the spectrum. ß rays spectrum is continuous among a and Y rays spectrum.
?
Activity 7.5
Research the common detectors for α-particle, ß-particle and y-rays
In a small group: Research the various forms of detectors for nuclear radiation.
Prepare a summary of your research to present to the rest of your class. Choose an
appropriate format for your presentation.
The half life
Here, we consider a system containing many nuclei of the same species at some
initial time. The number of any radioactive parent nuclei decreases with time since
it emits radiation in the form of α, or ß emissions. The decay of a particular nucleus
cannot be predicted and is not affected by physical influences like temperature. The
rate of isotope decay depends on two factors.
The total number of undecayed nuclei present in the system. That is, on
doubling the average number of undecayed nuclei must double the rate
of decay.
The stability of the isotope. Some isotopes decay more rapidly than
307
Physics | Student Text Book
others. The rate of decay gives the number of nuclei that decay per
second.
In general, the decay rate, called the activity, A, is given by
At -AN
where
The negative sign shows the decrease in the number of the radioactive
nuclei with time,
N is the number of undecayed nuclei at the subsequent time t,
The decay constant a of a radioactive nuclide is defined as its prob-
ability of decay per unit time; having SI unit s⁻¹. It is a positive rate
also called the exponential decay constant, disintegration constant, rate
constant, or transformation constant.
The SI unit of activity, A, is Becquerel (Bq); where 1Bq = 1 decay per second. We can
also use the unit Curie, Ci, where 1 Ci = X 10¹⁰ Bq.
The quantity of the parent radioactive nuclei is subject to exponential decay since
it decreases at a rate proportional to its current value. This exponential decay law is
given by
=
where N₀ is the number of undecayed nuclei at an initial time t0 = 0.
In practice, the stability of radioactive nuclei against decay and the decay rate are
most often estimated in terms of the half-life, t1/2, rather than the decay constant
a. The half-life is defined as the time at which half of the original nuclei have
decayed. Or, it can also be stated somewhat differently as the time after which one
half of the original number of nuclei remains untransformed. Since nuclear decay is
an example of a purely statistical process, a more precise definition of half-life is
that each nucleus has a 50% chance of living for a time equal to one half-life, t1/2.
The half-life of a certain decay can be determined by using N = N (t₁/₂) = N₀/2, in
to exponential decay law as:
Scientists predicted that the half-lives of naturally occurring nuclear reactions fall in
a very wide range - vary from fractions of milliseconds like Radium C (), to billions
of years like U-235 (4.5 billion years). For some induced radioactive elements
(initially stable made radioactive by exposure to specific radiation), the half life is a
few millionths or even hundred millionths of a second.
308
Grade 11
?
Activity 7.6:
Perform experiments on Half life simulation using free applets available from the
internet.
Key term:
The half life of a radioactive isotope is the amount of time it takes for one half of
the radioactive isotope to decay.
Why do we use a term like half-life rather than lifetime?
The answer can be found by examining Figure 7.10, which shows how the number
of radioactive nuclei in a sample of initial value N₀, decreases with time. The number
of radionuclide's left at t₁/₂ is N₀/2. Half of the remaining nuclei decay in the
next half-life (2t₁/₂), is N₀ / 4. Then, it becomes N₀ /8 in the third half-life and so
on. For n integral numbers of half-lives, the number of original nuclides left, N, can
be calculated by
N = 2⁻ⁿ N₀
No
Number of
N=No
undecayed
Nuclei
No/2
No/4
No/8
No/16
t₁/₂ 2t1/2 3t₁/₂ 1/2
Time(t)
Figure 7.10: Number of undecayed nuclei vs time graph of a radioactive isotope
Examples 7.3
1) The half-life of radium is equal to 1590 years. What is the activity of 1 g of
radium-226? Solution: t1/2 = 1590 yrs = 50176584000 S
The gram molecular weight of Ra-226 is M = 226.0254098 g/mol. There are Nₐ =
6.023 X 10²³ atoms/mol of radium. Therefore, the number of atoms of 1g of Ra-
226 would be:
309
Physics I Student Text Book
N = Nₐ X = 1gx6.023x10²³ atoms / mol =2.664x10²¹ atoms
M
226.0254098 g / mol
The decay constant is,
0.693
0.693
a =
=
=1.381x10⁻¹¹ₛ⁻¹ a = 0.693/t1/2=13.81 pBq
t₁/₂
50176584000s
The desired activity is
A = AN = X 10⁻¹¹ X 10²¹ = 3.6793 X 10¹⁰ Bq
A = 150176584000s
A = 1.23 x10¹⁰ Bq
That is, the number of decays per second in one gram of radium is 12300 million.
2) The radioisotope strontium-90 has a half-life of 38.1 years. If a sample contains
400 mg of Sr-90, how many milligrams will remain when the age of the sample is
190.5 years?
Solution
t1/2 = 38.1 years, t = 190.5 years
From the equation t₁/₂ = =0.693/X, we obtain
a = 0.693 = 0.693 = 0.018189 yr⁻¹
Then the mass remained after 190.5 years becomes
Review Questions 7.2
1. In the radioactive decay of radon-222, both alpha and gamma radiation are
emitted, with the latter having energy of 8.2 X 10⁻¹⁴ J per nucleus decayed:
2226Rn
2.
How much energy does 1mol of Rn release in the form of gamma radiation?
310
Grade 11
3. What can be the reason that tritium (H-3) isotope is a radioisotope where there
is no electrostatic repulsive force in its nucleus? How does this isotope decay?
4. Why does Uranium 235 decay via alpha decay (by the way of Thorium-231)
into 231 Pa?
5. You know that excessive exposure to radiation may damage living tissues and
organs, depending on the amount of radiation received (i.e. the dose). Write
some factors on which the extent of the potential damage depends on?
6. It is known that radioactive decay is a statistical process. Is it possible to
determine the constancy of t1/2, or a for a given radioactive element with one
of few atomic nuclei?
7. Determine the reaction equations of the decays of U-238 by alpha emission
and Th-234 by beta minus emission?
8. Does the probability per unit time that a radioactive nucleus will decay,
increase, decrease or remain the same independent of time?
9. Compare Geiger counter with Scintillator.
10. Given alcohol, argon gas, oxygen and hydrogen gas, which one of these acts
as ionizing gas in Geiger Muller counter?
11. What is the activity of a sample of 100 million atoms of carbon-14? The decay
constant, 2, is 3.84 X 10⁻¹² s-¹.
12. Here is a table showing the activity of a sample of technetium-99, a gamma
emitter which is often used in medical investigations. Plot the activity VS time
graph to show this data and work out the half life
Activity (Bq)
Time (hours)
4000
O
2000
6
1000
12
500
18
250
24
125
30
75
36
13. How do the electric charges of alpha, beta and gamma rays differ?
14. How does the source differ for a beam of gamma rays and a beam of X rays?
15. When beta emission occurs, what change takes place in an atomic nucleus?
16. Among the three radiations, alpha, beta and gamma radiations, which radiation
is the most fatal to the human beings?
17. Why does neutron radiation attain the highest penetration depth compared to
alpha and beta radiations?
311
Physics
Student Text Book
7.3 Use of nuclear radiation
By the end of this section you should be able to:
investigate the benefits and hazards (nuclear waste) of nuclear energy
production;
discuss and appreciate the application of nuclear medicine
?
Brainstorming questions
1. Have you ever heard that goiter can be treated using radiations?
2. Have you ever heard about how ages of fossils such as Lucy/Dinknesh are
determined? Outside of some harmful applications such as nuclear weaponry,
there remains a wide array/range of ways in which radioactive material and
the radiation it gives off remain useful in the daily lives of people all over the
world. The nuclear technologies are in use to improve agriculture, industries,
medicine, water and sanitation and power generation. Among these, only two
uses, namely, medical application and radioactive dating are discussed below.
Medical applications of nuclear radiation
Nuclear medicine uses radioactive material inside the body to see how organs or
tissue are functioning (for diagnosis) or to destroy damaged or diseased organs or
tissue (for treatment).
For diagnosis, nuclear medicine can show how the organs or tissues are functioning.
For most diagnostic procedures, a tracer, which contains the radioactive material,
is injected, swallowed, or inhaled. Then, a radiation detector is used to see how
much of the tracer is absorbed or how it reacts in the organ or tissue. The nuclear
diagnostics are more often used in imaging.
Some radioactive nuclides in use for diagnosis include fluorine-18, gallium-67,
krypton-81m, rubidium-82, nitrogen-13, technetium-99m, indium-111, iodine-123,
xenon-133, and thallium-201.
To diagnose cancer, positron emitting nucleotides (PET) are used to scan for a
short period. In this type of nuclear medicine, the tracer is used to show the natural
activity of cells, providing more detailed information on how organs are working
and if there is damage to the cells. Some common uses of PET scans include
diagnosing heart disease, Alzheimer's disease, and brain disorders. PET scans are
often combined with computed tomography (CT) scans or magnetic resonance
312
Grade 11
imaging (MRI) which provides three-dimensional images of the organ.
Nuclear treatment in Ethiopia
Based on the basics of medical application, in Ethiopia, there are Nuclear Technology
activities. Previously, the Black Lion Specialized Hospital (a teaching hospital under Addis
Ababa University) uses radioisotope for the treatment of cancer.
For treatment (Nuclear radiation therapy):- Radiation therapy is a type of cancer
treatment that uses high energy beams to destroy cancer cells and shrink tumors.
Cancer cells grow and divide faster than most normal cells. The radiation works by
making small breaks in the DNA inside cells. These breaks keep cancer cells from
growing and dividing and cause them to die. The radiation may injure noncancerous
cells, but most are able to recover. There are two broad types of radiation therapy
that doctors use to treat cancers: internal and external.
External beam radiation, or teletherapy: In this type of treatment, the
energy beams come from a machine outside of the body. The beam is
precisely aimed and it penetrates the body to reach the cancer site. For
example, such treatment can be carried out using a gamma beam from
a radioactive cobalt-60 source.
Internal radiation therapy: Brachytherapy and Systemic radiation thera-
py: In Brachytherapy, a doctor places usually a gamma or beta emitter,
in or near the cancer site. The implants come in different shapes, which
include: tube, wire, capsule, seeds, and pellets. For example, io-
dine-131 is commonly used to treat thyroid cancer and non-malignant
thyroid disorders. It is produced in wire form. In Systemic radiation
therapy, the patient requires swallowing a radioactive substance, which
travels throughout the body to find and kill the cancerous cells. Alter-
natively, a healthcare professional may inject the radioactive substance
into a person's vein.
?
Activity 7.8:
Contact a knowledgeable person such as a radiologist in a local hospital for
demonstration regarding the use of nuclear medicine for analysis or treatment.
If a tour cannot be arranged your teacher may perhaps invite a specialist to speak
to the class.
313
Physics
Student Text Book
Radioactive dating
Radioactive dating or radioisotope dating is a technique which is used to date materials
by use of naturally occurring radioactivity.
That is, in radioactive dating, scientists count the number of parent isotopes and
daughter isotopes formed from the nuclear decay to determine how many half-
lives have passed and provide a suggestion of the age of an object. Thus, once the
isotopic abundances of each parent/daughter elements is determined using the
mass spectrometer, the age (t), of the object can be calculated using the formula
N=N0e^lambda*t.
Its most famous application is carbon-14 dating. Carbon-14 has a half-life of
5730 years. Radioactive carbon has the same chemistry as stable carbon, and so it
mixes into the ecosphere, where it is consumed and becomes part of every living
organism. Carbon-14 has an abundance of 1.3 parts per trillion of normal carbon.
Thus, if you know the number of carbon nuclei in an object (perhaps determined
by mass and Avogadro's number), you multiply that number by 1.3x10⁻¹² to find
the number of ¹⁴C nuclei in the object. When an organism dies, carbon exchange
with the environment ceases, and ¹⁴C is not replenished as it decays. By comparing
the abundance of 14 C in an artifact with the normal abundance in living tissue, it is
possible to determine the artifact's age (or time since death).
Carbon-14 dating can be used for biological tissues as old as 50 or 60 thousand years,
but is most accurate for younger samples, since the abundance of ¹⁴C nuclei in them
is greater. Very old biological materials contain no ¹⁴C at all. There are instances in
which the date of an artifact can be determined by other means, such as historical
knowledge or tree-ring counting. These cross-references have confirmed the validity
of carbon-14 dating and permitted us to calibrate the technique as well. Carbon-14
dating revolutionized parts of archaeology.
Localized Applications of radioactive dating
Dinikenesh or Lucy was discovered in 1974 in Ethiopia, at Hadar, in Afar by
paleoanthropologist Donald Johanson. After all her bone fragments were collected
and reconstructed, Lucy was taken to USA so that her age is measured precisely.
Which method was used to measure the age of Lucy? Can carbon dating be applicable?
Carbon-14 has the same chemistry as stable carbon, and so it mixes into the
ecosphere, where it is consumed and becomes part of every living organism. When
the organism dies, carbon exchange with the environment ceases, and as a result
C-14 is not replenished as it decays. Since the ratio of C-14 to total carbon nuclei is
very small (about 1.3x10⁻¹²), C-14 concentration falls nearly to zero after about nine
314
Grade 11
half-lives (about more than 50 thousand years). This implies that Lucy is too old for
radiocarbon dating and hence other methods were employed to find her age.
The appropriate method used was
argon-argon (⁴⁰Ar-³⁹Ar) dating on
tiny crystals in layers of volcanic
ash sandwiching the sediments
where Dinikenesh was found. In
this measurement, her age was
found to be 3.18 million years.
Figure 7.11 shows several hundred
fossils of Lucy 40% pieces of the
skeleton of female found in Afar
Figure 7.11: Several hundred fossils of Lucy
region in Ethiopia.
with 40 percent pieces.
Review Questions 7.3
1. State some uses of radioactive isotopes.
2. Why might a radioactive source be injected into a patient?
3. What are radioactive tracers used for?
4. What is radioactive dating? Explain how it works.
5. Injected radioactive sources can be used as tracers to make soft tissues, such
as blood vessels or the kidneys, show up through medical imaging processes.
Which radiation type should the radioactive source used emit?
6. Depending on the object that scientists are trying to study, different radioactive
dating techniques can be used. Why do scientists prefer to use:
A.K-40 for dating of rocks that are older than 100,000?
B. C-14 for dating of fossils and some rocks?
7. How can carbon dating be used to measure age of dead organisms?
8. List some commonly used element pairs to establish absolute ages.
9. Right after scanning using radiation for diagnosis, does the body remain
radioactive? Is it harmful to approach the irradiated person?
315
Physics
I
Student Text Book
7.4 Nuclear Reaction and Energy Production
By the end of this section you should be able to:
distinguish between the two types of nuclear reaction;
appreciate the sun as a big nuclear reactor.
discuss the use (energy production, production of important isotopes, etc.)
and misuse (nuclear bomb) of artificial nuclear reaction.
Nuclear reactions are processes in which one or more nuclides are produced from the
collisions between two atomic nuclei or from the collisions between a nucleus and
a subatomic particle. In general, there are two types of nuclear reactions, namely;
fission reaction, and
fusion reaction.
Nuclear fission reaction
Nuclear fission is the splitting of a heavy atomic nucleus such as uranium-235, into two
fragments of roughly equal mass. Nuclear fission is a form of nuclear transmutation,
meaning that the starting atoms are not the same elements as the resultant - or
daughter - product atoms. In nuclear reactors, nuclear fission usually takes place by
inducing neutrons into the parent nuclei. In neutron induced fission reactions, two
additional neutrons are released per one incident neutron.
Nuclear fission is accompanied by the release of a large amount of energy. Part of
this energy is converted into the kinetic energy of the fission fragments and the
remaining energy is converted into different forms such as heat and sound. For
example, consider the fission reaction equation on U-235, given by:
"Ba+"Kr+3'n+200MeV
The reaction is described pictorially as shown in Figure 7.12.
316
Grade 11
144
56
Ba
235
92
U
Neutron
200
Neutron
MeV
Neutron
Neutron
89
36
Kr
Figure 7.12: The atomic fission of 235U.
In this reaction, the sum of the nuclear binding energy U-235 and the kinetic
energy of the incident neutron (n-1) is equal to the sum of kinetic energy of the two
daughter nuclides (Ba-144 and Kr-89); the kinetic energy of the three neutrons and
the 200MeV energy, which is directly released
Key terms:
Nuclear fission is the splitting of a nucleus of an atom into two or more smaller
nuclei.
Nuclear fusion is a reaction in which two or more atomic nuclei are combined to
form one or more different atomic nuclei and subatomic particles.
Example 7.4
A nuclear fission reaction is given below. Complete the equation, find the value of X
and determine the type of the element, Y.
²³⁵U+¹n X Y + 139 Cs + 2 + energy
Solution:
The equation is balanced on both sides so the total mass number on the left side
must be the same as the total mass number on the right side. Thus,
235 + 1 = X + 139 + 2, or X = 95, which corresponds to Rb-95.
317
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 7.9: Simulating nuclear reactions
Simulate nuclear reactions produced by high speed particles using marbles
accelerated down sloping aluminum channel into saucer. Those in saucer are
analogous to target nuclei. Include several marbles of differing sizes. Show effect
of speed by launching from different height and angles and effect of mass and
increased momentum of projectiles by using different marbles. Marble sufficient
momentum can cause ejection of one or more marbles from saucer.
Discuss analogy to bombarding nuclei with particles of ever increasing mass
proton, deuteron, and alpha.
Applications of fission reaction
Chain nuclear reaction:
Fission reaction has several applications. Its
In a chain reaction, neutrons
application in nuclear reactors is the concern
released in fission produce an
of this section. There are two types of nuclear
additional fission in at least one
reactors: power reactor and research reactor.
further nucleus. This nucleus in
turn produces neutrons, and the
Power reactors (PR) are used to generate
process repeats. The process may
electricity by the process of nuclear fission. In
be controlled (nuclear power) or
a chain nuclear reaction, undertaking in nuclear
uncontrolled (nuclear weapons).
reactor, the kinetic energy of fission fragments
Chain reaction occurs only above
and the energy released will be converted to heat.
a certain mass called critical
The heat produces steam which is used to drive
mass.
the turbine of a generator to produce electricity.
Pressuriser
Control rods
Steam
Steam
generator
Steel
pressure
vessel
Water
Fuel elements
Reinforced concrete
containment and shield
Figure 7.14: Scheme of a power reactor
318
Grade 11
There are several components common to most types of reactor:
Fuel: Uranium is the basic fuel. Usually pellets of uranium oxide
(UO₂) are arranged in tubes to form fuel rods. The rods are arranged
into fuel assemblies in the reactor core.
Moderator: Material in the core which slows down the neutrons re-
leased from fission so that they cause more fission. It is usually water,
but may be heavy water or graphite.
Control rods or blades: These are made with neutron-absorbing mate-
rial such as cadmium, hafnium or boron, and are inserted or withdrawn
from the core to control the rate of reaction, or to halt it.
Coolant: A fluid circulating through the core so as to transfer the heat
from it. In light water reactors the water moderator functions also as
primary coolant.
Pressure vessel or pressure tubes: Usually a robust steel vessel contain-
ing the reactor core and moderator/coolant, but it may be a series of
tubes holding the fuel and conveying the coolant through the surround-
ing moderator.
Steam generator: Part of the cooling system of pressurized water re-
actors where the high-pressure primary coolant bringing heat from the
reactor is used to make steam for the turbine, in a secondary circuit.
Containment: The structure around the reactor and associated steam
generators which is designed to protect it from outside intrusion and to
protect those outside from the effects of radiation in case of any seri-
ous malfunction inside. It is typically a meter-thick concrete and steel
structure.
Research reactors (RR) are nuclear fission-based nuclear reactors that serve
primarily as a neutron source. Research reactors are simpler than power reactors and
operate at lower temperatures. They need far less fuel, and far less fission products
build up as the fuel is used. They are also called non-power reactors, in contrast to
power reactors. The neutrons produced by a research reactor are used for different
purposes such as neutron scattering, analysis and testing of materials, production of
radioisotopes, research and public outreach, and education.
Radioisotopes can be produced in research reactors by exposing suitable target
materials to the intense neutron radiation for an appropriate time. The quality and
specific activity of the radioisotopes produced depends on both the target and the
irradiation conditions. A wide range of isotopes are made at reactors, from elements
as light as carbon-14 to as heavy as mercury-203, with irradiations ranging from
minutes to weeks.
319
Physics
Student Text Book
For example, Mo-99-the parent to the widely used medical diagnostic radioisotope
Tc-99m-is usually produced via neutron-induced fission of targets with U-235
using a 4- to 8-day irradiation time.
The problems posed by nuclear waste of reactors
Nuclear waste refers to the byproducts of nuclear reactors. One of the main
difficulties is that the isotopes used in nuclear power stations typically have very long
half lives. Plutonium-239 has a half-life of 24100 years; in contrast plutonium-238
has a half-life of 88 years. Spent nuclear fuel is the most important source of waste
from nuclear power stations and is mainly unconverted uranium. About 3% of it is
fission products from nuclear reactions. The actinides (uranium, plutonium, and
curium) are responsible for the bulk of the long-term radioactivity, whereas the
fission products are responsible for the bulk of the short-term radioactivity.
After about 5 percent of a nuclear fuel rod has reacted inside a nuclear reactor, it will
no longer able to be used as fuel due to the build-up of fission products.
Scientists are experimenting on methods for reusing these rods in order to reduce
waste and use the remaining actinides as fuel.
?
Activity 7.10 : Research nuclear power
1. Work in a small group to research one of the following topics. Students can be
assigned to investigate and report
The fraction of energy generated from nuclear power in Africa and the rest
of the world
Peaceful uses of Nuclear Radiation in Ethiopia and Africa
Nuclear Facilities in Africa
Present your findings to the rest of your class in a form of your choice.
7.4.1. Nuclear fusion reaction and its uses
Nuclear fusion reaction is a process of making a single heavy nucleus from the
combination of two or more lighter nuclei. In most cases, fusion reaction releases
more energy than fission reaction. The process releases energy because the total
mass of the resulting single nucleus is less than the mass of the two original nuclei.
The leftover mass becomes energy.
320
Grade 11
Use of nuclear fusion as source of energy in the sun
The principal source of energy in the sun is a net fusion reaction in which four
hydrogen nuclei fuses and produce a helium nucleus and two positrons. This is a net
reaction of a more complicated series of events:
41H ₄He + 2 +1ß
The mass of the resulting helium nucleus has a mass that is 0.7% less than that of
the four hydrogen nuclei. This lost mass (the mass defect) is converted into energy
during the fusion. The energy produced in this reaction is about 3.6 X 10¹¹ kJ of
energy per mole of He-4 produced. This energy is greater by 20 fold than the energy
produced by the nuclear fission of one mole of U-235, and over 3 million times
larger than the energy produced by (chemical) combustion of one mole of octane.
The heavy isotopes of hydrogen, a deuteron, and a triton, , also undergo fusion at
extremely high temperatures. They form a helium nucleus and a neutron:
2H + 3H ₄He +
This change proceeds with a mass loss of 0.0188 amu, corresponding to the release
of of He-4 formed. The very high temperature is necessary to give the nuclei
enough kinetic energy to overcome the very strong repulsive forces resulting from
the positive charges on their nuclei so they can collide.
Figure 7.13 shows the cyclic sun fusion reaction to form a very strong release in
the electromagnetic radiation.
Nuclear Fusion
Deuterium
Fusion
Helium
Energy
Tritium
Neutron
Figure 7.13: Nuclear fusion reaction process of the H isotopes.
Hydrogen bomb: One of the misuses of nuclear fusion reaction is its application for
hydrogen bomb, which has higher destructive power and greater efficiencies than
atomic bombs. Fusion weapons are also referred to as thermonuclear bombs.
321
Physics I Student Text Book
?
Activity 7.10:
Observe simulation of Nuclear Collisions using free applets available from the
internet. Demonstrate nuclear reactions using virtual laboratory simulation
software's like PhET.
Review Questions 7.4
1. List uses of applications of nuclear reaction
2. What are the basic differences between nuclear fission and fusion reaction
processes?
3. Complete the following nuclear reactions:
(a) 'Be+|H ⁶Li+
(b) He 13N+_
4. Describe the nature of research reactors by comparing it with the power
reactors.
5. Why is Technetium-99 considered as the most important radioactive isotope
for medical applications?
6. Is nuclear energy from radioisotopes in use for space travel?
7. Is there any radiation hazard from nuclear wastes of nuclear reactors? If so,
how?
8. Caesium-137 is a by-product of nuclear fission within a nuclear reactor.
a) Copy and complete this equation which describes the production of
137 55 Cs by finding X and y.
b) The half-life of Cesium is 30 years. When the fuel rods are removed
from a nuclear reactor core, the total activity of caesium-137 is 5.8 X
10¹⁵ Bq. After how many years will this have fallen to 1.6 X 10⁶ Bq?
c) Comment on the problems of storage of the fuel rods over this time
period.
9. Does Fusion produce radioactive nuclear waste the same way fission does?
10. Is there chain reaction in nuclear fusion? Can fusion cause a nuclear accident?
11. Can fusion reactors be used to produce weapons?
12. In the fusion reaction below, determine the mass defect.
H :He+,B+energy
322
Grade 11
7.5 Safety Rules Against Hazards of Nuclear
Radiation
By the end of this section you should be able to:
implement safety rules against hazards of nuclear radiation.
Nuclear Safety rules
Nuclear safety is defined by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as "The
achievement of proper operating conditions, prevention of accidents or mitigation
of accident consequences, resulting in protection of workers, the public and the
environment from undue radiation hazards". The IAEA defines nuclear security as
"The prevention and detection of and response to, theft, sabotage, unauthorized
access, illegal transfer or other malicious acts involving nuclear materials, other
radioactive substances or their associated facilities' This covers nuclear power plants
and all other nuclear facilities, the transportation of nuclear materials, and the use
and storage of nuclear materials for medical, power, industry, and military uses.
The nuclear power industry has improved the safety and performance of reactors
and has proposed new and safer reactor designs. However, a perfect safety cannot be
guaranteed. Potential sources of problems include human errors and external events
that have a greater impact than anticipated: The designers of reactors at Fukushima
in Japan did not anticipate that a tsunami generated by an earthquake would disable
the backup systems that were supposed to stabilize the reactor after the earthquake.
Catastrophic scenarios involving terrorist attacks, insider sabotage, and cyber-
attacks are also conceivable.
Nuclear safety therefore covers at minimum:
Extraction, transportation, storage, processing, and disposal of fission-
able materials
Safety of nuclear power generators
Control and safe management of nuclear weapons, nuclear material
capable of use as a weapon, and other radioactive materials
Safe handling, accountability and use in industrial, medical and re-
search contexts
Disposal of nuclear waste
Limitations on exposure to radiation
323
Physics
Student Text Book
Protecting yourself from radiation
Radiation is part of our life. Background radiation, coming primarily from natural
minerals, is around us all the time. Fortunately, there are very few situations
where an average person is exposed to uncontrolled sources of radiation above
background. Nevertheless, it is wise to be prepared and know what to do if such
a situation arises.
One of the best ways to be prepared is to understand the radiation protection
principles of time, distance and shielding.
Time: For people who are exposed to radiation in addition to natu-
ral background radiation, limiting or minimizing the exposure time
reduces the dose from the radiation source.
Distance: Just as the heat from a fire reduces as you move further
away, the dose of radiation decreases dramatically as you increase
your distance from the source.
Shielding: Barriers of lead, concrete, or water provide protection
from penetrating gamma rays and X-rays. This is why certain radio-
active materials are stored under water or in concrete or lead-lined
rooms, and why dentists place a lead blanket on patients receiving
X-rays of their teeth. Therefore, inserting the proper shield between
you and a radiation source will greatly reduce or eliminate the dose
you receive.
Safety precautions when using radioactive sources in schools
Radioactive sources which are used in school are usually very weak. They can
only be used in the presence of an authorized teacher. They are kept in a sealed
container except when they are being used in an experiment or demonstration.
The containers can be designed based on the appropriate shields. They are
immediately returned to the container when the experiment or demonstration is
finished. When using the radioactive source it should be:
handled with tongs or forceps, never with bare hands. Moreover,
hands must be washed after the experiment and definitely before
eating.
kept at arm's length, pointing away from the body.
always kept as far as possible from the eyes.
What to do in the event of a nuclear accident?
What are the three main safety guidelines for nuclear reactors?
324
Grade 11
?
Small group work:
Gather information about the possible sources of nuclear radiation from
the internet.
Enquire about radiation hazards in your locality by having a meeting with
the nearby Radiation Protection Authority and what could be done to
protect yourself and others from radiation hazards.
If there is no nearby authority, let you send your questions to an accessible
body of authority by electronic media.
Let you organize a report about what measures you need to take as school
community and present it to the whole class.
?
Expert Guest:
Your teacher will invite you a medical personnel from the nearby medical
establishment who is knowledgeable about nuclear medicine. Ask the guest to
explain
how and why nuclear medicine is practiced, where the medicine
comes from and how it is transported; handled, stored.
what measures should be implemented during use and disposal of
these medicines. To actively engage with the guest, you need prior
reading.
Discuss about hazards of nuclear radiations and safety with your
teacher.
325
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Review questions 7.5
1. How does radiation affect the public? How can you help the public to
protect from radiation hazards?
2. How do you need to be careful around radiation?
3. How can exposure to radiation be minimized?
4. How is a person contaminated by radiation such as from bomb get
decontaminated?
5. Is nuclear waste from nuclear reactors harmful to humans and the
environment? If so how can we protect the hazard?
6. What barriers provide protection from radiation produced by a nuclear
power plant?
326
Grade 11
UNIT SUMMARY
c
The chemical shorthand to describe atom X, where Z is the atomic number, and A
= Z +N, is AX.
c
The atom and the nucleus are assumed spherical and the atomic radius is estimated
by:
where A is the mass number of the atom; R₀ is the radius of the nucleus which is
roughly equal to R₀ = 1.2fm and 1 femtometer (1 fm) = 10⁻¹⁵ m.
c
A member of a family of an element with the same number of protons but different
number of neutrons is called an isotope. Some examples of isotopes of elements:
c
The strong nuclear force is a very short-range attractive force that acts between
nucleons: protons and neutrons. The strong nuclear force is strong enough to
withstand the electrical repulsion up within a distance of slightly more than the
radius of a nucleon, 10-15 m Both nucleons are affected by the nuclear force
almost identically.
c
The weak nuclear force acts inside of individual nucleons, which means that it is
even shorter ranged than the strong nuclear force. The weak nuclear force is a force
that causes decay of an atom by beta emission.
c
Nuclear binding energy is the energy that holds nucleons together. Another
equivalent definition of binding energy is the minimum energy that is required to
disassemble the nucleus of an atom into its constituent nucleons.
c
The mass of an atomic nucleus is less than the sum of the individual masses of the
free constituent protons and neutrons. The energy equivalent to this difference in
mass can be calculated by the Einstein equation,
BE = Amc2
where BE is the nuclear binding energy, and c is the speed of light. This 'missing
mass' is known as the mass defect, and represents the energy that was released when
the nucleus was formed.
c
The mass defect of an atom can be calculated by:
where Zm p is the total mass of the protons; (A - Z)mₙ is the total mass of the neutrons,
and M is the mass of the nucleus. Using this into the former equation, we obtain:
c
Nuclear energy is usually expressed in atomic energy unit (aeu), where:
1 aeu = c² X amu
Or, in megaelectron volt (MeV), where
1MeV=1.602x10⁻¹³ J, and 1 aeu = 931.1MeV
327
Physics I Student Text Book
c
When mass is in amu/u, the nuclear binding energy in MeV becomes,
BE=[Zm₂+(A-Z)m,-M]x931.1MeV
c
Binding energy per nucleon (BEN) is the average energy required to remove an
individual nucleon from a nucleus. It is given by
BE
BEN
=
c
Radioactivity is the phenomenon of the A spontaneous disintegration of unstable
atomic nuclei to atomic nuclei to form more energetically stable atomic nuclei.
Radioactive decay is a highly exoergic, statistically random, process that occurs
with a small amount of mass being converted to energy.
c
Representations of nuclear decay reaction of element with chemical symbol X by
alpha ( α a), or beta (B⁻, , or ß+) emission to give a daughter element Y are:
α-emission : AX
ß⁻ - emission : X
ß⁺ emission : X
C
Gamma rays are high energy, high frequency, electromagnetic radiations. Gamma
radiation usually accompanies alpha or beta decay.
C
Radiations damage cells by ionizing atoms or molecules by removing electrons
from them.
c
Absorbed dose describes the amount of energy deposited per unit mass in an
object or person. The units for absorbed dose are gray (Gy, international unit) and
rad; where 1Gy = 1J/kg and 1rad = 0.01 Gy = 0.01 J/kg.
c
Radiation doses above 3 Gy (300 rad) can be fatal and doses above 6 Gy (600
rad) are almost certain to be fatal, with death occurring within several months (in
shorter times at higher doses).
c
A radiation detector is a device that measures the ionization of radiations (i.e.,
creating electrons and positively charged ions). Scintilator, Gaseous ionization
detectors and Geiger counter.
c
The rate of isotope decay is called the activity, A, and is given by
c
where the negative sign shows the decrease in the number of the radioactive
nuclei with time, N(t) is the number of undecayed nuclei at the subsequent time t,
the decay constant A of a radioactive nuclide is defined as its probability of decay
per unit time; having SI unit s-1. It is a positive rate also called the exponential
decay constant, disintegration constant, rate constant, or transformation constant.
c
The SI unit of activity, A, is Becquerel (Bq); where 1Bq = 1 decay per second. We
can also use the unit Curie, Ci, where 1 Ci = X 10¹⁰ Bq.
328
Grade 11
c
If N₀ is quantity at time t =0, the quantity of the parent radioactive nuclei is subject
to exponential decay given by
c
The half-life is defined as the time at which half of the original nuclei have decayed.
Or, it can also be stated somewhat differently as the time after which one half of the
original number of nuclei remains untransformed.
C
The half-life is related to the decay constant by
0.693
c
Fission occurs when a neutron slams into a larger atom, forcing it to excite and
split into two smaller atoms-also known as fission products.
c
Nuclear fusion reaction is a process of making a single heavy nucleus from the
combination of two or more lighter nuclei.
c
A nuclear reactor is a device used to initiate and control a fission nuclear chain
reaction or nuclear fusion reactions.
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS 7
1. Discuss (a) Rutherford and (b) Bohr model of an atom.
2. What are the radii of U-238 and U-235?
3. What do you mean by reduced mass? How is this mass related with the nuclear
binding energy?
4. State some uses of radioactive isotopes.
5. State one risk or danger associated with radioactivity.
6. What are the basic differences between nuclear fission and fusion reaction pro-
cesses?
7. Write the nuclear reaction equation for K-242 that decays by beta minus emission.
Do the same for Pu-239 decays by alpha emission.
8. Compare alpha and beta emission interms of their nature, relative ionizing effect,
relative penetrating power, the effect of magnetic and electric field on the radia-
tion, and the common detectors.
9. What are research reactors (RR)? How are RR important for the in agriculture and
medical applications? How are the research reactors (RR) different from the power
reactors (PR)
10. When a patient undergoes radiotherapy, how does medical staff protect themslves
from radiation?
11. What effects can high doses of radiation have on the human eyes?
12. Iodine-131, in the form of iodine chloride is used to treat thyroid cancer. Why
does the patient radioactive substance orally to treat the cancer?
329