UNIT 4
DYNAMICS
Introduction
Motion is an important element in studying Physics. Naturally, the race of athletes, the
flying of a bird, and the jumping of a dolphin out from the water, the trajectory of a soccer
ball or a basketball and the like are examples of motion in nature. The motion of a fast
driving car, or an airplane or a fast magnetic levitated (Maglev) train, or a supersonic
jet, or a satellite orbiting the Earth are all fascinating developments of human beings in
the advancement of motion.
.In unit three of this textbook, you studied kinematics: the study of motion that
only describes the way objects move-their velocity and their acceleration but not what
causes the motions. However, motions have causes and that cause is a force. The study
of motion with its cause is dynamics. In this unit, we study about motion, how motion
is created by a force, what the impact of force is on moving or stationary objects and
the like.
At the end of this unit you should be able to:
demonstrate an understanding of the relationship between net force and
the acceleration of an object in linear motion
analyze the effect of a net force in quantitative terms, using graphs, free-
body diagrams, and vector diagrams
describe the first condition of equilibrium quantitatively.
demonstrate an understanding, in qualitative and quantitative terms, of
the concepts of work, energy, energy transformations and power
design and carry out experiments and solve problems involving energy
transformations and the law of conservation of energy.
realize that momentum is an inherent property of moving objects
express the relationship between impulse and momentum.
95
Physics
Student Text Book
4.1 The Concept of Force and Newton's Laws of
motion
The concept of force
At the end of completion of this section you should be able to:
discuss what the concept of force means in physics, and why forces are
vectors.
define force and discuss its effects on a body.
distinguish between contact forces and field forces.
discuss the four fundamental forces in nature and their real life
application.
state newton's laws of motion
demonstrate the cause effect relationship of force and acceleration.
apply newton's second law to determine the weight of an object.
demonstrate the relationship between weight and normal force.
?
Brainstorming
1. How do you define the term force in your own words? Mention some of the
natural phenomena that show the action of a force on or between objects in
your surroundings.
2. How does force affect every moment in your life?
To understand dynamics, the study of motion and its causes, we need to start with
the working definition of force. In everyday language a force is a push or a pull,
as when you push or pull a table on the floor or a player kicks a ball, Figure 4.1.
The speed and direction of motion of both the ball and the table are determined
by the magnitude and direction of the applied force. So force is a vector quantity,
just like velocity and acceleration.
The SI unit of measurement of force is newton (N).
Where 1N = 1kg.m/s²
Push
Pull
F
F
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1 (a) Force exerted on the table (b) Force exerted on the ball
96
Grade 11
Apart from changing the speed or direction of motion of a body or both, force can
also change the shape or size of a body. A tennis ball hit by a racket is deformed to
some extent. Such an effect is called deformation.
A force can be either a contact force or a field force. Forces that result from
physical contact between two bodies are called contact forces. A girl stretching a
spring, a man pulling a box on the floor, and a girl kicking a ball are few examples
of contact forces.
On the other hand forces like gravitational attraction between the Sun and the
Earth, the electrostatic force between charged particles, and magnetic force
between a magnet and magnetic substances that operate at a distance are known
as field forces.
The known fundamental forces in nature are all field forces. These are, in order
of decreasing strength:
1. the strong nuclear force between subatomic particles;
2. the electromagnetic forces between electric charges;
3. the weak nuclear force, which arises in certain radioactive decay processes; and
4. the gravitational force between objects.
The strong force keeps the nucleus of an atom from flying apart due to the
repulsive electric force of the protons. The weak force is involved in most
radioactive processes and plays an important role in the nuclear reactions that
generate the Sun's energy output. The strong and weak forces operate only on the
nuclear scale, with a very short range on the order of 10-15 m.
In this section we will use two new concepts, force and mass, to analyze the
principles of dynamics. These principles were clearly stated for the first time by
Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727); today we call them Newton's laws of motion.
Key terms
Dynamics: The subdivision of mechanics that deals with the motion of objects in
relation to the physical factor that causes the motion, the force.
Force: An external agent of a body that changes state of rest or state of motion
of that body.
97
Physics
Student Text Book
Isaac Newton was one of the most brilliant scientists in
history. Before the age of 30, he formulated the basic
concepts and laws of mechanics, discovered the law of
universal gravitation, and invented the mathematical
methods of calculus. As a consequence of his theories,
Newton was able to explain the motions of the planets,
the ebb and flow of the tides, and many special
features of the motions of the Moon and the Earth.
He also interpreted many fundamental observations
concerning the nature of light. His contributions to
Figure 4.2 Isaac Newton
physical theories dominated scientific thought for two
English physicist and math-
centuries and remain important today. (Giraudon/Art
ematician
Resource)
Laws of Motion
Newton's First Law of Motion
?
Brainstorming
Suppose you are in a stationary car. What will happen to you if the car suddenly
starts to move forward? Suppose now you are in a moving car. What will
happen to you if the driver hits the pedal and the car suddenly brakes to stop?
How do the forces that act on a body affect its motion? To begin to answer this
question, let's first consider what happens when the net force on a body is zero.
Consider a book placed on your desk. What will happen to the book if you leave
it there for a long time? Your response will obviously be 'it will remain at rest'. You
would almost certainly agree that if a body is at rest, and if no net force acts on it
(that is, no net push or pull), that body will remain at rest. But what if there is zero
net force acting on a body in motion.
To see what happens in this case, do the following activity.
?
Activity 4.1
1. Slide a hockey puck along a horizontal tabletop as described following the
three steps:
(a) Place the puck on the table Figure 4.3 a. Apply a horizontal force and
once it is in motion stop pushing it.
98
Grade 11
(b) Repeat step (a) but now cover the table top with a smooth surface of ice,
Figure 4.3b.
(c) Repeat step (a) by putting the puck on an air-hockey table, where it floats
on a thin cushion of air, Figure 4.3 c.
Write down your observation in each of the three cases. Is there a difference in
distance covered by the puck before it stopped? What do you think is the reason for
this?
1s,
Is2
S3
Puck on a table
Puck on an icy surface S₁ > S₂
Puck on an air-hockey table S3 S₂
Figure 4.3 A puck pushed horizontally on three surfaces of different nature. Compare the
distances.
From the results of the above activity, one can conclude that if we could eliminate
friction completely, the puck would never slow down, and we would need no force
at all to keep the puck moving once it had been started. Once a body has been set in
motion, no net force is needed to keep it moving. We call this observation Newton's
first law of motion:
Newton's first law of motion
"An object at rest remains in a state of rest and an object in motion continues in To-
tion along a straight line with constant speed unless an external force acts upon it.
"
Newton's first law of motion is also called the law of inertia. The property of a body
to remain at rest or to remain in motion with constant velocity is called inertia.
Key term
Inertia: The tendency of a body to oppose any change in its state of rest or its state
of uniform motion.
It is more difficult to change the state of motion of a truck than that of a small bajaj
(a three wheel taxi in many parts of Ethiopia). This is because the mass of the truck
is much larger than that of the bajaj, Figure 4.4. As the mass of the bajaj is small, a
single person can pull or push it which is unthinkable for the truck. This property of
99
Physics
I
Student Text Book
maintaining state of motion is called the inertia. mass is a measure of imertia.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4 Inertia is larger for large masses than for small masses.
?
Activity 4.2
Material required: Two medium-size cans, tow strings and a horizontal fixed beam
from which the cans can be suspended, Figure 4.5.
Procedure
Fill one of the cans with sand and leave the other one empty.
a) Try to set the cans in motion. What difference did you observe?
b) Now pull the cans to one side (to the same height) and release themTry to
stop the cans one after the other. What did you experience? Discuss with
your classmates about the difficulties you faced in terms of the forces you
are required to set the cans in motion (case (a)) or to stop them (case
(b)).
Figure 4.5 Large masses have larger inertia than small masses
100
Grade 11
Some examples of Applications of Newton's first law
You have heard about the importance of safety belts to protect passengers in a car
or in an airplane or in a bus from severe damage during accidents. The probability
of facing severe injury to the extent of death when an accident occurs is very high
on people who do not fasten seat belts.
The question is: Why Seat belts? What is the physics behind Seat belts?
The answer is Newton's first law of motion. If a car is moving with a speed of
80km/h, all passengers in the car are moving with a speed of 80km/h. If the car
suddenly stops for reasonable case, the passenger who fastened seat belt remains
intact with the body of the car and stops with the car safely, Figure 4.6a. On the
other case, the passenger who doesn't fasten seat belt is in a loose state from the
body of the car and when the car abruptly stops, according to Newton's first law,
the passenger continues its motion with 80km/h and collide to anything in front
of him such as to the steering wheel, Figure 4.6b or even may smash againes the
windshied of the car which may lead to severe injury and death. Modern cars
have airbags on the steering wheel or on the dashboard, Figure 4.7, to protect
passengers from severe injury by giving cushion during accidents. However,
airbags are designed to emerge automatically only when the car collided with
something. Therefore, passengers should always fasten their seatbelts.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6 A passenger without a seat belt will suffer injury during an accident.
Figure 4.7 Airbag systems in vehicles are designed to deply during vehicle collision
101
Physics
Student Text Book
?
Activity 4.3
Fun with Inertia
Materials
Glass tumbler
Small, stiff piece of cardboard
Coins
Ruller
(a)
Figure 4.8 Inertia at rest
Procedure 1: Refer Figure 4.8a.
(a) Put a playing card on top of the plastic cup
(b) Put a coin on top of the card
(c) With a sharp flick, hit the card out from under the coin.
Question: What happened to the coin? Explain your observation interms of
Newton's First law of motion.
The motion of a body can only be described relative to other bodies. Bodies with
which motion of a body can be compared are known as frames of reference. Frame
of reference can be catagorized as Inertial frame of reference and Non-inertial frame
of reference.
A frame reference which is at rest or moves with a constant velocity is known as an
inertial frame of reference. A stationary car or a car traveling at constant velocity
is an inertial frame of reference. A car slowing down for a stoplight, or speeding
up after the light turns green, will be accelerating and is not an inertial frame of
reference. Such a frame of reference is known as Non-inertial frame of reference.
An inertial frame of reference is the type of frame where Newton's laws hold true.
If no outside force is exerted on an object, it will continue to stay in state of rest or
uniform motion.
102
Grade 11
Newton's Second Law of Motion
?
Brainstorming
Based on your knowledge of kinematics discuss the difference between moving
with uniform velocity and having acceleration.
What is the cause of acceleration?
A net external force and a system are the main focus of this section in which the
cause effect relation of net force and acceleration will be discussed. The concepts of
weight, normal force, and friction force and how they are related to each other and
some applications of Newton's law are also the focus of interest in this section.
Newton's second law of motion is closely related to and is a consequence of Newton's
first law of motion. According to the first law, a body persists to its state of motion
or rest unless an unbalanced force acts on it." The question is: What will happen to
the object if an unbalanced force acts on it? The answer was given by Newton after
simple experiments and inquiries (refer Figure 4.9.)
+
m
THE
m
a
+
m
m
m
m
1
b
m
m
m
1
m
à
m
m
m
m
Figure 4.9 Demonstrating Newton's second law of motion. See how the acceleration is af-
fected (a) when the force is changed for a constant mass and (b) when the mass is changed
for a constant force
Inquiry I: What will happen if a force F is applied to an object of mass m which
is initially at rest on a horizontal smooth surface where friction is
negligible?
(Answer): By observation, it moves with some velocity in the direction of the applied
force.)
Inquiry II: How does it move as long as the force is maintained? (Answer: The velocity
is increasing uniformly through time. That means it is accelerating
uniformly).
103
Physics | Student Text Book
Inquiry III: What will happen to the magnitude of the acceleration if the force
is doubled, or tripled, while the mass is kept unchanged? (Answer:
Experimentally as the force is doubled the acceleration is doubled as
shown in Figure 4.9a a. The acceleration is therefore directly proportional
to the applied force.)
Inquiry IV: What will happen to the magnitude of the acceleration if the mass is
doubled, or tripled, while the force is kept unchanged? (Experimentally,
for the constant force, as the mass is doubled the acceleration is reduced
by half, when the mass is tripled, the acceleration is reduced by one-
third and so on as shown in Figure 4.9 b. The acceleration is therefore
inversely proportional to the mass.)
The answers for inquiries I through IV with an illustrative demonstration of Figure
4.9 collectively give the full statement of Newton's second law that can be stated as
follows.
Newton's Second Law of motion
"When an unbalanced force acts on an object of mass T, the object accelerates in the
direction of the applied force with the magnitude of acceleration directly proportional to
the net applied force and inversely proportional to the mass of the object."
Mathematically Newton's second law can be expressed as
a~F~anda~1
We write a
The constant of proportionality k is equal to one, so in mathematical terms the
preceding statement can be written
a = k m
Rearranging in a linear form,
Key terms
Net force: The sum of two or more forces (Resultant force)
Acceleration: The time rate of change of velocity. It could happen when a body
changes its speed or direction of motion or both.
System: A collection of objects, elements or components that are organized for a
common purpose. Anything outside the system is the surrounding.
The SI unit of force, newton, in terms of the three basic quantities of measurement
in mechanics: length mass and time is expressed as
104
Grade 11
1 newton = 1kg m²
(SI unit of force in terms the basic units)
Large quantities of forces can also be expressed in kilo newton (kN); 1kN=1000N
?
Activity 4.4
Group work
Explore the relationship between Force, Mass, and Acceleration.
Problem
If you pull an object with a force, how do force and mass affect the acceleration
of the object?
Materials
Dynamics cart with hook, two 200-g standard masses, one 1 kg standard mass,
spring scale (0 -5 N) smooth, and a flat surface (about 2 m long), Figure 4.10.
Loaded cart
Spring scale
Force
Figure 4.10 Set up of the materials
Procedure
A. Place the 200 g standard masses on the cart and attach the spring scale to
the hook on the cart.
B. Pull the spring scale so that the cart starts to accelerate forward. Pull the
spring with a constant force of 3 N. Keep the force as constant as possible
while pulling the cart and observe the acceleration of the cart.
C. Replace the 200 g masses on the cart with the 1kg standard mass. Then
pull the cart applying the same force you used in step B. Observe the
acceleration of the cart.
D. Place the 1 kg standard mass on the cart and now pull the cart applying a
constant force of 4 N. Observe the acceleration of the cart.
105
Physics
Student Text Book
E. Repeat step D but this time pull with a force of 2 N. Observe the acceleration
of the cart.
Answer the following questions based on your observation.
1. What can you say from your observation in steps B and C? How did the mass
affect the acceleration for a constant force?
2. What can you conclude from what you observed in steps D and E? How did
the force affect the acceleration for a constant mass?
3. What did you find difficult in this activity? What other techniques can you
suggest to keep the force applied on the spring constant? Discuss with your
group members.
Newton's third Law of Motion
?
Brainstorming
If you drop your pencil at a certain height, it falls downward due to the force that the
Earth exerts on the pencil. Can you say that the pencil in turn exerts force on Earth?
Why is it difficult to walk on sand than on a solid ground?
When a body exerts a force on a second body, the second body exerts a force on the
first body which is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. Figure 4.11 shows
some of the common action-reaction pairs.
If you hit down a nail with a hammer, the nail hits the hammer back with a force
of the same size. A typical application of Newton's third law is the propulsion of a
rocket while hot gas is exhausted from the rocket.
Reaction:
Reaction: Rocket
Force of nail on
moving upward
the hammer
Action:
Force on the
Force of hamme
on the nail
Action:
gas
Hot gas ejected
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11 Action and reaction pairs. Forces are always in pairs and for every action
there is an equal and opposite reaction
Key terms
Action and reaction: During an ineaction between two objects the force one exerts
on the other is Action and the force it is acted upon by the other is Reaction
106
Grade 11
Exercise 4.1
Discribe the action and reaction pairs a) as you walk on the ground,
b) as a player kicks a ball
Newton's third law is popularly expressed as:
"For every action there is always an equal and opposite reaction."
In Figure 4.12, it is clearly seen that the boy is pushing the girl but it is not obvious
that the girl is pushing back on the boy. In fact when both the boy and the girl move
in opposite directions immediately after interaction, it becomes clear that the boy is
affected by the force that the girl exerted on him. Can you identify the action and
reaction forces in this case?
FGB
F
BG
Boy
Girl
Figure 4.12 Action and reaction are equal and opposite F BG--FBG
?
Activity 4.5
Discuss with your classmate
Imagine a fat person and a thin person that are running in opposite directions
accidentally collide with each other. If the thin person falls backward while the fat
person stands still, what can you say about the forces the persons exerted on one
another? Give your reason in terms of Newton's third law of motion.
Misconception alert
Action and reaction forces, though they are equal in magnitude and opposite in
direction, they act on two different bodies. Therefore they cannot be added to give
a zero resultant!!!
107
Physics I Student Text Book
Weight and the Gravitational Force
When an object is dropped, it accelerates toward the center of the Earth. According
to Newton's second law, acceleration is the effect caused by a force. Therefore, a
falling object, experiences a downward force known as weight of the object denoted
by w. The magnitude of the weight is the product of mass (m) and the value of
acceleration due to gravity g. Weight is a vector whose direction is always down
towards the center of the Earth.
Mathematically,
Weight = (mass) (acceleration due to gravity)
W = mg
Near to the surface of the earth, the magnitude of g is 9.8m/s²
Question
Is weight of a body the same everywhere? Discuss you answer.
Example 4.1
What is the weight of a 1 kg block on the surface of the moon where acceleration
due to gravity is only one-sixth of its value on the surface of the Earth?
Solution
Weight W = mgm, where gm = 1 (g) = (9.8m/s²) = 1.6m/s²
W = (1kg) (1.6m/s²) = 1.6N
An object on the moon weighs one-sixth as much as it does on the surface of the
Earth.
This example depicts that the weight of an object is not an intrinsic property, as its
value varies from place to place depending on the value of acceleration due to gravity
g.
When an object is released in air, it experiences a downward force due to its weight
and a drug force due to friction with the air. When the net force acting on the object
is assumed to be gravity only, we say that the body is in free fall. The gravitational
force (Fg) on a freely falling body is thus its weight (W).
(F) = W = mg
108
Grade 11
Misconception Alert
In everyday language, it is common to interchangeably use mass and weight.
However in science, these terms are different from one another. Mass, measured in
kilograms, is the measure of how much matter is in an object and it characterizes
the inertial properties of a body. Weight on the other hand is a measure of the force
of gravity acting on an object and measured in newton.
Normal Force
If you place your book on a table top as shown in the Figure 4.13, then a downward
gravitational force, m, is exerted on the book, but the book is still intact on the table.
What keeps the book intact on
FN
the table? The upward force that
supports the book is the Normal
Force, denoted by FN. The normal
force is perpendicular to the surface
that supports the book.
Weight
W
Figure 4.13 Normal force and weight for a
book placed on a horizontal surface.
Normal force is a type of contact force - two objects or surfaces have to touch for
there to be a normal force.
Since the book is in equilibrium, the net force acting on the book is zero. Therefore,
on a level surface the normal force is equal to the weight.
F = w = mg
Note that as the name implies normal force is always normal (perpendicular) to
the surface. Thus the weight and the normal force are equal only when the object is
placed on a level surface. In most cases objects are placed on non-leveled surfaces
such as on an inclined plane as shown in Figure 4.14. The normal force is less than
the weight by a factor of cos Θ. As Θ is increased the normal force that supports the
object is decreased and it will be zero when Θ is 90⁰. When Θ is 0°, as in Figure 4.14
the inclined plane becomes a level surface and obviously the normal force will be
equal to the weight.
109
Physics
I
Student Text Book
F
N
W sin Θ
Θ
W cos Θ
Θ
W
Figure 4.14 A block on an inclined plane
Fₙ = W cos Θ = mg cos Θ
Key terms
Weight: The gravitational pull on an object
Normal forces: A force with which to objects push one another and acting
perpendicularly at the surface of contact
?
Activity 4.6
Place your book on a horizontal surface, Figure 4.15a. What is the normal force on
the block? Now raise one side of the surface slowly as in Figure 4.15b and answer
the following questions based on your observation.
a) What is the force that tends to slide the block down the surface?
c) What is the force that keeps the block on the inclined surface?
d) Did the block slide down the plane the moment you started to raise the
surface? If your answer is no, what kept the block from sliding at that
instant?
e) For what angle of elevation did the block start sliding?
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.15 A block on a horizontal surface and inclined surface
110
Grade 11
Example 4.2
If in figure 4.15b, the mass of the block is 6 kg resting on top of a 37° inclined
plane, determine the weight and the normal force.
Solution:
The weight of the block is: W = mg = (6 kg) (9.8 m/s²) = 58.8 N.
The normal force is: FN = mgcosΘ = (6 kg) (9.8 m/s²) cos37° = 47 N
Review Questions 4.1
1. What are contact forces and field forces? Give examples of each.
2. List down the four fundamental forces in nature and arrange them in the order
of increasing strength.
3. State the three Newton's laws of motion.
4. How are inertia and mass related?
FGB
FBG
5. Discuss the advantages of wearing seat belt in a car?
6. What is the advantage of having airbag in a car?
7. Discuss the dependence of acceleration of a body with its mass and net force
applied on it.
8. What is the relationship between weight and mass? Which is an intrinsic,
unchanging property of a body?
9. Identify the action and reaction forces in the following situations: (a) Earth
attracts the Moon, (b) a boy kicks a football, (c) a rocket accelerates upward,
(d) a car accelerates forward, (e) a high jumper leaps, and (f) a bullet is shot
from a gun.
10. A block of mass m is placed on a horizontal surface as shown in Figure 4.16.
What is the normal force in each of the following cases?
m
m
m
Fig 4.16
11. (a) If gold were sold by weight, would you rather buy it in Addis Ababa or in
Alaska?
(b) If it were sold by mass, in which of the two locations would you prefer to
buy it? Why?
111
Physics
Student Text Book
4.2 Frictional Force
At the end of completion of this section you should be able to:
describe the general characteristics of friction
list the various types of friction
calculate the magnitude of static and kinetic friction, and use these in
problems involving Newton's laws of motion
solve more complex acceleration problems involving Newton's laws of
motion.
use free-body diagrams to solve problems on Newton's Laws of motion.
?
Brainstorming
What is the role of friction in our daily life?
Can you get rid of friction?
Mention pros and cons of frictional force?
Friction is a type of force that We experience in our everyday activity. Friction,
in simple terms is a force that opposes motion. It occurs when two surfaces are in
contact with each other and when one surface slides or attempts to slide over the
other. Friction occurs due to the roughness of the surfaces in contact. Even if the
surface seem very smooth, it is not so at micro or nano scale, Figure 4.17.
Direction of motion
or attempted motion
F
Magnified view of
Contacting surfaces
F ᵉ
Figure 4.17 Magnified view of surfaces in contact
Friction helps us to move while we walk by preventing us from slipping. Without
friction between the tires and the road we couldn't drive or turn the car. Without the
frictional force exerted by the air on a body moving through it (air drag), parachutes
do not work. Without friction nails would pull out, light bulbs would unscrew
effortlessly. See Figure 4.18.
112
Grade 11
Direction of mtion
of the person
The foot exerts force
The ground applies a
backward against the
static frictional force
ground
forward against the foot
Air resistance
(Drag force)
Direction of motion
of the car
Rotation of
the wheel
Frictional force betweer
tire and the ground
Gravitational force
(Weight)
Figure 4.18 Friction force in action (a) Friction on the foot of a walking person
(b) Friction on the wheel of a moving car (c) Drag force on a parachute
There are two types of friction:Static friction and Kinetic friction. Static friction is
the friction between two surfaces when there is no movement. Suppose you pull a
block slightly along a table top, Figure 4.19a. The block will not move with such a
small force that you apply. What do you think is the reason for this? The force that
keeps the block form sliding is the force of static friction denoted by (F) and is
directed opposite to the applied force.
Motion
Applied force
Applied force
Fs
Fₖ
Static frictional force
Kinetic frictional force
(a) The block at rest
(b) The block in motion
Figure 4.19 Static friction and kinetic friction
Kinetic friction: Kinetic friction is the friction between two surfaces when one of
them is sliding over the other. For example, when the block that you push begins
to slide over the table, Figure 4.19b, there is force of kinetic friction denoted by (Ft)
between the bottom surface of the block and the table top.
113
Physics
I Student Text Book
Key terms
Friction: a force that opposes the motion of one surface over another.
Static friction: Friction between two contacting surfaces at rest.
Kinetic friction: Friction between two surfaces while one slides over the other.
Frictional force is directly related to the normal force and its value depends upon
the property of the surfaces in contact. This property of material that resists motion
is called the coefficient of friction (µ), which is defined as the ratio between the
friction force and the normal force. Mathematically,
Frictional force
Coefficient of friction = Normal force
or symbolically
Coefficient of friction is a dimensionless number.
We write Fₛ = µₛ, for static frictional force, where µₛ is coefficient of static friction.
Fₖ = µₖFₙ, for kinetic frictional force, where Uₖ is coefficient of kinetic friction.
The maximum value of static friction
The maximum value of static friction is known as limiting friction and it is the
frictional force between the surfaces when the body just begins to slide. Static friction
is less than or equal to the product of coefficient of static friction (µs) and the normal
force (Fₙ).
The maximum value being Fs = µsFN
Once the static friction gives way to kinetic friction, i.e., the block is in motion, it
is easier to keep it in motion than it was to get it started, indicating that the kinetic
frictional force is less than the static frictional force.
Kinetic friction is less than static friction.
Fₖ < Fs <
and H<Mk <
Note that
Unlike the kinetic friction force, the static friction force takes on any value between
zero and its maximum value of µₛFₙ, depending on the magnitude of the applied
force. It could take any value between zero to its limiting value.
114
Grade 11
Group work
Consider a block of wood placed at rest on a horizontal laboratory table and that
a horizontal force is applied on the block to get it moving along the surface. The
applied force versus frictional force is plotted as in Figure 4.20. Discuss the graph
with your classmates.
FN
FN
motion
F
F
F,
F,
mg
mg
Frictional force
F. max = Hs. FN
THE
Fx = P& FN
o
Applied force
Static region
Kinetic region
Figure 4.20 Plotting frictional force versus applied force
?
Activity 4.7
Relating static friction and normal force
Materials: Four identical blocks of known mass
A horizontal board
A spring scale
A graph paper
Procedure
1. Place one of the blocks on the board.
2. Attach the spring scale to the block, Figure 4.21a. Pull the block with an ever-
increasing horizontal force until the block just begins to move. Take the reading
of the scale.
115
Physics I Student Text Book
3. Increase the mass of the system by placing an identical block over the first
block, Figure 4.21b. Repeat step 2 and take the reading of the scale.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.21
4. Repeat step 3 two more times first with three blocks and then with four blocks.
5. Prepare a table and fill in the scale readings and the corresponding masses
used.
6. On a graph paper draw a graph of the reading of the scale versus the weight.
Draw a line of best fit and calculate the slope of the graph.
Question: What is the relationship between the maximum magnitude of the force
of static friction and the magnitude of the normal force? Write this as a
proportionality statement.
Example 4.3
An 8 kg block is placed on a horizontal surface. The coefficient of static friction
and that of kinetic friction between the block and surface are 0.4, and 0.35,
respectively.
A) What is the horizontal force just enough to start moving the block?
B) What horizontal force must be applied on the block to keep it
uniformly accelerating at 4 m/s2?
Solution
Given: m = 8 kg, µₛ = 0.4, µₖ = 0.3
A) The block is in a limiting equilibrium, so that the friction force will be
Fₛ = µₛFₙ, but FN = mg (since the block is on a level surface the
normal force is equal to the weight).
Therefore, Fs = µₘg = (0.4) (8 kg) (9.8 m/s²) = 31.4 N
B) As the block accelerates the net force that accelerates the block is the
vector sum of the applied force and the kinetic frictional force.
That is Fₙₑₜ = F app - Fₖ Fₙₑₜ = ma = (8kg)(4m/s²) = 32N, and Fₖ =
µₖᵐg = (0.3) (8 kg) (9.8 m/s²) = 23.5 N
thus, F app = F + = 32 N + 23.5 N = 55.5 N
116
Grade 11
Table 4.1 Coefficient of static and kinetic friction of some materials
Material
Against Material
Static friction
Kinetic friction
Glass
Glass
0.94
0.4
Rubber
Asphalt (dry)
0.85
0.67
Rubber
Asphalt (wet)
0.58
Rubber
Concrete(dry)
0.90
0.68
Wood
Wood
0.42
0.3
Steel
Aluminum
0.61
0.47
Steel
Copper
0.53
0.36
Steel
Steel
0.74
0.57
?
Activity 4.8
Group work
Set up an experiment to verify that of smoothness or roughness of a surface affects
the frictional fore between objects in contact?
?
Activity 4.9
In order to minimize accidents, it is advisable to drive slower during rainy season
than during dry season. What application of physics can you relate to this traffic
advice?
?
Activity 4.10
Interleave your books to each other
until they reach to approximately
3cm in thickness as shown in Figure
4.22. Try to separate the books after
interleaving by pulling them apart.
MANING
Why do you think it is very hard to
separate the books by pulling?
Figure 4.22 Interleaving the pages of two
books
117
Physics I Student Text Book
Did you know?
Natural lubricants include saliva produced in our mouth to aid in the swallowing process,
and the slippery mucus found between organs in the body, allowing them to move freely
past each other during heartbeats, during breathing, and when a person moves.
Example 4.4
A 6 kg block is placed on a ramp that makes an angle of 30° above the horizontal,
Figure 4.23a. If the block remains at rest,
A) what is the static friction that supports the block from sliding down the
ramp?
B) what is the coefficient of static friction between the block and the ramp?
Fs
mg sin Θ
30°
30°
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.23 A block on a ramp
As shown in Figure 4.23b, the force that tends to move the block down the ramp
is mg sinΘ and the one that prevented sliding is static friction Fₛ. The normal force
between the ramp and the block is FN = mg cosΘ.
A) Under the condition where the block is at rest we write,
Fₙₑₜ = 0 mg sinΘ-Fₛ = 0
Fₛ S = mg sinΘ = (6 kg) 30°) = 29.4 N
mg (6kg)(9.8m/s²)(cos30°) 29.4N = 0.58
See that mg sin Θ - Fs = 0, we have mg sin Θ - µₛmg Θ = 0
118
Grade 11
Example 4.5
A 6 kg block is placed on a ramp that makes an angle of 30° above the horizontal,
Figure 4.23a. If the block remains at rest,
A) what is the static friction that supports the block from sliding down
the ramp?
B) what is the coefficient of static friction between the block and the
ramp?
Some applications of Newton's Laws of motion
A free-body diagram
In order to easily understand and apply Newton's laws to solve practical problems
we need to know the use of a free-body diagram. A free-body diagram is a graphic,
dematerialized, symbolic representation of the body. In a free-body diagram, the
size of the arrow denotes the magnitude of the force. While the direction of the
arrow denotes the direction in which the force acts, Figure 4.24. For the block
of example 4.4, what acceleration would the block attain once it is set in motion
down the plane? (Take µₖ = 0.5)
FN
FN
y
Fy
F
F
X
Θ
Θ
Fx
Θ
W
W
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.24 (a) A moving sled (b) free-body diagram (c) free-body diagram with force
components
Solution:
When the block accelerates down the plane, we write
F net = ma
mg sin Θ - Fₖ = ma
mg (sin Θ - µₖ cos = ma
To draw a free-body diagram, we draw the object of interest, draw all forces acting
on the object, and resolve all force vectors into X and y components as required. We
119
Physics I Student Text Book
must draw a separate free-body diagram for each object in the problem. There are
many advantages of drawing free-body diagram. It is a medium to convert ideas into
a physical model. It also helps in understanding all facts of a problem. It assists in
building up suitable mathematical equations between various forces acting upon
link.
Key term
Free-Body Diagram: The most important step in solving a problem by means of
Newton's second law. It is a drawing that includes only those forces that act
directly on the object of interest
Example 4.6
Two blocks of identical materials are connected by a light string on a level surface
(Figure 4.25). Assuming no friction between the blocks and the level surface, find
the acceleration of the masses and the tension in the connecting string when the
string attached to m₁ is pulled to the right by a 36 N force. Use m1 = 4 kg and m2 =
8 kg.
m₂
m1
a
a
F
T
(a)
m₁
m₂
(b)
Figure 4.25
Solution:
Given: m₁ = 4 kg, m2 = 8 kg, F = 36 N
The blocks move together to the right under the action of force F. Writing Newton's
second law for each block we have
For m₁, F - T = m₁a
For m₂, T = m₂a
Adding the above equations we get
F=m,a+m,a=(m,+m,)a
F
a =
m₁ + m₂
Substituting the given values we obtain a = 3 m/s².
Using a 3 m/s² in T = m2a we get T = 24 N
120
Grade 11
Example 4.7
For the system of masses in Example 4.6, find the acceleration of the masses if the
coefficient of kinetic friction between each of the blocks and the level surface is
0.25.
Solution
given: m₁ = 4 kg, m2 = 8 kg, F = 36 N, µₖ = 0.25
This time the free-body diagram will include frictional forces on the blocks as in
Figure 4.26.
a
a
a
a
T
F
T
T
F
T
my
m₂
Ff1
Ff2
m₁
F12
m₂
F11
Figure 4.26 Free-body diagram
Writing Newton's second law of motion for each of the blocks as:
Adding these two equations, we get
Substituting values, we obtain
m₁ +m₂
Example 4.8
Two masses (m₁ = 4kg and m2 = 6kg), are connected by a light cord that passes over
a massless, frictionless pulley as shown in Figure 4.27a. This arrangement is called
Atwood's machine and sometimes is used to measure the acceleration due to gravity.
Find the magnitude of acceleration of the two masses and the tension in the cord.
Solution:
We construct a free-body diagram for the two masses as shown in Figure 4.27b,
and we identify the forces acting on each of the masses separately. m₁ is under the
action of the tension force on the string and its own weight while m₂ is under the
action of the tension force and its weight.
121
Physics I Student Text Book
When the system is released, m₁ moves upward while m2 moves downward.
Newton's second law is applied to m₁ in part (b) of the figure, we find:
Fₙₑₜ = m₁a
T - m₁g = m₁a
Also, we do the same for m2 of part (c) of the figure, to get:
Fₙₑₜ = m₂a
m₂g - T = m₁a
T
T
a
m₁
m₂
a
m₁
4 kg
6 kg
m₂
mig
m₂g
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.27: a) System of masses m₂ > m₁ attached by a rope over a friction-
less pulley, b)free-body diagram and direction of acceleration for m1
c) free body diagram and the direction of the acceleration for m₂
In the above two equations we have two unknowns the acceleration and the tension.
Adding the equations T = m₁a and T = m₂a, T will be cancelled out and
we get:
m₂g -m₁g = m₂a+ma
g(m₂-m₁)=(m₁+m₂)a
The acceleration is therefore,
m₁
m₂ and m₁ in the equation we get
Substituting this value of acceleration into one of the equations T m₁g = we
get
122
Grade 11
Tension Forces
When an object attached to a string (or a cable) is pulled by means of a pulling force
exerted on the string, the force on the string is called a tension force. The tension
force acts along the direction of the string and exerts a force both on the object and
on the person exerting force on the cable, as illustrated in Figure 4.28. If the mass of
the given cable is neglected, the same tension acts on both the object and the person
T
Figure 4.28 A man pulling a block
Vertical Tension force on a static object
The mass in Figure 4.29 is suspended from a vertical string. As the mass is not moving
it is in equilibrium and its acceleration is zero. Applying Newton's second law along
the y direction we write
Fₙₑₜ = ma
TE-
T - mg = ma
m
T-mg=0
Figure 4.29 The tension in the string supports the weight
Vertical tension force on an accelerating mass
The string attached to an object is pulled upward under such tension that it accelerates
the object upward (Figure 4.30). In this case the tension supports the weight and also
accelerates the object upward. Applying Newton's second law along the y axis we
write
123
Physics
I
Student Text Book
T
TE-
a
Fₙₑₜ = ma
a
m
T - mg = ma
T-mg=0
mg
T = m (g + a)
Figure 4.30 An object hangs by a string in an elevator accelerating upward
Exercise 4.2
What would the tension in the string be if the elevator of Figure 4.30
(a) is at rest?
(b) accelerates downward?
(c) accelerates upward?
(d) decelerates downward?
Review Questions 4.2
1. Walking on horizontal slippery ice can be much more tiring than walking on
ordinary pavement. Why?
2. You often hear people say that "friction always opposes motion." Give at least
one example where (a) static friction causes motion, and (b) kinetic friction
causes motion
3. If you push on a heavy box that is at rest, you must exert some force to start its
motion. Once the box is sliding, why does a smaller force maintain its motion?
4. A 25 kg block is initially at rest on a horizontal surface. A horizontal force of
75 N is required to set the block in motion. After it is in motion, a horizontal
force of 60 N is required to keep the block moving with constant speed. Find
the coefficients of static and kinetic friction from this information.
5. If a car is traveling westward with a constant speed of 20 m/s, what is the
resultant force acting on it?
6. What will happen to the tension in the string of Figure 4.30, if the cables of the
elevator suddenly break and the elevator falls freely?
7. A person weighs a fish of mass m on a spring scale attached to the ceiling of
an elevator. What can you say about the motion of the elevator if the reading
of the scale is (a) equal to mg? (b) greater that mg? (c) less than mg?
8. A block is placed on a smooth inclined plane shown in Figure 4.31. What
124
Grade 11
force parallel to the surface of the inclined plane is require to move the block
up the plane at (a) a constant speed? (b) a constant acceleration of 0.5 m/s2?
È
8
Figure 4.31 A mass on an inclined surface
9. Repeat question 8 if the coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and
the inclined surface is 0.25.
10. A ball of mass m1 and a block of mass m2 are attached by a lightweight cord
that passes over a frictionless pulley of negligible mass, as in Figure 4.32.
The block lies on a frictionless incline of angle Θ. Find the magnitude of the
acceleration of the two objects in terms of m₁, m2, g and Θ
ta
mg
F
8
Figure 4.32
11. The driver of a speeding empty truck slams on the brakes and skids to a stop
through a distance d. (a) If the truck carried a load that doubled its mass, what
would be the truck's skidding distance? (b) If the initial speed of the truck
were halved, what would be the truck's skidding distance?
125
Physics I Student Text Book
4.3 The First Condition of Equilibrium
At the end of completion of this section you should be able to:
define the term equilibrium
explain the first condition of equilibrium
apply the first condition of equilibrium to solve practical problems.
?
Brainstorming
What will happen to an object when it is under the action of balanced set of forces?
If an object is either at rest or moves uniformly including translational (linear) as
well as rotational motion it is said to be in equilibrium. In this section we shall focus
on one dimensional motion. If a body is at rest or moves at a constant speed in a fixed
direction (constant velocity) then it is in translational equilibrium. This statement
defines the first condition of equilibrium.
If an object is in equilibrium, its acceleration is zero and according to Newton's
second law of motion, the vector sum of all the forces acting on it must be zero.
ΣF=0 (The first condition of equilibrium)
For n number of forces acting on a object, we write
This equation can be written component wise as
and
Key term:
Equilibrium: a word that describes a state of rest or uniform motion along a fixed
direction of a body.
Example 4.9
A traffic light weighing 100 N hangs from a vertical cable tied to two other cables
that are fastened to a support, as in Figure 4.33a. The upper cables make angles of
37° and 53° with the horizontal. Find the tension in each of the three cables.
126
Grade 11
T,
37°
53°
T,
T2
T1
T2
37°
53°
T3
W
T,
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.33 A traffic light suspended from two strings Solution
Solution
Drawing a free-body diagram is highly helpful in solving problems involving
Newton's laws. As shown in the free-body diagram, the traffic light is under the
action of three tension forces, T1, T2 and T3. For it is in equilibrium, we write
Σ F = 0
But from Figure b, T₃ = W and we have T1 + T2 + W = 0
Breaking the forces into their components and applying the first condition of
equilibrium we have
T₂cos 53° - T₁ COS 37° = 0 0.6T2 - 0.8T₁ = 0
Σ Fy = 0, T₂y - T₁y - W = 0 T₂sin 53° - T₂sin 37° = W 0.8T2 - 0.6T₁ = 100N
Solving for T₁ and T₂ we get T₁ = 60N and T2 = 80N
?
Activity 4.11
If an object is at rest, it is necessarily in equilibrium. Is this statement correct?
Discuss your answer.
Review questions 4.3
1. If only one force acts on an object, can it be in equilibrium?
Explain.
2. If an object is in equilibrium, which of the following statements is not true?
(a) The speed of the object remains constant
(b) The acceleration of the object is zero.
(c) The net force acting on the object is zero.
(d) The object must be at rest.
(e) The velocity is constant.
127
Physics
Student Text Book
3. What is wrong with the
statement "Because the car is at
rest, there are no forces acting on it"?
e
How would you correct this sentence?
4. Can an object be in equilibrium if it is
in motion? Explain.
5. Mass m= 10kg is supported by two
M
strings is in equilibrium as shown in
Figure 4.34. Find the tension in the
horizontal string. Take Θ = 53°
Figure 4.34 A mass in equilibrium
4.4 Work, Energy and Power
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define work in terms of the applied force and the displacement.
calculate the work done by a constant force, by a varying force.
demonstrate by examples that maximum work is done when the applied force
is parallel to the displacement vector.
apply work-energy theorem to solve problems.
calculate kinetic energy and potential energy of a body.
differentiate between conservative and non-conservative forces.
explain the law of the conservation of energy.
solve problems by applying the law of conservation of energy.
define power and solve problems involving power.
?
Brainstorming
What do you mean by the term work in your everyday language? When do you
consider that you did some work?
Work, in general, is the means of transferring energy from one body to another or a
means of transforming energy from one form to another. For instance, if you raise a
load from the floor to the top of a shelf, energy is transferred from your muscles to
the load and in the process chemical energy is converted into potential energy of the
128
Grade 11
load. Energy, which is defined as the capacity to do work, has important features:
it exists in different forms and it is converted from one form to another with the
total amount being constant. It cannot be created or destroyed. In an automobile
engine, chemical energy stored in the fuel is converted partially to the energy of
the automobile's motion and partially to thermal energy. In a microwave oven,
electromagnetic energy obtained from the mains is converted to thermal energy of
the food being cooked. In these and all other processes, the total energy-the sum of
all energy present in all different forms-remains the same. No exception has ever
been found.
Work done by a constant force
?
Brainstorming
If your friend carried your 35 N bag and walked horizontally through 10 m, did
she do some work for you? How about carrying the same bag upstairs to the
second floor?
Work has a different meaning in physics than it does in everyday usage. In physics
doing work involves applying a force to an object while moving it a given distance.
In other words, work is done when a force acts on something that undergoes a
displacement from one position to another.
The definition for work W might be taken as W = F S, where F is the magnitude of
the force acting on the object and S is the magnitude of the object's displacement.
That definition, however, gives only the magnitude of work done on an object when
the force is constant and parallel to the displacement, which must be along a line,
Figure 4.35. For a more general case work is defined as the scalar product of the force
and the displacement produced.
W = F.S
W = F.S COS Θ, where Θ is the angle between F and $
$
Figure 4.35 A constant force moves the mass through displacement ,
W = F.S cos (0°) = S
129
Physics
Student Text Book
For a force F acting at an angle, Figure 4.36, the work done is W = FS cos Θ, which
can also be written as
W = (F cos Θ) S
where Fcos Θ is the component of the force along the direction of the displacement.
See that the component of the force along the direction perpendicular to the
displacement (F sinΘ) does no work (for Θ = 90°, cos 90° = 0).
The
FcosΘ
$
Figure 4.36 Force at angle, W = (F cos Θ) S
The SI unit of work is joule, abbreviated as J.
1 joule = lnewton.meter
Other unit of work in the (centimeter-gram-second) cgs unit is erg where 1 erg =
1dyne. cm.
1joule = 10⁷erg
Example 4.10
What is the work done on a block of mass 10kg, when a force of 20 N 30° above
the horizontal displaces the block by 5m?
Solution:
The givens are F = 20 N, Θ = 30° and S = 5m.
We are required to find the work done.
W = FS cos Θ = (20N) (5m) (cos 30°) = (100 Nm) (0.866) =86.6 J
Exercise 4.3
A man pushes a stalled vehicle with a steady force = (150i - 40j) N and the
displacement of the car is = (14i + 11ⱼ) m. How much work does the man do on
the car?
?
Activity 4.12
Can work done be positive, negative or zero? Specify the conditions in which work
130
Grade 11
can be positive, negative or zero.
Example 4.11
A man pulls a package along a horizontal floor with a force of 400 N at an angle
of 30° as shown in Figure 4.37a. A constant frictional force of 100 N acts between
the package and the floor. Find the work done by each force acting on the sled and
the total work done by all the forces.
F
12
N
F
le
*Fₖ
10
T b.
b
a
Figure 4.37
Solution
The forces that are acting on the package are shown in Figure 4.37b.
Work done by the applied force
WF = FS cos 30° = (400 N) (10 m) (0.866) = 3464 J
Work done by frictional force
Wf = Fₖ S cos (180°) = (100 N) (10 m) (-1) = - 1000 J
The gravitational force (Fg = mg) and the normal force FN are both perpendicular to
the displacement and therefore,
Wg = WFN = 0.
The total work Wtot done on the package by all forces is the algebraic sum of the
work done by the individual forces.
Wₜₒₜ = WF + Wf + W₈ + WF, N = 3464 J + (-1000 J) + 0 + 0 = 2464 J
?
Activity 4.13
1. Based on your knowledge of dynamics determine the net force acting on the
package of Example above to show that the total work done on the package is
also equal to the net force on the package times the displacement.
Wₜₒₜ=FₙₑₜS
131
Physics I Student Text Book
Work Done by the Gravitational Force
We next examine the work done on an object by the gravitational force acting on
it. Figure 4.38 shows an object of mass m that is thrown upward with initial speed
V₀ and thus with initial kinetic energy K₀ o = ½ mv². As the object rises, it is slowed
down by a gravitational force F,; that is, the object's initial kinetic energy decreases
because F, does work on the object as it rises. The work done by the gravitational
force is
The force magnitude is mg and we write
Wᵍ = mg d cosΘ (work done by gravitational force)
With Θ = 180°, work done by gravitational force is
W₈ = mgd
V₀
V
The
F &
a
a
The
F &
F &
V₀
V
F &
The
F &
Figure 4.38 Work done by gravitational force: (a) A mass raised through
vertical distance d (b) a mass lowered through vertical distance d
The minus sign tells us that during the object's rise, the gravitational force acting
on the object transfers energy equal to mgd from the initial kinetic energy that it had
at the beginning of its motion.
After the object has reached its maximum height and is falling back down, the angle
Θ between force and displacement is zero. Thus, the work done by the gravitational
force will be W₈ = mgd cos0° = + mgd
The plus sign tells us that the gravitational force now transfers energy in the amount
mgd to the kinetic energy of the object.
132
Grade 11
Example 4.12
A 5 kg bag is raised to a height of 2.5 m above the ground. What is the work done
by the applied force and by the gravitational force?
Solution
The work done by the applied force is
Wf = Ff S cos 0° = F S
The force required to raise the bag is the weight
W = mg.
Taking vertical distance as height h, we write WF = mgh
= (5 kg) (9.8 m/s²) (2.5 m) = 122.5 J
The work done by gravitational force is
W₈ = F ₂ S cos 180° = - mgh = - 122.5 J
How would the answer change if the bag were lowered from the same height to
the ground?
Example 4.13
Consider a block of mass m is pushed up a rough inclined plane of angle Θ by a
constant Force F parallel to the incline, as shown in Figure 4.39. The displacement of
the block up the incline is d.
a. by the applied force
b. by the force of gravity
c. by the normal force
d. by the kinetic friction
FN
a
h
14
yr
misso
yi
Θ
0
Figure 4.39 A block is pushed up a rough inclined plane with a constant force F parallel
to the incline. The normal is perpendicular to the surface. A mark is on mg to show that
the weight is decomposed to its parallel and perpendicular components.
Solution:
(a) The work done by the applied force W F
W₁ = F S cos 0° = F d (since F is in the same direction as d)
133
Physics I Student Text Book
(b) The work done by gravity W₈ is: W₈ = (mg sin Θ) (S) cos 180° = - mgd cosΘ, (mg
sin Θ is the component of the weight parallel to the displacement and 180° is the
angle between mg sinΘ and the displacement)
(c) The work done by the normal force is:
WN = FN S cos90° = 0 (The normal force is perpendicular to the displacement)
(d) The work done by the kinetic friction is:
Wf = Fₖ S cos180° = (mgcosΘ) (d) (-1) = - µₘₘgdcosΘ
?
Activity 4.14
Suppose you apply a constant force F on a mass to displace the mass through
distance S. If you plot the Force-Displacement graph and determine the area of the
region enclosed by the graph, what quantity would you obtain?
Work done by a variable force
In general, a force that acts on a body may vary in magnitude and direction as it
displaces the body between two points in space. Let us consider a varying force F
acting on a body to displace the body along the X axis. In this case using the expression
W = F.S will not be appropriate. Instead we calculate the infinitesimal work done by
the variable force and add those values to get the total work done. Figure 4.40a,
shows an example of the F vs S curve of the case of a variable force acting to produce
displacement S.
Fx
Fx
Ffx
F2x
Fdx
Fcx
F1x
F2x
Fbx
Fax
F1x
x
x
x
x1
x2
o
Ir
x2
o
x1
Дга
Дх
Are
X2
x2 x₁
Arb
Ar,
4x,
(a) Forec F varies with X
(b) F VS X graph
(c) Estimate the area of
the graph to get the work
Figure 4.40 Work done by a varying forces = Area under F vs S graph
Key terms
Constant force: A force that does not vary with time or position
Variable force: A force that varies with time or position
134
Grade 11
?
Activity 4.15
One of the common examples where varying force acts on a body is the case of a
force applied on a spring. Show that the work required to stretch a spring (spring
constant k) from initial elongation X1 to a final elongation X2 is W = ½ k (x2² - x₁²).
?
Activity 4.16
Group work
Work done by a varying force
Aim: To determine the work done by a varying force.
Apparatus:
Clamp Stand
Helical Spring of force constant 100 N/m
Mass Hanger
Pointer
Meter Ruler
Five equal masses each weighing 5 N
Figure 4.41 Setup of apparatus
Method:
(a) Hang a helical spring from a clamp stand, Figure 4.41.
(b) Attach a mass directly to the bottom of the helical spring and record the
135
Physics I Student Text Book
position of the bottom of the mass hanger relative to a meter ruler. Take
that reading as X1.
(c) Add the second mass to the first and record the new position of the mass
hanger relative to the meter rule as X2.
(d) Repeat step (c) for the third, fourth and fifth masses to the spring and
record the position of the bottom of the mass hanger, as X₃, X₄, and X₅,
Table 4.2
Table 4.2
F (N)
F1 =
F2 =
F3 =
F4=
F₅=
X (m)
X1
=
X2 =
X3 =
X₄=
X5=
Questions:
(1) Plot the Force (weight) versus extension (elongation) X.
(2) What quantity do you get from the slope of the graph?
Note that according to Hooke's law, the extension of the force is directly
proportional to the force applied, F = k X, where k is the spring constant).
(3) What is the area of the graph?
(4) Compare the result you obtained in step (3) with the result you get by the
doing product ½ kx2, which is equal to the work done on the spring.
Kinetic energy
One of the common types of energy that we encounter in our daily activities is kinetic
energy. Kinetic energy is the energy a body possesses due to its motion. A body of
mass m moving with velocity V is said to have kinetic energy of KE = ½ mv2.
Example 4.14
A 1200 kg car traveling at 30 m/s has a kinetic energy of
KE = ½ (1200 kg) (30 m/s)² = 540 kJ
Kinetic energy is a scalar quantity.
The work -energy Theorem
The total work done on a body by external forces is related to the body's displacement-
that is, to changes in its position. But the total work is also related to changes in the
speed of the body.
136
Grade 11
Consider a particle of mass m, moving with an acceleration a under the effect of a
net constant force F along the X axis, Figure 4.42.
F
Xo
X,
Figure 4.42: The work done by the applied force as it displaces the mass from x₀ to xf
The work done by the applied force is
W = F(x - x₀)
We know that the effect of the force in moving an object is the acceleration, thus:
W = ma(x-x x₀)
From kinematic equations, the relation of the acceleration can be expressed in
terms of the displacement and the velocity as:
Substituting this value of the acceleration into the above equation, the work done will be
Simplifying and rearranging we get
The quantity ¹ᵐv² is called the kinetic energy of the moving object having mass m
and velocity V denoted by K with SI unit joule (kg.m2/s2).
(Kinetic energy of a moving object)
Therefore, is the change in kinetic energy of the moving object as its
velocity is changed from vi to vf. Therefore, the work done by a net force is equal
to the change in kinetic energy. This principle is called the work-energy theorem.
Mathematically,
137
Physics
I Student Text Book
W (The work-energy theorem)
That is, the work done by the net force in displacing a particle equals the change in
its kinetic energy.
Potential energy
The energy of a body due to its relative position or shape is known as potential
energy
The energy due to the relative position of a body is called Gravitational potential
energy while the potential energy due to change in shape of the body is called Elastic
potential energy.
Gravitational potential energy of a body of mass m placed at a height above a
reference level is given by PE = mgh.
Elastic potential energy of a body such as a spring that is stretched through X is given
by
PE = ½ kx²
The sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy of a body is termed as the total
mechanical energy of the body.
ME = KE + PE
Suppose you throw a ball vertically upward. We already discussed that as the ball
rises, the work W₈ done on the ball by the gravitational force is negative because the
force transfers energy from the kinetic energy of the ball. We say that this energy
is transferred by the gravitational force to the gravitational potential energy of the
ball-Earth system.
On its way up, the ball slows (decelerates) and finally stops, and then begins to fall
back down because of the gravitational force. During the fall, the transfer is reversed:
The work Wg done on the body by the gravitational force is now positive-that force
transfers energy from the gravitational potential energy of the ball-Earth system to
the kinetic energy of the ball.
For either rise or fall, the change U in gravitational potential energy is defined as
being equal to the negative of the work done on the ball by the gravitational for
ce.
U=-W
138
Grade 11
Key terms
Kinetic energy: Energy due to motion
Potential energy: Energy due to position or shape
The above conclusion can also apply to a block-spring system shown in Figure
4.43. Initially the block moving to the right hits the spring. The spring force
acts toward left causing deceleration of the block doing negative work on the
block and transferring energy from the kinetic energy of the block to the elastic
potential energy of the spring-block system. The block then begins to move
leftward because the spring force is still leftward. The transfer of energy is then
reversed-it is from potential energy of the spring-block system to kinetic
energy of the block.
x
0
0
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.43 (a) As the block moves to the right the spring force does negative work on it
(b) As the block moves backward, the spring force does positive work on it.
Conservative and non-conservative Forces
There are generally two kinds of forces namely, Conservative forces and non-
conservative forces.
Conservative forces have these two equivalent properties:
1. The work done by a conservative force on a particle moving between any two points
is independent of the path taken by the particle.
2. The work done by a conservative force on a particle moving through any closed path
is zero. (A closed path is one in which the beginning and end points are identical).
Gravitational force is an example of a conservative force, and the force that a spring
exerts on any object attached to the spring is also conservative.
A force is non-conservative if it does not satisfy properties 1 and 2 for conservative
forces. Non-conservative forces acting within a system cause a change in the
mechanical energy ME of the system. The work done on a system by a non-
139
Physics I Student Text Book
conservative force is equal to the change in mechanical energy of the system. Typical
example of non-conservative force (also known as dissipative force) is frictional
force. Wᵈ is work done by dissipative forces.
Wᵈ = ME, Wᵈ
fₖ d = AKE + ДРЕ
Where fₖ is frictional force, d is the distance through which frictional force acted.
Where KE = ½ mv² , gravitational PE = mgh, and Elastic PE = ½ kx²
Key terms
Conservative force: A force in which work done is independent of the path
followed.
Non-conservative force: A force in which work done is path dependent.
Power
In the previous section we have seen that the quantity of work has to do with a force
causing a displacement. Work has nothing to do with the amount of time that this
force acts to cause the displacement. Sometimes, the work is done very quickly and
other times the work is done rather slowly. If you dig a well using a mattock, it may
take several hours. The same amount of work can be done in very few minutes if it is
dug by an excavator machine (Figure 4.44). The excavator can complete the work in
a shorter time than the same work done by the mattock digger.
Figure 4.44 A ditch dug by a mattock (less powerful machine) and by an excavator (a very
powerful machine)
We express the relation between work done and the time interval involved in doing
it, by introducing the concept of power. Since work can vary as a function of time, we
first define average power as the work done during a time interval, as:
Work done
Average power = Time taken
Sybmolically
The SI unit of power is watt. 1 W = 1 J/s
140
Grade 11
Metric prefix multipliers of units of power are usually used Such as kilo watt (kW)
in rating our home electric stove , mega watt (MW) and giga watt (GW) in rating
power generating plants such as the Great Ethiopian Rainnasence Dam (GERD).
Key term
Power : the rate of conversion of energy or the rate of doing work
All machines are typically described by their power rating. The power rating indicates
the rate at which that machine can do work upon other objects. Thus, the power of
a machine is the work to time ratio for that particular machine.
Another non SI unit of power is the horsepower.
1 horsepower = 746 watts
Exercise 4.4
Consider a boy and a girl of equal mass of 50 kg run upstairs to the fourth floor to
a height of 20 m above the ground floor.
(a) Compare the work done by each of them.
(b) Compare the power developed by each of them.
?
Activity 4.17
Discuss
Does the work done in lifting an object depend on how fast it is lifted? Does the
power expended depend on how fast it is lifted?
Another expression for power
Using the expression work = Force x displacement
Power = work time , we get
Force x displacement
Average power =
time
displacement
Average power = Force X
time
Average power = Force x average velocity
Pav = Fxv av
The instantanous power can be written in terms of instantaneous velocity as
P = F v, where V is instantaneous velocity
We can also express instantaneous power in terms of the scalar product as
P = F.v
141
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 4.15
Motor
A 1000 kg elevator car carries a maximum load
TE
of 800 kg, Figure 4.45a. As the elevator moves
upward a constant frictional fore of 4000 N
retards its motion. What minimum power must
the motor deliver to lift the loaded elevator car
Ft
at a constant speed of 2.5 m/s?
mg
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.45 Work done on an elevator and its load
As the elevator and its load are moving upward at a constant speed, Newton's
second law of motion applied on the system shown in the free-body diagram
(Figure 4 45 b), is written as
Fₙₑₜ = ma T+mg+F=ma
T - mg - Ff = ma, for motion at a constant velocity a = 0 and we have,
T - mg - Ff = 0
T = mg + Ff = (1000 kg + 800 kg) (9.8 m/s²) + 4000 N = 21640 N
The power P = F V = (21640 N) ( 2.5 m/s) = 54100 W = 54.1 KW
Example 4.16
Two forces F1 = 5N and F2 = 2N along the
directions indicated are acting on a box that slides
horizontally to the right across a frictionless
surface, as shown in Figure 4.46. Force F₁ makes
Moti
e
an angle Θ = 60° with the horizontal. Force F2 is
F2
against the motion. The speed V of the box at a
certain instant is 4 m/s. What is the power due to
each force that acts on the box at that instant, and
Figure 4.46
what is the net power? Is the net power changing
with time?
Solution:
The weight m t as and the normal force FN are perpendicular to the velocity V.
Thus, their work done is zero, and hence the power due to each of them on the
block is zero.
142
Grade 11
The power delivered by F1 is:
P₁ = F1.V = COS 60° = 10W
which indicates that the force F1 is transferring energy to the box at a
rate of 10 J/s.
The power delivered by F2 is:
P₂ = F2.V = cos 180° = 8W
which indicates that the force F₁ is transferring energy from the box at a rate of
8 J/s.
The net power is the sum of the individual powers. Thus,
=
This indicates that the net rate of energy transfer to the box is positive. So, the kinetic
energy of the box will increase, and hence its speed. Consequently, the net power
will increase with time.
Review questions 4.4
1. Write down two examples in which a force is exerted on an object without
doing any work on the object.
2. A bullet has twice the mass of a second bullet. If both are fired so that they
have the same speed, which has more kinetic energy? What is the ratio of the
kinetic energies of the two bullets?
3.
(a) If the speed of a particle is doubled, what happens to its kinetic energy?
(b) What can be said about the speed of a particle if the net work done on it
is zero?
4. Can kinetic energy be negative? Explain.
5. The force acting on a particle varies as in Figure 4.47. Find the work done by
the force on the particle as it moves
Fx(N)
(a) from X = 0 to X = 8 m,
6
(b) From X = 8 m to x = 10 m, and
4
(c) From X = 0 to X = 10 m.
2
x(m)
2
4
6
8
10
-2
Figure 4.47
6.
Elastic potential energy depends on the spring constant and the distance the
spring is stretched or compressed. By what factor does the elastic potential
energy change if the spring's stretch is (a) doubled or (b) tripled?
7. Calculate the elastic potential energy of a spring with spring constant = 225 N/m
that is (a) compressed and (b) stretched by 1cm.
8. A diver drops from a board 15 m above the surface of water. Neglecting air
143
Physics
Student Text Book
resistance, (a) use conservation of mechanical energy to find his speed as he
is 5 m above the water's surface, and (b) find his speed as he hits the water.
9. What average power must be supplied to push a 10 kg block from rest to
20 m/s in 5 S when the coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and
surface is 0.2? Assume the acceleration is uniform.
10. An advertisement claims that a certain 1200 kg car can accelerate from rest to
a speed of 25 m/s in a time of 8 S. What average power must the motor develop
to produce this acceleration?
4.5 Conservation of mechanical energy
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
define mechanical energy.
state the law of conservation of mechanical energy.
apply the law of conservation of mechanical energy to solve problems
?
Brainstorming
If you drop a ball from the top of the whiteboard, discuss the energy conversion
that takes place as the ball falls down.
Suppose a car traveling along the road suddenly brakes to a stop. What kind of
energy conversion takes place in the process?
The law of conservation of mechanical energy states that in the absence of dissipative
forces like air resistance and friction, the total mechanical energy of an object or
system of objects remains unchanged.
ME = 0
AKE + PE = 0
(KE₆ KEi) + (PE₆ PEᵢ) = 0
KEᵢ + PEᵢ = KE₆ + PE₆
Example 4.17
A 10 kg block is released from rest at the top of a
smooth inclined plane 10 m in length, as shown
1
h
in Figure 4.48. Find the speed of the block as it
30°
reaches the bottom of the inclined plane.
Figure 4.48
144
Grade 11
Solution
There is no friction between the block and the inclined surface. Applying the law
of conservation of mechanical energy we write
AKE + ДРЕ = 0
The block starts from rest so that KEᵢ = 0, and at the bottom of the incline PE₆ = 0
PEᵢ = KE₆
mgh = ½ mv²
v = √2gh, h = lsin 30° = (10m) (0.5) = 5m
Therefore V = 2 (9.8m/s² (5m) = 9.9m/s
Example 4.18
Repeat the question in Example 4.17 if the inclined plane is rough and the
coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and the surface is 0.2.
Solution
In the presence of dissipative forces the work done by these forces equals the
change of mechanical energy of the system.
Wd = ME
-fₖd = (KEf — KEᵢ) + (PEf — PEᵢ)
Taking KEi = 0, PEf = 0 we have
- fₖd = KEf - PEᵢ
- (µₖN) =
= 1 2 mv² = mgh - (µₖN) l
= 1/2mv2 = mgh (µₖmgcos (30°)) = mg [ h - (µₖcos (30°) l]
v² = 2g[h - (µkcos (30°) l = 2g[h (µk (30o)
= 2 (9.8m/s²) [5 m - (0.2) (0.866) (10m) (10 m)] = 64 m/s
v = 8 m/s
145
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 4.19
A 2 kg block sliding over a smooth horizontal
V
surface with a constant speed of 8 m/s hits a
horizontal spring whose one end is fixed as shown
in Figure 4.49. If the maximum compression of the
spring just before the block comes to rest is 20 cm,
what is the spring constant of the spring?
Figure 4.49
Solution
Given
Speed of the block V = 8 m/s, compression of the spring x = 20 cm = 0.2 m.
Required is spring constant k
Initially the spring has no compression, X1 = 0, PEᵢ = 0 and after being compressed
through X2 = 0.2 m, it possesses elastic potential energy PEf = ½ kx= 2 ½ kx2
The block has initial KEᵢ = ½ mvᵢ² = ½ mv² and it stops after compressing the
spring Vf = 0 and KE₆ = 0.
In the absence of dissipative forces we write
ДКЕ + PE = 0
KEi = PEf
KEᵢ of the block = PEf of the spring
½ mv² = 1/ kx,²
k= mv² X = 2 (0.2)² / 3200N/m.
Review Questions 4.5
1. A ball is thrown straight up into the air. Where will it attain its minimum
kinetic energy? At what position is the gravitational potential energy of the
ball-Earth system a maximum?
2. A 1 kg ball is released from the top of an 18 m high tower. Neglecting air
resistance, where above the ground will the ball have its kinetic energy twice
its potential energy at that location?
3. A particle of mass m = 8 kg is released from point A and slides on the
146
Grade 11
frictionless track shown in Figure 4.50. Determine
(a) the particle's speed at points B and C and
(b) the net work done by the gravitational force in moving the particle from
A to C.
m
A
B
C
8 m
6m
4.5 m
Figure 4.50
4. A 5 kg block is set into motion up an inclined plane shown (Figure 4.51) with
initial velocity of 10 m/s. How far up along the plane does the block go before
coming to rest assuming?
(a) no friction between the block and the surface of the inclined plane?
(b) the coefficient of friction between block and the surface is 0.25?
Vi = 2 m/s
30
Figure 4.51
5. A 0.50 kg block slides across a tabletop with an initial velocity of 20 cm/s
and comes to rest in a distance of 50 cm. Find the average friction force that
retarded its motion.
6. Suppose a car traveling at a speed V skids a distance d after its brakes lock.
Estimate how far it would skid if it were traveling at speed 2v when its brakes
locked.
147
Physics
Student Text Book
4.6 Impulse and Linear Momentum
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
discuss impulse and linear momentum
relate impulses to collisions
apply the impulse-momentum theorem to solve problems
differentiate elastic and inelastic collisions
state the law of conservation of linear momentum
explain the meaning and usefulness of the concept of center of mass
calculate the center of mass of a given system
calculate the velocity of the center of mass
apply the law of conservation of linear momentum to solve problems
involving collision in one dimension.
?
Brainstorming
Suppose you are riding a bicycle at a speed of 15 m/s. How different is the effort
you are required to exert when you want to stop in 5 second or when you want to
stop in 9 seconds? Give your answer in terms of the force you apply on the brakes
and the time taken to stop.
Linear momentum is the property of a moving object that describes how hard it is to
set a body in motion or to stop it. It is hard to stop a fast moving object than a slow
moving object. Similarly, it is hard to stop a larger mass than a smaller mass provided
that they move with the same speed. The Linear momentum of a body is defined as
the product of its mass and its velocity.
Mathematically, Momentum = mass x Velocity
Linear mumentum denoted by P and
P = mv
Momentum is a vector quantity directed along the direction of the velocity and its
SI unit is kgm/s.
Exercise 4.5
How would the momentum of an object change if
a. the mass is doubled but the velocity remains the same?
b. the velocity is reduced to one-third of its original magnitude?
c. the direction of the velocity changes from South to East?
148
Grade 11
Example 4.20
What is the linear momentum of a 0.5 kg match box that is moving at a constant
speed of 6m/s toward the positive X direction?
Solution:
Given; m = 0.5kg V = 6 m/s + x direction
Required = ?
Usin g the equation P = mv
The magnitude of the momentum is P = mv = (0.5kg) (6m/s) = 3kgm/s.
The momentum takes the direction of velocity and we have P = 3 kg m/s, toward
+X direction.
Example 4.21
If the box in the above example is acted by an external force and its velocity is
increased from 6m/s to 15m/s along the same direction, what is the change in
momentum?
Solution:
The given are m = 0.5kg, Vᵢ = 6m/s, Vf = 15m/s
Required ДР = ?
The change momentum P = (mv)
= m (vf vᵢ)
= (0.5kg) (15m/s south - 6m/s south)
= 1.5kg m/s, south
Example 4.22
A 1.5 kg ball that was moving along a smooth horizontal floor at 5 m/s toward East
hits a hard surface and rebounds with the same speed along the same line. What is
the change in momentum of the ball?
149
Physics I Student Text Book
Solution
Given
Mass m = 1.5 kg,
Vᵢ = 5 m/s, East, vf = 5 m/s, West
ДР = (mv)
= m vf - vᵢ) = (1.5kg) (5 m/s, West - 5 m/s, East)
= (1.5kg) (5 m/s, West + 5 m/s, West)
= (1.5kg) (10 m/s, West) = 15 kgm/s, West
Changing the momentum of a body require application of a force. According to
Newton's second law, velocity of a moving object changes when a non-zero net force
acts on it. Starting from the common version of Newton's second law we define an
equivalent expression as follows.
F At At
F = p (Newton's second law in terms of momentum)
The net force (vector sum of all forces) acting on a particle equals the time rate of
change of momentum of the particle.
Rearranging the above equation we have
ДР = F At
?
Activity 4.18
Group discussion
According to the equation P = + t, a rapid change in momentum requires a large
net force, while a gradual change in momentum requires less net force. How is this
used in the design of automobile safety devices such as air bags that help to reduce
the possibility of injury of the driver?
J = F At
The product of the net force and the time interval, È t, is known as Impulse of the
net force, denoted by j.
The change in momentum of a particle during a time interval equals the impulse of
150
Grade 11
the net force that acts on the particle during that interval. This statement defines the
Impulse-Momentum theory.
Key term
Momentum: describe the effort require to get a body moving or to stop it.
Impulse: is change of momentum
Example 4.23
A 2 kg ball that was moving along a smooth horizontal floor at 2.5 m/s toward East
hits a hard surface and rebounds with a speed of 2.3 m/s along the same line. If the
time of interaction between the ball and the wall is 0.20 s,
(a) What is the change in momentum of the ball?
(b) What is the impulse imparted to the ball?
(b) What is the net force exerted on the ball by the surface?
Solution
Given
Mass m = 2 kg,
vᵢ = 2.5 m/s, East, vf = 2.3 m/s, West, t = 0.2 s
(a) ДР = mAv = (vf
= (2 kg) (2.3 m/s, West 2.5 m/s, East)
= (2 kg) (2.3 m/s, West + 2.5 m/s, West)
= 9.6 kg m/s, West
(b) Impulse = Change of momentum
J = ДР = 9.6 kg m/s, West
(c) From J = FA we have
F = J = 9.6kgm/s 0.2s west 48 kg m/s2, West = 48 N, West
Exercise 4.6
To improve the safety of a motorist, modern cars are built so the front end cramps
upon impact. A 1500 kg car is traveling at a constant speed of 10 m/s due East. It
hits a rigid wall and comes to rest in 0.25s.
a. Determine the impulse provided to the car.
b. What is the average net force exerted on the car?
c. For the same impulse, what would be the average net force exerted on the car
if it had a rigid bumper and frame that stopped the car in 0.04 s?
151
Physics I Student Text Book
?
Activity 4.19
Suppose you are standing on a table top that is 1 m high above the floor and that
you jump off the table and land on the floor. It is common experience that your
feet experience an upward force of the floor. What action do you take at the instant
you land on the floor in order to minimize the effect (magnitude) of the force on
your feet?
Example 4.24
The force that an average football player can exert on a ball is 1200N. Such a
football striker shoots a penalty from a penalty spot 1 1m from the goal line. The
average mass of a soccer ball is 400g. If the time of contact between the ball and
the foot is 0.02s, what is the velocity of the ball as it leaves the spot?
Solution:
The given are: magnitude of the force F = 1200 N, At = 0.02s m = 400g = 0.4kg.
Required: V =?
Reasoning: The ball is accelerating from rest to a velocity TV as long as the force
is applied on it for 0.02 S. After it leaves the foot of the striker, the only forces
are gravity and air resistance. As the ball accelerates from 12 i=0 to vf = v , the
momentum of the ball is changed from Pi to Pf.
Therefore using the equation,
Since the ball is initially at rest on the penalty spot, pi=0 = and p f = mv.
Thus, V = 0.4kg = 30 m/s.
Exercise 4.7
What is the acceleration of the ball in the above example while it was in contact
with the striker's foot? How long does it take for the ball to pass the goal line?
(Assume the ball obtained a slight air clearance on its path to the goal line so that
friction can be neglected.)
152
Grade 11
One way to calculate the impulse
Fnet (N)
provided to an object is to graph
the net force on the object as a
function of the interaction time
as in Figure 4.52. The area of
10 20 30 40
the net force versus time graph
t (s)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
is equal to the magnitude of the
impulse provided.
Figure 4.52 Magnitude of net force (Fₙₑₜ) versus
time graph of a model rocket. The area under the
graph equals the impulse provided to the rocket.
In reality, many interactions occur for a very short period of time that accurate
measurement of the net force is difficult. The net force increases from zero to a very
large value in a short period of time like in the case of the baseball bat hitting the
ball, Figure 4.53. The area bounded by the dotted line equals the impulse provided
by the bat.
Fnot
Average Fnot)
t
At
Figure 4.53 the bat exerts non-linear net force on the ball. The product (average net force)
x (time interval) gives the impulse.
Exercise 4.8
Calculating Force: Venus Williams' Tennis Serve
During the 2007 French Open, Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a
premier women's match, reaching a speed of 209 km/). What is the average force
exerted on the 0.057 kg tennis ball by Venus Williams' racquet? Assume that the
ball's speed just after impact is 58 m/s, as shown in Figure 4.54, that the initial
horizontal component of the velocity before impact is negligible, and that the ball
remained in contact with the racquet for 5 ms.
153
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Vₜ
Figure 4.54 The tennis ball acquires a final velocity of 209 km/h (58 m/s).
Law of Conservation of Linear Momentum
If two bodies collide or push each other apart and no forces act except for each one
pushing on the other, the total momentum of the two bodies does not change. That
is the initial total momentum is equal to the final total momentum.
Mathematically, 1=1,
For two bodies in motion having initial and final velocities each,
Consider what happens if the masses of two colliding objects are more similar such
as two identical cars for example, one car bumping into another, as shown in Figure
4.55. Both cars are moving in the same direction when the lead car (labeled m₂) is
bumped by the trailing car (labeled m₁). The only unbalanced force on each car is the
force of the collision. (Assume that the effects due to friction are negligible.) Car 1
slows down as a result of the collision, losing some momentum, while car 2 speeds
up and gains some momentum. We shall now show that the total momentum of the
two-car system remains constant.
Before
Fₙₑₜ = 0
System of
interest
P1 + P2ᵢ = P
u1
U2
m1
m2
154
After
Fnet = 0
Grade 11
System of
interest
st
Nit
m1
m2
Figure 4.55. Car of mass m1 moving with a velocity of u₁ bumps into another car of mass
m2 and velocity ū₂ that it is following. As a result, the first car slows down to a velocit of
v₁ and the second speeds up to a velocity of v₂. The momentum of each car is changed,
but the total momentum Pₜₒₜ of the cars is the same before and after the collision (if you
assum friction is negligigle)
Using the definition of impulse, the change in momentum of car 1 is given by
where F₁ is the force on car 1 due to car 2, and At is the time the force acts (the
duration of the collision).
Similarly, the change in momentum of car 2 is
where+, 2 is the force on car 2 due to car 1, and we assume the duration of the colli-
sion At is the same for both cars. We know from Newton's third law that
Pᵢ= Pᵢ = (The law of conservation of momentum)
Collisions in One Dimension
The term collision is used to represent an event during which two particles come
close to each other and interact by means of forces. The time interval during which
the velocities of the particles change from initial to final values (time of interaction)
is assumed to be short so that the interaction forces are assumed to be much greater
than any external forces present.
In the previous section we have discussed that the total momentum of an isolated
system just before a collision equals the total momentum of the system just after the
collision.
In contrast, depending on the type of collision, the total kinetic energy of the system
of particles may or may not be conserved. Collisions are classified as Elastic and
155
Physics
Student Text Book
Inelastic depending on whether or not kinetic energy of the system is conserved.
A collision in which both total momentum and total kinetic energy are conserved
is known as Elastic collision. Elastic collisions occur between atomic and subatomic
particles. Collisions between two billiard balls are some of the practical collisions
that are only approximately elastic.
A collision in which total momentum is conserved but total kinetic energy is not
conserved is known as inelastic collision. When the colliding objects stick together
after interaction, the collision is said to be completely inelastic.
?
Activity 4.20
Discuss
Momentum of an isolated system is conserved in all collisions. Kinetic energy of
an isolated system is conserved only in elastic collisions. Why?
Elastic collision
Consider two masses m₁ and
m₂ moving along the same
V1i
V2
line in opposite direction
i
12
Before collision
as shown in Figure 4.56. If
the masses make a head-
on elastic collision, how do
we determine the velocities
V1f
V2f
After collision
of each of the masses after
collision?
Figure 4.56 Two masses making an elastic head-on collision
In an elastic collision both kinetic energy and momentum are conserved and we
have
As the masses are moving along the same line in opposite directions, velocities
directed to the right can be taken positive and velocities directed to the left can be
taken negative. With this consideration we write
And for the conservation of kinetic energy, we write
156
Grade 11
,
m₁ (v₁ᵢ V₁ƒ) (v₁ᵢ + V₁ƒ) = M₂ (v₂ƒ v₂ᵢ) (v₂ƒ +
m₁ (v₁ᵢ V₁ƒ) + V₁ƒ)
=
m₂(v₂f - v₂ᵢ)
This equation, in combination with the equation of the law of conservation of
momentum can be can be used to solve problems dealing with elastic collisions. See
that (v₁₁ - v₂ᵢ) is the relative velocity of the masses before collision and is
the relative velocity of the masses after collision.
?
Activity 4.21
Give real life examples of elastic collisions,
inelastic collisions and
perfectly inelastic collisions.
Example 4.25
Consider two masses m₁ of 4 kg and m2 of 6 kg moving along the same line in
opposite direction as shown in Figure 4.56, with velocities of 2 m/s and 1 m/s
respectively, along the directions indicated. If the masses make an elastic collision,
what are the velocities of each of the masses after collision?
Given
m₁ = 4kg,v₁ = + 2m/s
m₂ = 6kg,v₂ = - 1 m/s
For an elastic collision both momentum and kinetic energy are conserved and we
write
And also
157
Physics I Student Text Book
Solving the simul tan eous equation
2v1f + 3v2f = 1 and
V2f V1f = 3,
we get
v1f = - 00/15 m/s and V2f = 7/15 m/s
The final results show that after collision m1 moves to the left with a speed
of 00/15 m/s and M₂ moves to the right with a speed of 7/15 m/s.
Key terms
Elastic collision: a collision in which both kinetic energy E and momentum are
conserved
Inelastic collision: a collision in which momentum is conserved but kinetic energy is
not.
Example 4.26
Two gliders A and B with masses of 0.5 kg and 0.3 kg, respectively, move toward
each other on a frictionless air track (Figure 4.57 a). After they collide (Figure 4.57
b), glider B has a final velocity of 2 m/s toward the positive X direction (Figure
4.57 c).
1ª
VBi
VAf
V af
B
x
A
A
B
A
B
MA
mB
(a) Before collision
(b) Collision
(c) After collision
Figure 4.57 Gliders on an air track
(a) What is the final velocity of glider A?
(b) How do the changes in momentum and in velocity compare?
Solution
Given
mA = 0.5 kg, VAi = 2 m/s
(a) Applying The law of conservation of linear momentum,
158
Grade 11
(0.5 kg) (2 m/s) + (0.3 kg) (-2 m/s) = (0.5 kg) (VAƒ) + ( 0.3 kg)(2 m/s)
1 kg m/s - 0.6 kgm/s = (0.5 kg) (Vₐƒ) + 0.6 kg m/s
Solving for VAť we get Vₐƒ = - 0.4 m/s
(b) Change of velocity of glider A is
VA = Vₐf - VAi = (-0.4 m/s) - (2 m/s) = - 2.4 m/s
Change of velocity of glider B is
VB = - VBi = (2 m/s) - (-2 m/s) = + 4 m/s
See that VA 1 AvB
Change of momentum of glider A is
mA (AvA) = (0.5 kg)( 2.4 m/s) = -1.2 kgm/s
Change of momentum of glider B is
1B(AvB) = (0.3 kg)( + 4 m/s) = 1.2 kgm/s
The gliders experience equal and opposite forces and according to Newton's second
law the one with the smaller mass will have acceleration of larger magnitude. By the
impulse-momentum theorem, the gliders experienced equal and opposite impulses
and therefore equal and opposite changes in momentum.
Inelastic collision
Inelastic collisions are of two types. When the colliding objects stick together after
the collision, the collision is called perfectly inelastic. When the colliding objects do
not stick together, but some kinetic energy is lost the collision is called inelastic.
For a perfectly inelastic collision where the masses stick together after collision we
use
m₁v₁ᵢ + m₂V₂ᵢ = (m₁ + m₂) V, V is the common velocity of the masses after colli-
sion.
Example 4.27
A 700 g pistol loaded with a 180 g bullet rests on a smooth table, Figure 4.58. If the
bullet suddenly goes off with a speed of 300 m/s, with what speed will the pistol
recoil?
159
Physics I Student Text Book
Bullet
Pistol
V21
12
Figure 4.58 Recoil velocity of a Pistol
Solution
Given:
Mass of the Pistol-bullet system before interaction m = 700 g + 180 g = 880 g = 0.88 kg
Initial velocity of the system 7i=0 Ti =
Final velocity of the bullet V2f= 350 m/s, forward
To find the final velocity with which the pistol recoils just after interaction we
apply the law of conservation of momentum as
v
Substituting the given values we write
0 = (0.7 kg)( 1f) + 0.18 kg)(300 m/s)
Substituting the given values we write
0 = (0.7 kg) (v + 0.18 kg) (300 m/s)
Rearranging this equation and solving for V₁ƒ, we obtain
The minus sign indicates that as the bullet goes off forward, the pistol recoils
backward.
V1f = 77 m/s, backward
?
Activity 4.22
A physics student (mass 60 kg) carrying a 2 kg book is standing in the middle of a
frozen pond. What can he do in order to go toward the shore of the pond?
160
Grade 11
Example 4.28
Perfectly inelastic collision
A fully loaded dump truck with a mass of 25000 kg is moving at 72 km/h on
a level paved road. On its way, it suddenly collides head on with a 150 kg bajaj
which was moving at 54 km/h in the opposite direction. What will be the final
velocity of the truck-bajaj system after collision?
Given: m₁ = 25000kg,
v₁₁ = 72km/h = 20m/s
m2 = 150 kg
V₂ᵢ = 54 km/h = 15m/s (initially moving in opposite direction to the track's
motion)
Required: Vf = ?
Solution:
By conservation of linear momentum for a head-on collision,
Total momentum before collision = Total momentum after collision
Since the dump truck and the bajaj stick and go together to have a common final
velocity, we
Therefore:
(25000 kg)(20 m/s) + (150 kg)(-15 m/s) = (25000 kg + 150 kg)vf
Solving for the final velocity we get Vf = 19.7 m/s
The value is positive indicating that after collision the truck-bajaj system moves
along the initial direction of motion of the truck.
Example 4.29
Ballistic pendulum
Consider a ballistic pendulum, a type of pendulum used to determine the speed
of bullets before electronic timing devices were invented (Figure 4.59).
161
Physics
I
Student Text Book
ceiling
suspension
wire
pistol
bullet
block
height
of swing
Figure 4.59 A Ballistic pendulum
A stationary block of wood is suspended from the ceiling by light ropes. When a
bullet is fired at the block, the bullet becomes embedded in the wood upon impact.
Just after interaction the pendulum-bullet system starting from rest, rises up to a
certain height of swing before stopping. Derive an expression for the velocity of
the bullet in terms of mass of its own mass, mass of the block, g and swing height.
Solution
On impact some of the kinetic energy of the bullet is transferred to the pendulum-
bullet system so that the system will have speed Vf just after interaction. As
the pendulum-bullet system swings upward, its kinetic energy is converted to
gravitational potential energy.
Taking mass of bullet = m₁,
mass of the block = m₂
velocity of bullet before impact V₁ᵢ = v,
initial velocity of the block = 0,
swing height = h
The law of conservation of momentum can be written as
m₁v₁ᵢ+ m₂V₂i= = (m₁ + m₂) ( perfectly inelastic collision)
m₁v=(m₁ + m₂) f
my
162
Grade 11
f (perfectly inelastic collision)
m₁v=(m₁ + m₂) v₁
This is the velocity with which the pendulum-bullet system starts just after interaction.
Starting off with speed Vƒ the system rises up to swing height h so that the kinetic
energy of the pendulum-bullet system is changed to gravitational potential energy
of the system.
vf²= 2gh
Rearranging the equation we write the speed of the bullet as
?
Activity 4.23
In the solution for Example 4.29, we have assumed some of the initial kinetic
energy of the bullet being transferred to the pendulum-bullet system emphasizing
a loss of kinetic energy in the process. How do you explain this?
Example 4.30
A 14.9 g bullet from a pistol strikes a 2 kg ballistic pendulum. Upon impact, the
pendulum swings for ward and rises to a cm. What was the velocity ofthe
bullet immediately before impact?
Solution
Given
mass of the bullet = m₁ = 14.9 g = 0.0149 kg
mass of the block m₂ = 2 kg
initial velocity of the block = 0,
swing height = h = 21.9 cm = 0.219 m
Using the given values in the equation V = , we get the velocity
163
Physics | Student Text Book
of the bullet just before hitting the block as V = 280 m/s
Exercise 4.9
On a frictionless, horizontal air table, puck A (with mass 0.25 kg) is moving toward
puck B (with mass 0.35 kg), which is initially at rest. After the collision, puck A has
a velocity of 0.012 m/s to the left, and puck B has a velocity of 0.65 m/s to the right.
(a) What was the speed of puck A before the collision?
(b) Calculate the change in the total kinetic energy of the system that occurs during
the collision.
Center of Mass
The principle of conservation of momentum can be restated in a useful way by using
the concept of center of mass. A mechanical system can be either a particle or a
group of particles. Center of mass of an object or system of objects is a place where
the total mass of the system assumed to be concentrated. We shall see that the center
of mass of the system moves as if all the mass of the system were concentrated at that
point. When a resultant force acts on a system of objects or particles, the force is
assumed to have acted at the center of mass and the center of mass moves with an
acceleration governed by Newton's second law of motion.
Key terms
Center of mass: a point where the total mass of a body or system of objects is as
sumed to be concentrated
Suppose we have several particles with masses m₁, m₂ and so on. Let the coordi-
nates of m₁ be (x₁, y₁), be those of m₂ be (x₂, y₂) and so on. We define the center of
mass of the system as the point that has coordinates ( Xcm' Yᶜₘ) given by
Xcm = m₁+m₂ +m₃ +..+mₙ
Ycm = m₁+m₂+m₃+..+mₙ
Example 4.31
Three masses on m₁ = 300 g, m2 = 500 g and m₃ = 200 g are place on the xy plane
at coordinates (-2,2), (2,3) and (3,-1), respectively. If distances are in centimeters,
find the coordinates of the center of mass of the system.
164
Grade 11
Solution
Given ml = 0.3 kg at ( -2, 2) , m2 = 0.5 kg at (2, 3), m3 = 0.2 kg at (3, -1)
xcm = m₁X₁+m₂X₂+m₃X₃X₃ m₁ +m₂ + m₃ = = 1=1, 1
ycm = y₁ m₁ +m₂ + m₃ = 0.3+0.5+0,2 = 19 = 1.9
Motion of Center of the Mass
What will happen to the center of mass when the
system of particles moves? The center of mass of a
system of particles is the point that moves as though
all of the system's mass were concentrated there and
all external forces were applied there. Figure 4.60
shows the position of the center of mass (the dot) of
the baseball bat flipped in the air. The center of mass
follows parabolic path while the other parts of the
bat follow complicated path.
Figure 4.60 The motion of a baseball bat flipped in the air and the motion of its center of
mass.
Knowing the X and y coordinates of the center of mass (or the X and y components
of its position vector) we can determine the time rate at which the position vector
changes to determine the velocity of the center of mass.
The coordinates of x and y components of the center of mass are respectively,
(vcm)y=
m₁+m₂ +m₃ +..+mₙ
When writing this equation to the single vector equation of the velocity of the center
of mass, we have
165
Physics
I
Student Text Book
If the sum m₁ + m₂ + m₃ + mₙ represents the total mass of the system M, we
have
=
The linear momentum of a system of particles is equal to the product of the total
mass M of the system and the velocity of the center of mass.
Conservation of Momentum Applied to Rockets
The motion of a rocket, Figure 4.61, can be explained using Newton's third law.
When the rocket engines burn the fuel and eject the gas backwards, the rocket
propels upward (action-reaction pairs). The law of conservation of momentum
can also be used to explain why a rocket can accelerate even in a vacuum.
When the engines of a rocket burn fuel, the escaping exhaust gas has mass and
considerable speed. When a rocket is in outer space, external friction is negligible.
So the rocket-exhaust gas system is an isolated system. For a rocket-gas system,
the equation for the conservation of momentum is
AProcket
change in the momentum
rocket
of the rocket
change in the momentum
of exhast gas
Figure 4.61 Rocket propulsion
166
Grade 11
Review Questions 4.6
1. A car has the same kinetic energy when it is traveling south at 20 m/s as when
it is traveling northwest at 20 m/s. Is the momentum of the car the same in
both cases? Explain
2. A glass dropped on the floor is more likely to break if the floor is concrete than
if it is wood. Why?
3. An apple falls from a tree and feels no air resistance. As it is falling, which
of these statements about it are true? (a) Only its momentum is conserved;
(b) only its mechanical energy is conserved, (c) both its momentum and its
mechanical energy are conserved, (d) its kinetic energy is conserved.
4. What is the effect on impulse if (a) the time interval is doubled?
(b) the net force is reduced to one-third of its original magnitude?
5. A golfer hits a long sending 50 g golf ball toward East. The graph of the net
force as a function of time for the collision between the golf club and the ball
is as shown in Figure 4.62.
(a) What is the impulse provided to the ball?
(b) What is the velocity of the ball at the moment the golf club and ball
separate?
6000
5000
Magnitude of Net Force Fnet
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time t(ms)
Figure 4.62 Force vs time graph
6. Two billiard balls A and B that are traveling toward each with speeds of V and
2v respectively, If ball A is traveling tward East and B toward West, what are
the finalocities of the two balls. Assume an isolated system.
7. A 0.16 kg billiard ball traveling at 0.5 m/s, due North strikes a stationary 0.18
kg snooker ball and rebounds at 0.23 m/s due South. The snooker ball moves
off at 0.463 m/s due North. Ignoring the possible rotational effect, determine
if the collision is elastic?
8. A 75 kg hunter in a stationary canoe throws a 0.72 kg spear at 12 m/s in the
forward direction. The mass of the canoe is 10 kg. What will be the velocity of
the canoe and the hunter immediately after the spear is thrown?
9. A basketball player A and her wheelchair have a combined mass of 58 kg.
167
Physics
I
Student Text Book
She moves at 0.6 m/s toward East and pushes off a stationary player B while
jockeying for a position near the basket. Player A ends up moving at 20 m/s
toward West. The combined mass of player B and her wheelchair is 85 kg.
What will be player B's velocity immediately after interaction Figure 4.63)?
before
after
VAf = 0.6 m/s
VBf = ?
VAL = 0.6 m/s
Player A Player B
Player A
Player B
Figure 4.63
10. The center of gravity of an object may be located outside the object. Give a
few examples for which this is the case.
168
Grade 11
SUMMARY OF UNIT 4:
c
Newton's laws of motion can be applied in numerous situations to solve problems
related to motion.
c
Newton's first law also known as the law of inertia tells us that in the absence of
unbalanced force a body at rest remains at rest and a body in motion keeps on
moving with the same velocity.
c
Newam's second law describes what happens to a body if it is ncted upon by mn
unbalanced force. The acceleration of a body is directly proportional to the net
force and inversely proportional to the mass of the body. A body accelerates in the
direction of the net force on it.
C
Newton's third law tells us the fact that forces are in pairs and that action and
reaction are equal and opposite.
C
Friction is an example of contact type of force. It arises when a hody moves or
attempts to move on another body. Friction depends on the nature of the surfaces
in contact and the normal force.
c
Static friction is greater than sliding (kinetic friction).
C
The normal force on an object is not always equal in magnitude to the weight of the
object. It depends on the orientation of the surface on which an object is placed.
C
A body is in equilibrium is the net force acting on it is zera.
c
When a body is in equilibrium, it is either at rest or moves at a constant speed in a
fixed direction. Itx acceleration will be zero.
c
For problems involving two or more forces, draw free-body diagrams, resolve the
forces into their components and apply Newton's laws
c
The net work done Wₙₑₜ, is the work done by the net force acting on an object.
c
Work done on an object transfers energy to the object.
The translational kinetic energy of an object of mass m moving at speed V is k=
1/2 mv²
c
The work-energy theorem states that the network Wₙₑₜ on a system changes its
kinetic energy.
C
Gravitational potential energy of a mass m placed at height habove a reference is
PE=mgh
c
One of the common examples of work done by a varying force is work done on a
spring.
c
Elastic potential energy of a spring that is stretched or compressed through X is
PE=k²
Linear momentum is defined as the product of a system's mass and its velocity.
c
In symbols, linear momentum P is defined to be P = mv where m is the mass of
169
Physics
I
Student Text Book
the system and is its velocity.
c
The SI unit for momentum is kgm/s.
c
Newton's second law of motion when expressed in terms of momentum it take the
form Fₙₑₜ =
c
Center of mass of a body is a point where the total mass of the body is assumed to
be concentrated.
c
Power is the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of energy.
c
When a certain work is done in a given interval of time, the power delivered is
given by Power = Work/time.
c
When a force is applied on an object, the velocity is changed, the power delivered
at that instant of time is given by the dot product of the applied force and the
velocity vector as P = F.v
c
When several forces are acting on a body, the net power delivered is the sum of the
power delivered by each of the forces.
C
Positive power means energy is transferred to the object by the force.
c
Negative power means energy is transferred from the object by the force.
170
Grade 11
END OF UNIT 4 QUESTIONS:
1. A ball of mass m is suspended by a string from the ceiling, the Earth pulls down
the ball with a force of magnitude equal to the weight of the ball. Consider this to
be the action force, what is the action force?
a. The string pulling upward on object with a force of magnitude equal to
the weight of the ball
b. The ceiling pulling upward on the string with a force of magnitude equal
to the weight of the ball.
c. The ball pulling upward on the earth with a force of magnitude equal to
the weight of the ball.
2. It is easier to pull a rolling bag on a road than to push. This is because when the
rolling bag is pulled,
a)
the vertical component of the force
acts in the direction of gravity and
weight thereby weight of the roller
is increased and friction increased.
b)
the vertical component of the force
acts in opposite direction to the
weight, thereby weight of the roller
is decreased and friction decreased.
c)
the premise is wrong, because pull-
ing a roller cannot be easier than
pushing.
3. The speed of a freely falling object is proportional to its mass or weight.
a. True
b. False
4. How is inertia of an object affected by its mass?
5. List down the various effects of force.
6. Which of the following statement is NOT true?
a. Rate of change of momentum is called force.
b. Action reaction pairs of force are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
c. Action reaction pairs of force act on two different bodies.
d. Action reaction pairs of force can be cancelled to each other.
171
Physics
I
Student Text Book
7. Any two equal and opposite forces constitute ac-
tion and reaction pairs. Is this statement correct?
Explain.
8. A soccer player starts from rest and accelerates
forward, reaching a velocity of 8 m/s in 2.5 S. (a)
What was his average acceleration? (b) What av-
erage force did he exert backward on the ground
to achieve this acceleration? The player's mass is
70 kg, and air resistance is negligible. (This prob-
lem is solved by integrating the concepts of kine-
matics to dynamics.)
9. What is the use of airbags in cars?
10. Give reason why dust is re moved from a carpet by shaking?
0.2 m/s
11. Why is it advised to tie a rope on the luggage to a luggage rack while you travel by
the bus?
12. The figure at the right shows a 75 kg man standing on a bathroom scale in an ele-
vator. Calculate the scale reading: (a) if the elevator accelerates upward at a rate of
1.20 m/s2, and (b) if the elevator moves upward at a constant speed of 1 m/s.
13. Define the term equilibrium and state the first condition of equilibrium.
172
Grade 11
14. If a block is at rest on an incline without slipping, then friction must equal the
component of the weight of the object parallel to the incline. This requires great-
er and greater friction for steeper slopes
inclined
plane
e
a.
Draw the free body diagram and show that the maximum angle of an in-
cline above the horizontal for which an object will not slide down is Θ=
tan-1(µs).
b.
This angle is called the critical angle, what will be the acceleration of the
block when the angle of the inclination is greater than the critical angle? Is
the acceleration dependent on the mass? Is the acceleration dependent on
the mass if the surface is frictionless? For what angle would the block begin
to slide if the surface were frictionless?
15. Three blocks are in contact with each other on
a frictionless horizontal surface as in the figure
THE
m₂
m3
below.
mg
16. A horizontal force =18N is applied to m₁. If m₁ is 1kg, m₂= = 2 kg, and m3 = 3kg,
Draw a separate free body diagram for each block and find:
a. The acceleration of the block.
b. The resultant force on each block.
c. The magnitude of the contact forces between the blocks.
17. State the law of conservation of momentum.
18. Compare the momentum of a 78 kg footballer running at a speed of 8.0m/s to
that of a hard kicked 0.4kg soccer ball at a speed of 25m/s. Which one has a larger
momentum?
19. Does a large force always produce a larger impulse on an object than a smaller
force does? Explain.
20. If the speed of a particle is doubled, by what factor is its momentum changed? By
what factor is its kinetic energy changed?
21. If two particles have equal kinetic energies, are their momenta necessarily equal?
Explain.
173
Physics I Student Text Book
22. What is the momentum of a 200 kg mass if it has kinetic energy of 1600 J?
23. By what factor must the speed of a moving body change in order to double its
kinetic energy?
24. Suppose that you push on the 30 kg box as shown in the figure with a constant
force of 120 N through a distance of 0.80 m, and that the average opposing friction
force is 5 N.
a.
Calculate the net work done on the box.
b.
Solve the same problem as in part a, this time by finding the work
done by each force that contributes to the net force.
c.
Using the work energy concept, find the velocity of the box at the end
of the push
120N
30kg
25. Explain why it is easier to climb a mountain on a zigzag path rather than one
straight up the side. Is your increase in gravitational potential energy the same in
both cases?
26. Three objects are located in a coordinate system as shown. Find the center of mass.
5.00 kg
2.00 kg
4.00 kg
x
1.00 m
0.500 ml
174
convection
