UNIT 1
PHYSICS AND HUMAN SOCIETY
Introduction
Physics is a major driver of innovation and economic growth in world-wide in sectors
ranging from energy, security, advanced manufacturing, data extraction and analysis to
healt care and diagnostic, finance and communication for the benefit of society.
In this chapter you will understand the career opportunity of physics, the contribution of
physics for every individuals and economic growth of a country. In addition to see you
will practice the method of gaining knowledge, It is important in providing fundamental
knowledge for understanding nature, in providing applied knowledge for the development
of technology.
After completing this unit, student will be able to:
get acquainted with the impact of physics on society.
familiarize themselves with physics communities and their roles.
develop basic understanding of the making of physics knowledge.
familiarize themselves with basic principles and applications of physics in
various disciplines.
acquire basic knowledge and understandings of nature and appreciate it.
update themselves with the current status of physics.
1.1 Importance of Physics to Society
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the importance of physics to society
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the benefit of physics for society?
2. What are the technologies directly related to physics that benefit society?
1
Physics
Student Text Book
Physics is one of the sciences that generate fundamental knowledge needed for the
future technological advances that will continue to drive the economic engines of the
world. Physics contributes to the technological infrastructure and provides trained
personnel needed to take advantage of scientific advances and discoveries. Physics
is an important element in the education of chemists, engineers and computer
scientists, as well as practitioners of the other physical and biomedical sciences. The
future of any country and its contribution to the global economy is linked to its
ability to develop its human capital in the field of science and engineering. Through
its scientists and engineers, it is able to develop infrastructure for trade and industry.
Physics extends and enhances our understanding of other disciplines, such as
the earth, agricultural, chemical, biological, and environmental sciences, plus
astrophysics and cosmology subjects of substantial importance to all peoples of the
world.
Physics can play an important role in developing strategies to combat climate change,
in the development of cleaner energies, and in the development of technological
advancements.
Physics improves our quality of life by providing the basic understanding necessary
for developing new instrumentation and techniques for medical applications, such as
computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography,
ultrasonic imaging, and laser surgery.
Physics and technology must work together to resolve the need for new technologies
that will decrease the damage to our planet, for strategies to ensure that the people
of developing countries have the tools to progress, the need for solutions to deadly
diseases that remain a threat, and the need for solutions to the increasing demands
we place on our resources before they depleted. The role of physics in our modern
world is more important than in any other time in history.
Society's reliance on technology represents the importance of physics in daily life.
Many aspects of modern society would not have been possible without the important
scientific discoveries made in the past. These discoveries became the foundation
on which current technologies were developed. Discoveries such as magnetism,
electricity, conductors and others made modern conveniences, such as television,
computers, phones and other business and home technologies possible. Modern
means of transportation, such as aircraft and telecommunications, have drawn
people across the world closer together all relying on concepts in physics.
2
Grade 11
The Influence of Physics on Society
Explain the important of physics in transport, electronics and health.
Simple mechanical devices such as pulleys and levers, as well as complex modern
machines like quantum computers and nuclear reactors, would be impossible to
create without the use of physics.
Physics lies at the root of many inventions that have had an enormous impact on the
everyday life of the average person. There are numerous ordinary objects that people
use regularly that rely on the science of physics to function, including semiconductors,
lasers, X-rays, GPS devices, radio transmitters and bar code scanners.
Transportation vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes and space shuttles could not
be constructed without the help of physics experts. Physics is also useful for military
purposes, informing the design of weapons. Many of the scientists responsible for
inventing the atomic bomb were physicists, and today physicists are involved in the
creation of nuclear weapons.
?
Activity 1.1
1. Explain the influence of physics on society in transport, health, economy,
technology, etc
1.2 Physics Communities and Their Roles
At the end of this section you will be able to:
discuss about physics communities and their roles.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the purpose of establishment of physics communities? What are the
technologies directly related to physics that benefit society?
Physics communities are an organized group of persons associated together
for scientific purposes. This organization is established at the level of national,
continent as well as worldwide based on their aims. For example, Ethiopian Physical
Society (EPS) was established by Ethiopian physics professionals to enhance physics
research and education, thereby contributing its share to the overall development of
the country.
3
Physics
Student Text Book
Objectives of EPS
To promote physics education and research in the country;
To organize and coordinate various conferences on physics education
and exchange of scientific information;
To popularize physics in order to make students develop interest in
physics;
To promote active participation of Ethiopian physicists and the general
public in the design and implementation of the physics curriculum;
To create a means for disseminating scientific information; etc.
Ethiopian Physics Society in North America (EPSNA) was established to
promoting physics education and research among Ethiopians in Ethiopia and North
America. The mission of EPSNA was to promote and support the education and
training of Ethiopian Physics professionals by donating educational materials, field
equipment, computing facilities, provide scholarship. etc.
African association of physics students (aaps) is Student-run educational
association. It comprises students and recent graduates who are interested in physics.
The purpose of the organization is to encourage physics students in their scientific
and professional work in an African and an international context as well as to promote
relations between physics students from all over the world. The 'aaps' is committed
to supplement physics education with an international scientific experience and
it is affiliated with Physics societies and departments. 'aaps' is open to all persons
committed to physics.
Group Work
Make a group and do a project work on searching for detailed information about
Ethiopian space science society (ESSS) mission, strategies, goals etc and present
in the class.
?
Activity 1.2
What are the benefits of physics communities?
4
Grade 11
1.3 Making of Physics Knowledge
At the end of this section you will be able to:
discuss how scientific knowledge is constructed.
discuss the roles that the learning of physics plays to the individual
intellectual satisfaction.
?
Brainstorming
1. What is the process of gaining knowledge in physics?
One way of understanding the concept of knowledge is to look at the different ways
in which we acquire knowledge. There are two types of knowledge from two entirely
different sources. First, there is knowledge through experience: seeing something,
hearing about something, feeling something called a posteriori knowledge. Second,
there is knowledge that does not come from experience, but perhaps instead is
intuitively supplied from reason itself, such as logical and mathematical truths called
a priori knowledge.
Experimental knowledge
Experiential (a posteriori) knowledge is of many types. Four of them are sensory
perception, introspection, memory, and testimony: these are the four main ways of
acquiring knowledge through experience.
I. Sensory perception: sensory perception is perhaps the dominant source of
experiential knowledge, it immediately raises a critical question. We gather
knowledge by seeing, touching hearing, etc.
II. Introspection: Introspection is like a sixth sense that looks into the most
intimate parts of our minds, which allows us to inspect how we are feeling and
how our thoughts are operating. If I go to a doctor complaining of an aching
back, she'll ask me to describe my pain. Through introspection I then might
report, "Well, it's a sharp pain that starts right here and stops right here."
The doctor herself cannot directly experience what I do and must rely on my
introspective description.
III. Memory: a memory is like a recording device that captures events that one
can experience more or less in the order that they occur.
IV. Testimony: Testimonies from written sources are usually more reliable than
5
Physics
Student Text Book
oral sources, but much depends on the integrity of the author, publisher, and
the methods of fact-gathering.
Non-Experiential Knowledge
Turning next to non-experiential (a priori) knowledge, this source of information
is more difficult to describe. We presumably gain access to this knowledge through
rational insight. Usual examples of non-experiential knowledge are mathematics
and logic. Take, for example, 2+2=4. Indeed, I might learn from experience that two
apples plus two more apples will give me four apples.
Scientific method
The scientific method is an ordered series of steps to acquire knowledge based on
experimental evidence.
Examples of Scientific Method in Physics
Observation: the water boiled at a lower temperature when I was visiting the
mountains than when I was in other cities with low altitudes.
Question: Why does my water boil at different temperatures?
Research: In a chemistry book, you read that the boiling temperature of a substance
depends on the strength of the molecular bonds of a substance and
the pressure.
Hypothesis: Since the atmospheric pressure changes with altitude, the boiling
temperature of water is different at different altitudes.
Experiment: You decide to heat water at different altitudes and record the boiling
temperature.
Analysis:
Altitude (m)
Boiling point of water (C°)
O
100
150
99.5
305
99
610
98
1524
95
6
Grade 11
Your measurements indicate that as the height increases,
I
the boiling temperature of water decreases!
Question
Conclusion: The original hypothesis was correct. The
Analysis
boiling temperature of water decreases
approximately by one degree Celsius.
/
Hypothesis
?
Activity 1.3
1. Give some examples in the process of scientific method of knowledge gain.
1.4 The Mission of Physics and Career Awareness
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the job opportunities concerning to physics.
?
Brainstorming
1.
Mansion lists of career related to physics.
The diversity of physics careers is an appealing aspect for prospective students.
Physics graduates have skills that are in high demand in diverse sectors. These include
skills relating to numeracy, problem-solving, data analysis and the communication
of complex ideas, as well as a wider understanding of how the world works on a
scientific and human level.
Typical careers in physics
Whether you want to explore space, time,
PHYSICS:
matter or the many other intriguing elements
of the physical world, a physics degree can
OL
MULTIPLE
do wonders for your career path. While
CATEWAY
many physics graduates go on to work within
Geophysics
Science
Engineering
L
CAREER
graphy
Biophy
research roles, these are spread across many
YOUR
Chemistry
Meteorology
Authorize
OPTIONS
different industries - including education,
Medicine
Education
Actuarial
automotive and aerospace industries,
Patent
Science
defense, public sector, healthcare, energy,
materials, technology, computing and IT.
Figure 1: Career opportunities
7
Physics
Student Text Book
Physics careers in space and astrono-
my
As an astronomer, your job would be to
study the universe, collecting data from
global satellites and spacecraft and operating
radio and optical telescopes. Other tasks
within this sector include investigation and
research of new materials and technologies,
measuring performance of existing materials
Figure 2: A person observing
and technologies, and problem-solving at
stars through telescope
the design stage.
Physics careers in healthcare
Physics careers in the healthcare sector are
numerous. Medical physics overlaps significantly
with biomedical engineering, and physicists
work alongside biomedical engineers to create,
review and maintain medical technologies and
equipment. Although cardiology and neurology
are areas reserved for those with an additional
medical degree, physicists are regularly employed
within areas such as radiology, radiation oncology
Figure 3: observing CT scan
and nuclear medicine, in order to test and approve
result
the latest technologies and equipment.
Physics careers in engineering
The engineering sector provides many
careers in physics, particularly within
manufacturing and technology-based
roles. Physics graduates are often
tasked with improving and developing
products and manufacturing processes,
and benefit from a large range of
potential employers spanning multiple
industries such as medicine, energy,
transport, defense, space exploration and
Figure 4: engineers working place
telecommunications
8
Grade 11
Physics careers in energy
Whether we're talking about renewable or
non-renewable energy, there are plenty of
careers in physics within the energy sector.
Alongside the rise of renewable energy, oil
and gas companies remain big players in the
energy market and are major employers for
physics graduates. Oneb area of focus is
Figure 5: wind energy production
on extracting fossil fuel reserves in the most
site
efficient way possible, using knowledge of
the Earth's characteristics and the newest
technologies.
With the prospect of fossil fuels running out, energy companies are also branching
out into renewable alternatives such as wind and solar energy and are investing
heavily in research and development in this area, offering much career potential.
Your role here could be to collaborate with other scientists and engineers to develop
efficient and functional energy systems which harness the Earth's energy sustainably
and cost-effectively.
Physics careers in technology
A broad arena of continual growth and
innovation, the technology sector is a constant
source of new opportunities, challenges and
career paths. For physics graduates, there is
scope to work alongside other specialists in
order to develop new ideas and products. Fields
with particularly high demand for research and
development workers from various backgrounds
Figure 6: application of
include relatively young fields such as robotics,
machines
nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Technology careers in physics may be based in
public or private-sector research centers. Many
opportunities for graduates are available within
large technology companies, as these businesses
are keen to attract innovative and talented
researchers from around the world.
9
Physics
Student Text Book
Geophysics and meteorology careers
Those who study physics are also prime
candidates for environmental careers, thanks
to their scientific understanding of the ways in
which the Earth functions. While geophysicists
are more concerned with the prediction of
natural disasters, meteorologists focus on areas
such as daily weather forecasting, as well as
Figure 7: Metrological report
researching the long-term effects of climate
change.
Research scientist careers
The main reason to study physics is to help
you gain more in-depth, specialized knowledge
to prepare you to work effectively in a specific
field. Potential areas of specialization include
astrophysics, particle physics, biotechnology,
nanotechnology, meteorology, aerospace
dynamics, atomic and laser physics,
atmospheric, oceanic and planetary physics and
climate science.
Figure 8: Data scientist
The mission of physics is to advance science, engineering, and innovation
throughout the world for the benefit of all and serving Society.
1.5 Current Status of Physics
At the end of this section you will be able to:
list at least five recent new developments or discoveries in the fields of
physics.
?
Brainstorming
Go to library and websites search out what are the newest discoveries in physics
Nowadays, there is a lot of discoveries and inventions in different parts of the world.
Among this some are listed below.
10
Grade 11
Major recent discoveries in Physics
Physics is the study of physical world from the smallest particles to the gigantic
structures known to human; galaxies, clusters of galaxies and black holes. Some of
them are,
Discovery of Exoplanets:
Exoplanet or extrasolar planet is a planet
outside our solar system. As of 1 October
2022, there are 5,197 confirmed exoplanets
in 3,833 planetary systems.
Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz won the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 2019.
Figure 9: Artist's impressio of exo
planet orbiting two stars
https://www.nobelprize.org/interactive-visualisations-the-discovery-of-exoplanets/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel Mayor
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Didier Queloz
Black hole:
Black hole is a region of space-time the gravity
of it so strong that nothing can escape. Not
even, light (electromagnetic wave).
Roger Penrose, Reinhard Genze. And
Andrea M. Ghez have won the Nobel Prize in
2020 for discovery black hole formation and
discovery of supermassive compact object
(Black hole) at the center of our Milky-way
Galaxy.
Figure 10: Image of Black Hole
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Penrose,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinhard_Genzel
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrea_M_Ghez
11
Physics
Student Text Book
Quantum cryptography:
Cryptography is a way of sending information and messages in secret. Think of your
bank account number, password etc. without the secret encryption all these are at
risk. Quantum cryptography is an application of quantum physics that enhances the
security of the information exchange at higher level.
High energy physics (Particle Accelerators)
July 4, 2012 EC, CERN scientists (thousands of them doing collaboratively from
almost every corner of the world) discovered a particle called Higgs Boson. It is a
subatomic particle like photons, protons and electrons but at the very basic level.
The experiment took 60 years to prove the existence of this particle.
Gravitational wave (Large scale structures)
Even more years have taken to prove Albert Einstein's theory of gravity that says
gravity is a wave that travels with the speed of light 3.00 X 10⁸ m /s. The hypothesis
was formulated in 1916, it was proved to be right in 2016 by LIGO, it took again
thousands of scientists' collaborative work. They use Laser Interferometer as shown
in the figure.
Global warming:
Global warming is an increase in earth's temperature and its impact on earth's climate.
Climate is a long-term weather variability
averaged over many years and decades. Some
of the variables are temperature, humidity,
atmospheric pressure and wind. According to
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
a typical variability average year is 30.
Syukuro Manabe and Klaus Hasselmann
have won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2021
for modeling earth's climate and reliability
predicting global warming. The following
Figure 11: gravitational wave
images from Wikipedia illustrate the effect of
experimenting areas
global warming.
12
Grade 11
Temperature change in the last 50 years
Global surface temperature
°C
°F
Observed temperature
3.0
1.5
Change from pre-industrial
Human and natural drivers
Natural drivers only
2.0
1.0
0.5
1.0
0
0
2011-2021 average VS 1956-1976 baseline
-0.5
-1.0
-1.0 -0.5 -0.2 +0.2 +0.5 +1.0 +2.0 +4.0 °C
Year 1850
1900
1950
2000 2020
-1.8 -0.9 -0.4 +0.4 +0.9 +1.8 +3.6 +7.2°F
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syukuro_
Figure 12: illustrating the effect of
Manabe
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klaus
global warming.
Hasselmann
James Webb Space Telescope (JWST)
It is an infrared telescope located between
earth and sun at a distance of 1,500,000 km
beyond Earth's orbit around the Sun. It is
operating at the temperature of (-223 °C)
important for infrared detection of the
galaxies and other large-scale structures.
Figure 13: image of JWST
13
Physics
I
Student Text Book
It will tell us about assembly of galaxies, birth
of stars and atmospheres of exoplanets and
objects in our solar system.
Figure 14: Star formation in Carina
Nebula.
Future perspectives.
Research at the forefront is very expensive (Billions of dollars), it is also needing a
collaboration of scientists from many fields. It also involves many countries.
Rich countries have huge laboratories of their own with many physicists involved.
Ethiopia as developing country must start doing physics at the highest level for its
national security and sustainable growth. the Ethiopian Science and Art Museum
inaugurated by PM Abiy Ahmed 4 October 2022 would stimulate and attract young
students towards science. It is situated in Addis Ababa.
Figure 15: Some photographs of the newly inaugurated Ethiopian Science and Art Museum.
14
Grade 11
The museum holds exhibition hall dedicated to scientific and developmental
research. It also includes several building complexes dedicated to interactive display
screens, cyber security, geographical information system (GIS), data analysis,
manufacturing, and robotics to name a few.
Figure 16: Interior of the Dome-shaped Science and Art Museum
Planetarium: Inside this dome you can seat and watch from our solar system to
stars and galaxies. It is an amazing and inspiring place for young and old alike.
?
Activity 1.4
1. Google the web or go to the library to find some information to find out what
is going on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethiopia_Museum_of_Art_and_
Science.
Questions 1.1
Explain current status of physics.
1. What do you think the future of physics looks like? Your opinions in one
paragraph or two with justification.
2. What is the significances of the two discoveries- gravitational wave, and Higgs
boson?
15
Physics
Student Text Book
UNIT SUMMARY
Physics improves our quality of life by providing the basic understanding necessary
for developing new instrumentation and techniques for medical applications,
such as computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission
tomography, ultrasonic imaging, and laser surgery.
c
Transportation vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes and space shuttles could
not be constructed without the help of physics experts.
c
Physics is also useful for military purposes, informing the design of weapons.
Many of the scientists responsible for inventing the atomic bomb were physicists,
and today physicists are involved in the creation of nuclear weapons.
Physics communities are an organized group of persons associated together
for scientific purposes. This organization is established at the level of national,
continent as well as worldwide based on their aims.
c
The scientific method is an ordered series of steps to acquire knowledge based on
experimental evidence.
C
The mission of physics is to advance science, engineering, and innovation
throughout the world for the benefit of all and serving Society.
c
Physics have a lot of job opportunities in the fields of Astronomy, healthcare,
engineering, energy, technology, meteorology, etc
c
New discoveries of Exoplanets, Black hole, Quantum cryptography, High energy
physics, Gravitational wave, Global warming, James Webb Space Telescope, etc
have been seen in recent years.
END OF UNITQUESTIONS
1. What is the importance of learning physics in your opinion?
2. What did you benefit from knowing physics at this level?
3. List at least ten technological benefits that physics has contributed for society.
4. What is the benefit of establishing physics communities?
5. Is there a physics community in your high school? If the answer is yes, what is it
helpful for?
6. What process skills should you use investigating a phenomenon?
7. What are the process skills you are using in your in investigating a phenomenon?
8. What are the career opportunities physics have?
9. At the forefront in physics research, there are many countries collaborating. Why
is that?
16
