UNIT 5
radiation
air
HEAT CONDUCTION AND
CALORIMETRY
conduction
Introduction
Everywhere you look including yourself, energy transfer taking place in different forms.
One of such energy transfer methods is heat transfer. Heat energy is very essential to
society. From everyday cooking to some of modern-day luxuries, such as refrigerators
and Jet engines are using the transfer of heat energy at the heart of their working
principle. Heat is one of the mechanisms to transfer internal energy so that it can be
usable.
Heat is often misunderstood to be the same as temperature. In this unit, you will be
discussing differences and relationships between the two. Apart from that, you will also
learn about thermal expansion caused by the change in temperature, the quantity of
heat transfer due temperature changes, and change of phase along with internal energy
and the work done by a system.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
gain comprehensive knowledge on basic properties of fluids, thermal
properties of matter, phase changes, calorimetry
quantitatively and qualitatively describe about heat capacity, specific heat
capacity, and thermal expansions.
solve calorimetry problems.
use specific heat and heat of transformations in the practical application
of calorimetry.
175
Physics
Student Text Book
5.1 The Concept of Heat
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the concept of heat
?
Brainstorming:
Get motivated by the following questions
What is temperature?
Although they are highly related, heat and temperature are completely different
quantities. Heat is a measure of change, never a property possessed by an object
or system. Therefore, it is classified as a process variable. However, temperature is
a fundamental physical quantity which is to the average kinetic energy of particles
of the substance.
It should also be noted that work and heat are closely related. Both can change the
temperature of a substance, and heat can be turned into work and work can be
turned into heat. This equivalence is the basis of how heat engines power modern
society.
What is heat?
When a hot cup of tea is left in a room
in contact with the enveloping air, you
know that the cup of tea will gradually
cool down over time. So what is
happening over the course of time to
cause the tea to cool down?
Figure 5.1: Spontaneous transfer of heat is from hot to cold
The fact that the tea lowers its temperature is a sign that the average kinetic
energy of its particles is decreasing - the tea is losing energy. The energy that is
lost by the tea is being transferred to the colder surroundings. In general, if two
objects at different temperatures are brought in thermal contact, energy flows
spontaneously from the hotter object to the cooler one. The spontaneous transfer
of energy from hotter region to cooler region is called heat. Since heat is energy,
176
Grade 11
its SI unit is joules (J). When temperatures of the tea and that of the surrounding
air balance out, we say thermal equilibrium is reached. At thermal equilibrium,
the two regions may exchange energy, but no net heat transfer occurs.
Heat, internal energy and thermodynamic work
Another aspect of the definition
Key terms:
of heat is that a body never
Internal energy is equal to the sum of internal
contains heat. That is, we
kinetic energy due to molecular motion
cannot say "stored heat energy"
(translational, rotational, and energy of
as we cannot say "stored electric
vibration) and internal potential energy due to
molecular attractive forces.
current". Heat is not something
Heat is energy which is in transit from one
you get it sitting down. Rather,
body to another as the result of a difference
heat can be identified only as it
in temperature.
crosses a boundary.
Thermodynamic work is the quantity of energy
transferred from one system to another.
When an object is heated, its temperature rises, since the average kinetic energy
of its particles increases. In other words, the energy stored in the substance is
increased. This energy stored in the object is what we call internal energy. When
the tea is cooling down, it is releasing its internal energy in the form of heat.
Internal energy is equal to the sum of internal kinetic energy due to molecular
motion (translational, rotational, and energy of vibration) and internal potential
energy due to molecular attractive forces.
Heat and work are two different ways of transferring energy from one system to
another. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between systems, while work
is the transfer of mechanical energy between two systems. If heat is supplied
to an enclosed gas, the temperature of the gas increases by then increasing its
internal energy. If the gas is closed by a movable piston as shown in Figure
5.2, work is done by the expanding gas in raising the piston up. Thus, the heat
supplied is converted partly into internal energy and partly into work done. We
can also increase the internal energy of the gas by pushing the piston down and
compressing the gas.
177
Physics
Student Text Book
Surrounding
Heat
supplied (Q)
Work
done (W)
System
(ideal gas)
Figure 5.2: Relationships between heat, work and internal energy
Review Questions 5.1:
1. Explain the concept of heat and describe effects of heating.
2. What are the factors that cause heat flow between two systems which are
in thermal contact?
3. Is there any heat exchange between two systems in thermal contact if they
are in thermal equilibrium?
4. Is it possible to reduce net heat flow to zero? What about internal energy?
Is there any relationship between internal energy and temperature?
5. Consider two cylinders, A and B, of equal volume, which are filled with
equal amount of gases of the same type but A is at higher temperature than
B.
a. Can you say A has greater heat than B?
b. Can you say that A has greater internal energy than B?
C. If A and B are brought in thermal contact, which one loses
and which one gains internal energy? What is the direction of
heat flow? Does the measure of the average kinetic energy of
molecules in B increase or decrease?
6. In the figure shown, heat is supplied to the gas confined in a cylinder.
a. What would happen to this energy after it enters
into the cylinder?
b. If work is done on the piston and displaces it up,
gas
what would happen to the internal energy; decrease or
heat
increase?
C. If the internal energy remains the same while heat
is flowing in to the system, what happened to the energy supplied?
7. What are similarities and differences between heat and work?
178
Grade 11
5.2
Heat transfer mechanisms
At the end of this section you will be able to:
explain the concept of heat conduction
?
Brainstorming
This unit is motivated by the following discovery questions:
1. When you touch one end of a metal rod whose other end is on a fire, you feel
warm. How is that happened?
2. When you are outside of your house and enjoying the morning sun you
feelwarm. How is that happened? When you insert your hand over the steam
of boiling water, you feel warm. How is that happened?
3. What types of objects feel cold and what type of objects feel warm in your
house? Justify your answer and write them down.
Have you ever touched a hot pan and burned your fingers, or have you ever warmed
yourself in front of a campfire on a cold night? These are all related to the movement
of heat and how it gets transferred between substances and locations. Heat transfer
mechanisms are the ways by which thermal energy can be transferred between
objects, and they all rely on the basic principle that kinetic energy or heat wants to be
at equilibrium. Heat transfer occurs in three different ways: conduction, convection,
and radiation.
I. Conduction
If one end of a metal rod is over a flame and a person is holding the opposite end with
a bare hand, as shown in Figure 5.3, the heat will quickly transfer through the metal
to the person's hand and burn him/her. Such direct transfer of heat from one object
to another by collisions of neighboring particles is called conduction. In conduction,
no actual drift of molecules in the direction of heat flow is happening.
Key terms:
Conduction is the process by which heat energy is transmitted through collisions
between neighboring atoms or molecules.
Convection (or convective heat transfer) is the transfer of heat from one place to
another due to the movement of fluid.
Radiation heat transfer occurs via electromagnetic waves. Unlike conduction and
convection, radiation does not need a medium for transmission
179
Physics
Student Text Book
Conduction
Hotend
Coldend
Figure 5.3: Heat transfer by conduction
Materials such as metals that conduct heat very well are called good conductors.
Some substances are very bad at transferring heat, and these are called insulators.
Good insulators are, therefore, very poor conductors. Do you know why your metal
pots have wooden handles?
Do you know...?
The photo shows Aerogel, an extremely good thermal insulator, be-
tween a blowtorch and matches. The Aerogel blocks all of the heat
from the blowtorch and prevents the matches from burning. Source:
https://www.ucalgary.ca/
The reason is that the metal pots are good conductors of heat, and wood is bad heat
conductor. So, metal pots have wooden handles so that persons do not feel hot while
holding them
Houses are usually insulated with poor conductors such as rock, wool or fiberglass.
Imagine how cold a house would be if there was no protection from the cold outside
during winter, or how hot it would be if it were not protected from the heat outside
in the summer! Interestingly, though, insulators do not actually totally stop the flow
of heat, just slow the transfer considerably.
?
Activity 5.1:
1. Suppose you have a piece of metal and a piece of wood in your room. Why
does the metal feel colder than the wood if they are both at room temperature?
2. You know that rate of heat transfer depends on the properties of the medium.
180
Grade 11
a.
What do you think on impact of size or shape on rate of heat transfer?
b.
Two regular metal rods of different cross-sectional area and equal length
are put in to a fire, as shown in Figure 5.4. If you are holding on the cold
side, after some time you feel the temperature increase in your hand.
Discuss in groups which one of the metals transfer energy to your hand
sooner. Why is that?
3. If you want to have best insulating wall, which factors should you consider?
Figure 5.4: Conducting slab
II. Convection
Convective heat transfer is the transfer of heat between two bodies by currents of
moving gas or fluid. Convection happens in all fluids like the air in your environment,
water in a sea and so on. When a fluid is heated, the molecules at the bottom gain
energy and begin to move faster (See Figure 5.5). As they move faster, they begin to
spread apart, which makes the fluid less dense. But instead of being confined to a
small space, the fluid's warmer molecules begin to move upward, while the cooler,
denser portion of the fluid begins to sink.
Once the cooler molecules reach the
bottom where the heat is, they get an
increase in energy again. They rise back up
to the top, while the cooler molecules sink
warm
molecules
back to the bottom. The cycle continues as
Convection
cool
long as there is a heat source at the bottom.
molecules
Unlike conduction, in convection, heat is
heat
carried from the bottom to the top being
Figure 5.5: Heat transfer by
carried by molecules. That is, molecules
convection
travel with the heat.
III. Radiation
When you sit in front of a campfire, you are warmed by its heat. Hover your hand
over a hot light bulb, and you will feel the heat coming off it, even without touching
it. If you stand out in the sunshine, you will quickly get warmed by its rays. Such heat
181
Physics
Student Text Book
transfer mechanism is called radiation.
Heat transferred by radiation is called radiant heat. Like light, radiant heat is radiant
energy, and does not necessarily require a medium to carry it. This form of energy
transfer is facilitated through a type of electromagnetic radiation.
?
Activity 5.2
1. Let there be hot coffee, hot water, hot milk, hot tea, hot porridge. Discuss and
rank from hottest to coldest. You may design and carry out investigative work
to scientifically support your claim.
2. In hot areas what do people do to cool themselves? (Think of in terms of
clothing housing etc.)
Review Questions 5.2:
1. What would happen to boiling water if you close the cover tightly? Try to
describe it in terms of convention and conduction.
2. What is the difference between conduction and convection?
3. Does heat transferred less or more if the area is big?
4. Name the general mode of heat transfer in: Solids, liquids and gases.
5. A person prefers to sit by a fire during the cold winter months. Which heat
transfer mechanism gives him the most heat?
6. What would be the effect if air were as good conductor as iron?
7. Three types of heat transfer mechanisms are indicated in the same phenomenon,
as shown in Figure 5.6. Do you think these are correct designations? Explain.
Conduction
Convection
Radiation
Radiation
Figure 5.6: Summarizes the three heat transmission mechanism
182
Grade 11
5.3 Heat Capacity and Specific Heat Capacity
After completing this section, you should be able to:
differentiate between heat capacity and specific heat capacity
list the specific heat capacity of various materials
?
Brainstorming!
Investigate in groups why water is added in the radiator of a car? Why different
additives are added in the radiator water? Your investigation can be done through
literature search asking knowledgeable person.
Heat capacity
Different substances respond to heat in different ways. For example, if a metal
plate is placed in the bright sun on a hot day, it may become quite hotter than the
surrounding. An equal mass of water under the same sun exposure will be cooler
than the metal. This means that water has a higher heat capacity. Some objects
gain and lose heat quickly, some slow and some intermediate. Therefore, we need to
define a quantity called heat capacity.
Heat capacity is defined as the amount of heat required to change the temperature of
a given amount of matter by 1°C or by 1K. The mathematical form of this definition
is given by;
C=2/AT C
where Q is heat transferred to the object, T is change in temperature of the object and
C is heat capacity of the object. The SI unit of C is joule per kelvin (J/K); where 1 J/
K=1J/°C.
Consider two tankers, 10 kL and the other 10L, are filled with pure water at the same
temperature. If the two tankers were subjected to the same input of heat energy, the
10L water would certainly rise in temperature more quickly than the water in the
10kL tanker.
Key terms:
Heat capacity is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of an object
by 1 or 1 K.
The specific heat capacity of a substance is the amount of energy required to raise
the temperature of 1 kilogram of the substance by 1 / or 1 K.
183
Physics
|
Student Text Book
This suggests that the heat capacity of an object depends not only on the property of
the object but also on its mass. Because of its much larger mass, the 10 kL water has
a larger heat capacity than the 10L water. Therefore, we require defining a quantity,
specific heat capacity, which depends only on properties of the substance.
Specific heat capacity
Specific heat capacity is defined as the amount of heat absorbed or released by 1kg
of an object to change its temperature by 1o C. The specific heat capacity, c, of a
substance of mass, m, and heat capacity, C, can be defined as
c = m C , or, c = mAT Q
The SI unit of specific heat capacity is J/kg.°C, or J/kg.K.
Specific heat is a property that is specific to a given type of matter, and substances
vary in their specific heat. Table 5.1 holds specific heat capacity of some substances.
Table 5.1: Provides specific heats of some substances at 25 °C and atmospher-
ic pressure.
Substance
Specific heat capacity
Solids
Aluminum
900
Iron
448
Lead
128
Brass
380
Glass
837
Carbon, graphite
709
Copper
385
Gold
129
Silver
233
Ice (-5°C)
2090
Liquids
Alcohol (ethyl)
2400
Mercury
140
Water (15°C)
4186
Gas
Steam (100°C)
2010
Metals tend to have low specific heat. On the other hand, water has very high specific
heat compared to most other substances. That is why; water is commonly used as a
coolant for machinery because it is able to absorb large quantities of heat.
184
Grade 11
Example 5.1:
Calculate the heat energy transferred if the temperature of 600 g of lead is raised
from 20 °C to 100°C.
Solution: Cₚb = 128J / kg.K, m = 600g, T = 100°C - 20°C = 80°C = 80K
The amount of heat absorbed by the lead is
Q = cₚ₆mAT = 128J X X K
Q = 6144.0J
Review Questions 5.3
1. What does a higher specific heat capacity mean in terms of heat energy
transfer?
2. Concrete has a higher specific heat than soil. Use this fact to explain why a city
has a higher average temperature than the surrounding countryside at night.
3. How many joules of energy are required to raise the temperature of 100g of
gold from 20°C to 100°C? (Specific heat of gold is 129 J/kg. °C)
4. Why are coastal climates much more moderate than inland climates?
5. Which heats faster, land or water? You will answer this question by taking
measurements carried out to study differences in specific heat capacity.
6. A 0.80 kg aluminum pan on a stove is used to heat 0.20 L of water from 25.0
°C to 85.0 °C. (Hint: Mass of 1 L of water = 1 kg of water, around 4 °C)
a)
How much heat is required?
b)
What percentage of the heat is used to raise the temperature of the
pan?
7. Calculate the temperature increase of 50 kg of steel falling from a height of 50
m if 50% of its kinetic energy is converted into heat and assume no heat flow
to the surrounding ?
185
Physics
Student Text Book
5.4 Thermal expansion
After completing this section, you should be able to:
solve problems associated with thermal expansion
?
Brainstorming:
1. In the construction of ball bearings (shown in Figure 5.7b) the outer metal ring
and the inner metal ring rotate smoothly due to the solid iron balls between
them and oil lubrication. Once the iron balls are put in to place, they will be
there permanently. Have you ever wondered how the iron metal balls get in
to the ball bearings? Discuss with your group and come up with your opinion.
Your opinion must be supported by reason.
2. What is the reason for the bending of the railroad, shown in Figure 5.7a?
(a)
(b)
Ball Bearings
Figure 5.7: (a) Effect of thermal expansion, (b) application of thermal expansion
Thermal expansion is the change in size of matter in response to a change in its
temperature. When a substance is heated, the average kinetic energy of its constituting
particles is increased.
Key term:
Thermal expansion is the change in size of matter in response to a change in
temperature
Thereby, the particles start to vibrate and move more and usually maintain a greater
average separation. Except in some cases, most substances expand when heated
and contract when cooled. Thermal expansion is also affected by the properties
of the substance. For example, solids expand very less as compared to liquids and
186
Grade 11
gases. Gases expand much more than liquids and solids. This happens because
intermolecular force of attraction is very strong in solids, intermediate in liquids and
very weak in gases. All factors that affect thermal expansion will be treated below.
Thermal expansion can be classified in to three: linear expansion, surface (area)
expansion and volume expansion.
Linear expansion
If the change in length is along one dimension (length) over the volume due to a
change in temperature, it is called linear expansion. Suppose an object has an initial
length of L₀ at some initial temperature T₀. Let the length be changed to L when the
temperature is changed to T. Experiments show that if the change in temperature
(T) is not too large, the change in length (L) is directly proportional to T and
L₀. Then, the change in length is defined as
where,
AT = T - T₀ is the change in temperature,
L = L - L₀ is the change in length,
α is the linear coefficient of thermal expansion, which has the unit °C⁻¹
, or K⁻¹, and
L₀ is the original length.
T₀
L.
AL
T=T,+AT
L
Figure 5.8: Linear expansion
Each substance has a unique linear expansion coefficient; i.e., different substances
expand in different amounts for the same temperature change. For example,
the coefficient of linear expansion of Aluminum is 2.3 x10⁻⁵ K⁻¹ means that if the
temperature of 1 m long Aluminum is increased by 1 K, its length increases by
2.3x10⁻⁵ m. By the same change in temperature, the same length of copper wire
187
Physics I Student Text Book
increases by 1.7x10⁻⁵ m. This implies that the same change in temperature on
different materials of the same length produces different changes in length.
Table 5.2: Linear expansion coefficients of some solids
Material
α X 10-6 (°C⁻¹)
Aluminum
24
Brass and Bronze
19
Copper
17
Glass
9
Lead
29
Steel
11
Concrete
12
Example 5.2:
A steel bridge is built in several segments, each 20 m long. The bridge was constructed
when the temperature was 20 °C. If a gap of 4 cm is left between neighboring
segments what would be the maximum temperature that the bridge can manage
before buckling?
Solution:
T₀ = 20 °C, L₀ =20.0 m, L = 4 cm = 4x10⁻² m, α = 1.1x10⁵K⁻¹
The gap is filled from the two sides.
The expected rise in temperature is
T = L = 1.1X10³k⁻¹x20.0m 4.0x10²m = 180 K = 180°C
The temperature at which the bridge may buckle is
T = To + T = 20°C + 180°C = 200°C
Such big change in temperature may occur if there are exceptional moments such
as flowing volcano over the bridge.
188
Grade 11
Area expansion
The same method as linear thermal expansion can also be applied for area expansion.
Thus, consider the plate of surface area A₀ at a temperature T₀, as shown in Figure
5.9. For a small change in temperature of T, the change in area A, is given by
A = A₀βAT
where â is called the coefficient of surface (area) expansion, and it can be measured
by the unit °C⁻¹, or K⁻¹.
A
A+AA
Temperature T
Temperature T+AT
Figure 5.9: Area expansion
Relationship between a and ß
Suppose a square plate of side length L₀ and surface area A₀, is experienced a
change in temperature of T, then the new area in terms of the new length L can
be written as:
Since α is to the order of 10⁻⁵, then ignoring the third term containing α² 10⁻¹⁰)
doesn't affect the result and we get:
Comparing this with the original definition, we find that ß = 2α. This is a very
good approximation, so we do not need table of values for ß as we can easily find it
by doubling the value of α.
189
Physics
I
Student Text Book
Example 5.3:
The surface area of one side of a circular brass plate at temperature 100 °C, is 3850
cm². To put this plate inside a cylinder, you need to cool it to 0 °C. What is the
base area of the cylinder?
Solution:
T₀ = 100 °C, T = 0°C, A₀ =3850 cm²
The area of the plate at T = 0 °C is obtain as
A = (3850cm²) + 2 X 1.9 X 10⁻⁵K⁻¹ (0°C - 100°C)]
A = 3835.37 cm²
In order for the plate to pass into the cylinder, either side of its surface area should
be reduced to below 3835.37 cm².
Volume Expansion
When the length, the width and the thickness of the object are equally significant,
as shown in Figure 5.10, we need to consider the expansion of the object in three
dimensions. In this case, all the three lengths experience significant changes in
length with a change in temperature.
Peculiarity of water expansion
The peculiarity of water in its response to temperature changes is that its volume de-
creases as its temperature increases between 0 °C to 4 °C. The density of water has
maximum value at 4°C.
Final Volume
V
Initial Volume V
0
Initial Length
Length After Heating
Figure 5.10: Volume expansion
190
Grade 11
Change in volume V of an object subjected to a small temperature change T, is
given by
V = V
where γ is the coefficient of volume expansion.
The final volume, V, is, then
Both ß and γ have the same units as α; that is, °C⁻¹, or K⁻¹.
Relationship of γ , with a and β
Using a method similar to what we have done in deriving relationship between ß and
α, we find the volume of a cube of length L to be:
V = L³ = L₀³ (1 + αT) = Vₑ 3αT)
Evaluating all the above discussions, we find that:
γ = 2ß = 3a
Table 4.3: Coefficient of volume expansion of solids and liquids
Material
Volume Expansion Coefficient (β) X 10-4°C-1
Alcohol
1.12
Benzene
1.24
Mercury
1.82
Air
3.67
Example 5.4:
1, A 200 liter aluminum cylindrical reservoir is filled with Ethyl alcohol (
γ = 112 X 10⁻⁵ K⁻¹ at the temperature of 20°C. What volume of alcohol will overflow
if the system is heated to 100°C.
Solution:
α₄ₗ = X T₀ = °C, T = 100 °C, V₀ =200 lit
The two have the same initial volume, but will have different volumes when
their temperature is changed even with the same amount. The difference in their
volumes for an increase in temperature T, is equal to the difference between
the volume of the alcohol,
191
Physics I Student Text Book
V = V₀ + αT), and that of the cylinder, VAl = V₀ + T) Thus
Substituting values ans simplifying the result, we obtain
Vₗcy = (200lit) (80°C) (112 10⁻⁵) K⁻¹ - 3 X 2.31 X 10⁻⁵K⁻¹)
Vₗcy = 16.81 lit
2. While working in the laboratory, you fill water in a glass flask that holds exactly
one litter at temperature 10 °C. You heat the flask, raising the temperature of the
water and flask to 30 °C. Which material expands more; the glass or the water? The
information you need for deciding is the coefficient of expansion.
(take γ = 207x10⁻³K⁻¹ for water and
= 3x9x10⁻K⁻¹ = 2.7x10⁻K`for glass)
Solution:
The glass flask and the water both expand when heated. The water expands more,
as the result some water spills out. Let Vw be the increase in the volume of water;
V₉ is the increase in the volume of glass; and^Vₛ is the volume of water spilled.
Then,
V$ = VAT - VAT = (Bᵥ - ßg) VAT
V = (207 X 10⁻⁶ K⁻¹ - 27 X 10⁻⁶K⁻¹) X 10L X (30°C - 10°C)
V$ = 36mL
Real and apparent coefficients of cubic expansion
The formula used to calculate change in volume for a change in temperature of a
solid can be applied for liquids. However, why we want to discuss volume expansion
for liquids is that liquids are treated with their containers and consequently the
expansion of the container affects the result for liquids.
While measuring the coefficient of cubic expansion of a liquid, the result is not a real
value, rather it is an apparent value since the container itself is affected by the change
in temperature. Therefore, the actual coefficient of volume expansion is given by
γᵣ = r + γc where γᵣ is the real value, γ is the apparent value and Vc is the
coefficient of cubic expansion of the container.
192
Grade 11
Example 5.5:
Mercury of volume 10000 cm³, which is filled in a brass container, is heated from 10
°C to 80 °C. What will be the real and apparent volume expansions of mercury in the
brass container?
T₀ = 10°C, T = 80°C, = 18 X , Vb = 5.7 X
The real expansion of mercury is
^Vₘ,r = V₀γ T = (10⁴cm³) X (18 x 10⁻⁵K⁻¹) (80°C - 10°C)
^Vₘ,r = 126cm³
The apparent coefficient of volume expansion of mercury in brass container,
γ app = 18 X - X = 12.3 X
The apparent volume expansion of the mercury becomes
Vₐₚₚ = γ app VₒT = 12.3 X 10⁻⁵K⁻¹ (10⁴cm³) (70k)
AVa₇ₚ = 86.1cm³
Thermal expansion of gases
Gases expand more at ordinary temperature than solid and liquid. In the case of
gases, both temperature and pressure determine the change in volume of the gas.
Increasing the temperature leads to increase in the volume of the gas while the
increase in the pressure leads to decrease in volume. In this case, you cannot use the
method used in liquids and solids to determine the volume expansion coefficient of
a gas.
Applications of thermal expansion in solids
?
Brainstorming
1. Discuss and present the applications of thermal expansion in your locality.
2. Explore how mercury thermometer is calibrated. What property is used for
calibration and why is the mercury made to rise up a capillary tube ? What
would be the shape of the metals look like after heating up? Describe the
shapes
Figure 5.11: Two different metals attached together
3. Follow the demonstration by your physics teacher and explain Gravesend's
ring -and -ball experiment to describe thermal expansion of solids. Experiment
on thermal expansion of gases by putting an inflated balloon on a hot water.
193
Physics
Student Text Book
Some applications of thermal expansion:
Riveting two metal sheets tightly: As the rivet cools it contracts and makes
the joint between the two metal sheets tighter, as shown in Figure 5.12.
hot rivet - expanded
cold rivet . contracted
metal sheets
cool
hot
Figure 5.12: Riveting metal sheets
brass
iron or invar
The bimetallic strip: A bimetallic strip is made
out of two metals of different coefficients of linear
this metal
expands less
expansion bonded together. For example iron and
brass bonded together. The coefficient of linear
expansion (α) of iron (1.1 X 10⁻⁵ K⁻¹) is less than that
of brass (1.9 X 10⁻⁵ K⁻¹). When the strip is heated, the
brass expands faster than the iron and as a result the
strip bends towards the iron side, as shown in Figure
5.13.
Figure 5.13: Bimetallic strip
A bimetallic strip can be used as a switch in an electric circuit that turns on and off
according to the temperature. This switch is what we call thermostat.
Removing a stopper: If you find it difficult to remove the stopper
from a glass bottle, just heat its neck slightly. Now the neck of the bot-
tle expands and the stopper comes out easily.
Liquid thermometers: The expansion of mercury or alcohol in a liq-
uid thermometer is an application of the thermal expansion of liquids.
Boiling of liquids: When liquid is heated, the molecules of the liquid
expand and the liquid changes its state.
Sealed bottles: Medicine bottles are left out with some space at the top
so that the medicine does not spill off after expansion.
194
Grade 11
Review Questions 5.4
1. A steel cork of a soft drink bottle at normal temperature is too tight to open it.
Which method helps to open it easily; heating or cooling?
2. Does heating a thin, circular ring make it wider or narrower?
3. A segment of steel railroad track has a length of 60 m when the temperature is
0.0°C. What is its length when the temperature is raised to 40.0°C?
4. What would happen if, upon heating, the glass of a thermometer expands more
than the liquid inside?
5. Why do we use mercury in a glass thermometer while the glass undergoes
thermal expansion with it?.
6. When a metal ring and a metal sphere with equal radius are both at room
temperature, the sphere does not pass through the ring. After the ring is heated,
the sphere can pass through the ring. Why?
7. The diameter of a piston is 10 cm. To what temperature should a steel ring of
diameter 9.9 cm be heated so that the piston can pass through the ring?
8. Suppose a 300 L steel barrel is filled with Ethyl alcohol at a temperature of
10°C. How much Ethyl alcohol over flows if the system is heated to 100 °C?
9. Consider three metal rods, each has a length of 40.0 cm at a temperature of
0°C. When the temperature on them is increased by 100 °C, the length of the
one is increased by 0.08 cm, the second one by 0.05 cm. The third rod which
is made of combinations of the first two metals, extends by 0.06 cm. Find the
length of each portion of the composite bar.
10. Suppose that a steel hoop could at 0.0 degree Celcius be constructed around
the earth's equator, just fitting it at a temperature 25°C. What would be the
thickness of space between hoop and the earth if the temperature of the hoop
were increased by 5 °C. = 1.2 X
11. Two brass rods and one steel rod of equal length L₀ and equal cross-sectional
are joined rigidly at their ends. All rods are in the state of zero tension at 0° C.
Find the length of the system when the temperature is increased to T. (Take
a
12. The length of a copper wire at 0°C is 100 cm and it is is shorter by 0.05 cm from
a steel wire at the same temperature. To what value should the temperature on
the two wires be increased so that the two wires attain the same length?
13. Calculate the change in area if the surface area of a container with a glass
cover is 0.05 m2 and a = 9 X 10⁻⁶ °C-1 when it is exposed to a temperature
difference of 96 °C.
195
Physics
Student Text Book
L
14. Calculate the volume difference of a 1.00 m³ of water when heated from 10 °C
to 90°C. = 2.1 X 10-4 °C-1.
5.5 Change of phase
After completing this section, you should be able to:
discuss the phenomena of change of phase
?
Brainstorming
You know that heat is a transfer or flow of energy due to temperature dif-
ference.
1. Is there a situation in which heat transfers without bringing change in the
temperature of the substance?
2. Have you ever noticed that melting or boiling undertakes without any change
in temperature while heat is being transferring? What happened to the heat
supplied?
Anything that has mass is made up of matter - an all-encompassing word for atoms
and molecules that make up our physical world. We describe this matter as existing
in states (sometimes referred to as phases). Most people are familiar with three states
of matter - solids, liquids and gases. The term phase is used to describe a specific
state of matter, such as a liquid, solid or gas.
Most substances can exist in different states. For example, water exists in liquid state,
water as solid state, such ice, and water as gaseous state such as steam or water vapor.
All these states or phases are the result of being at different temperatures. Phases
of matter are inter-changeable. That is, matter can be changed from one state to
another by adding or taking heat from the object.
196
Grade 11
What is phase change?
What is important about phases of matter is that matter undergoes changes in phase.
When a substance is supplied with heat, it either changes its temperature or changes
its internal energy. When internal energy is changed as heat is supplied the substance
undergoes phase change. At phase change the heat supplied is used to change the
molecular structure to break the bonds between molecules keeping the temperature
constant. The transition from one phase to another is called phase change or phase
transition, for instance, solid to liquid (melting), liquid to gas (evaporation).
Latent heat
The energy absorbed or released by a substance during a change in its physical state
(phase) that occurs without changing its temperature is called latent heat. The
amount of heat absorbed or released by an object of mass, m, is given mathematically
by
Q = mL
where L is called the latent heat of the substance; i.e., L = Lf for heat of fusion and
L=Lᵥ = for heat of vaporization. Its SI unit is joule per kilogram (J/kg).
Latent heat depends on the nature of the phase change as well as on the properties of
the substance.
Key terms
Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat absorbed by 1kg of a substance from
solid to liquid - leaving the temperature of the system unaltered.
Latent heat of vaporization is the amount of heat absorbed by 1kg of the substance
to change its phase from liquid to gas.
The word "latent" means "hidden", so why is the term hidden? The reason why it
is called latent heat is that it cannot be measured by a thermometer. The energy
involved in a phase change is used to break bonds, and hence there is no increase in
the kinetic energies of the particles (therefore, no rise in temperature). An important
point that we should consider is that at a given pressure, any phase change undertakes
at a specific temperature.
Latent heat of fusion (Lf) is defined as the amount of heat absorbed by 1 kg
of a substance to change its state from solid to liquid without any change in
temperature. The temperature at which fusion takes place is called the melting point
of the substance. For example, the melting point of water is 0°C. Since fusion and
solidification of a given substance are the exact opposite processes, they have equal
in magnitude, but opposite in sign.
197
Physics I Student Text Book
Heat of vaporization (Lᵥ) is defined as the quantity of heat transferred to change 1
kg of a substance from liquid state to gaseous state keeping the temperature constant.
The temperature at which a liquid substance changes to steam is called boiling point.
For example, the boiling point of water is 100 °C.
The temperature versus heat graph, in Figure 5.14, shows temperatures at which
phase changes take place.
Phase Change
Phase Change
(Solid Liquid)
(Liquid Gas)
Gas
Temperature (°C)
Vaporization
Condensation
Liquid
Melting
Freezing
Solid :::
Heat Energy
Figure 5.14: Temperature versus heat diagram
Table 5.4: Latent heat of fusion (Lf) and latent heat of vaporization (Lv)
Melting Point
Boiling point
Substance
(°C)
Lf (J/kg)
LV( J/kg)
(°C)
Oxygen
-218.79
1.38 X 10⁴
-182.97
2.13 X 105
Ethyl alcohol
-114
1.04 X 10⁵
78
8.54 X 10⁵
Water
0.00
3.33 X 10⁵
100.00
2.26 X 10⁶
Lead
327.3
2.45 X 04
1750
8.70 X 10⁵
Copper
1083
1.34 X 10⁵
1187
5.06 X 10⁶
Example 5.6
Suppose the temperature of 4 kg of water is increased from -50 °C to steam at 100 °C,
at standard pressure. Assume the specific capacity of ice is constant, 21 J/g.K. How
much energy is absorbed by the water? Draw the temperature versus heat added
graph.
Solution:
Cᵢ = 2100 J kg.K, Lf = 3.36x X J / kg, cw = 4200 kg.K, Tᵢ = -50°C,
Tₘ = 0°C, Tb = 100°C, Lᵥ = X kg,
The heat energy absorbed by the ice to increase the temperature from Tᵢ = -50°Cto
melting point (Tₘ = 0°C) is,
Qi =
198
Grade 11
The energy absorbed by the ice at 0°C to water at 0°C,
Qf = mL = 4kg X 3.36 X / kg = 1344000J
The energy absorbed by the water to increase its temperature from 0°C to boiling
point
(Tb = 100°C)
,
Qw = mcw (Tb - Tₘ) = 4kg X / kg.K (100°C - 0°C) = 1680000 J
The energy absorbed to change water at 100°C to steam at 100°C,
Q$ = mLv = 4kg X 32.25 X 10⁶ J / kg = 1.29x 10⁸ J
The total energy absorbed by the water is, then
Q = Qi + Qf + Qw + Q$
Q = 420000 J + 1344000J + 1680000 J + 129000000 J
Q = 132444000 J
Temperature (°C)
Gas phase
100
Liquid phase
0
420000 1764000
3444000
132444000
solid phase
Heat (J)
-50
Figure 5.15. illustrates how the temperature varies when we add heat continuously to a
specimen of ice with an initial temperature below 0°C (point A).
Phase diagram
Phase diagram is a graphical representation of the physical states of a substance
under different conditions of temperature and pressure. The commonly known
phase diagram has pressure on the y-axis and temperature on the x-axis. As you can
see in Figure 5.16, there are three major curves for boiling, freezing or melting or
199
Physics
Student Text Book
fusion, and sublimation on the phase diagram. As you cross the lines or curves on
the phase diagram, a phase change occurs.
At several points on the graph, the temperature and pressure combinations will
create a state of phase equilibrium between two phases. This is illustrated by a line
along those temperature-pressure combinations called, "phase equilibrium lines." At
every point along that line, there is equilibrium of both phases.
Key terms
The triple point represents the combination of pressure and temperature that
facilitates all phases of matter at equilibrium.
Critical Point is the point in temperature and pressure on a phase diagram where
the liquid and gaseous phases of a substance merge together into a single phase.
Fusion curve
solid phase
compressible
supercritical fluid
liqiud
critical pressure
Pressure
Pcr
liquid
critical point
phase
Vaporization curve
triple point
gaseous phase
Ptp
sublimation
vapour
curve
critical tempreture
Tₜₚ
Tcr
Temperature
Figure 5.16: Phase diagram
The triple point: The triple point is a point at which the three lines on the pressure-
temperature graph converge, offering an equilibrium state where all the three phases
of solid, liquid and gas exist simultaneously. For example, the single combination
of pressure and temperature at which liquid water, solid ice, and water vapor can
coexist in a stable equilibrium occurs at exactly 273.1600 K and a partial vapor
pressure of 611.657 Pa.
Sublimation:
Sublimation is the term for a phase change that proceeds directly from the solid phase to
the vapor phase without first making the transition to the liquid state.
200
Grade 11
Critical point (or, critical state): The critical point occurs where the critical
temperature and critical pressure of a substance meet. Above this point clear phase
boundaries cease to exist. For water the critical point is around 647 K and 22 MPa. The
properties of the gas and liquid phases merge together giving only one phase at the
critical point. Beyond the temperature of the critical point, the merged single phase
is known as a supercritical fluid. A substance cannot form a liquid above its critical
temperature, regardless of the applied pressure. Above the critical temperature, the
molecules have enough kinetic energy to overcome the intermolecular attractive
forces.
The critical point is different to the boiling point of a substance. The boiling point
of a substance is usually meant to mean the boiling point at standard atmospheric
pressure. However, the actual boiling point of a substance depends on the surrounding
pressure. From the phase diagram the substance has a number of boiling points
following the curving blue line. The lower the pressure, the lower is the boiling
point. The critical point occurs only at one specific temperature and pressure.
Table 5.5: Liquid-vapor critical temperature and pressure for selected substances
Substance
Critical temperature
Critical pressure (absolute)
Mercury
1,476.9 °C (1,750.1 K)
1,720 atm (174,000 kPa)
Sulfur
1,040.85 °C (1,314.00 K)
207 atm (21,000 kPa)
Iron
8,227 °C (8,500 K)
Gold
6,977 °C (7,250 K)
5,000 atm (510,000 kPa)
Review Questions 5.5
1. Why does the melting point of ice get lower at higher pressures?
2. Define critical temperature. Does it vary with pressure? Is it the same as
boiling point?
3. Does the boiling point increase indefinitely with increased pressure?
4. Collect the triple points of water, carbon dioxide, mercury, and zinc, in the
internet. Compare temperatures of these at triple point with the corresponding
melting points at standard pressure.
5. Is it possible to compress steam to form a liquid if the temperature is higher
than 374°C?
6. Calculate the heat energy required to melt 10 g of copper at its melting point.
(Lf for copper = 209 000 J/kg).
7. Calculate the heat energy released to cool 0.1kg of aluminium from 2,470°C
201
Physics
I
Student Text Book
(boiling point of Al) of aluminium gas to solid aluminium at 660.3°C (melting
point of Al) at standard pressure.
8. The diagram shows the phase diagram of CO2.
a. At what temperature and pressure can the solid, liquid and vapor phases of
CO2 coexist in equilibrium?
b. At what temperature does carbon dioxide undergoes change in state at
standard pressure? What type of state change does it undergo?
C. What are the critical temperature and pressure for CO2?
Critical
Supercritical
point
c
fluid
72.9 atm
Liquid
Pressure (not to scale)
5.1 atm
0
Triple
Solid
point
1 atm
Gas
B
-78.5
°C
-56.7 °C
31 °C
Temperature (not to scale)
9. The diagram below shows the phase diagram of water.
a. At what temperature and pressure can the solid, liquid and vapor phases of
water coexist in equilibrium?
b. Is water solid, liquid or gas at 0.01 °C under 1 atm?
217.75 atm
critical point
Pc
Critical
Pressure
LIQUID
melting
PHASE
SOLID
Pressure, P
PHASE
1 atm.
Normal Boiling Point
triple point
GAS
0.006 atm
PHASE
sublimation
0.01
°C
100°C
373.99 °C
Temperature, T
Critical Temperature
202
Grade 11
5.6 Calorimetry
After completing this section, you should be able to:
solve problems associated with Calorimetry
investigate a phenomena related with heat capacity from every day
experience.
?
Brainstorming
You have learned specific heat and heat capacity and later specific latent heat.
Discuss how you can measure the specific heat and latent heat of a substance.
Calorimetry is the measurement of the quantity of heat exchanged between
substances. The experimental approach of measuring heat capacities and the heat
changes during chemical and physical processes is called calorimetry. A calorimeter
is a device used to measure specific heat capacity and specific latent heat of solids or
liquids.
5.6.1. Measuring specific heat capacity
There are several methods we can use to determine the specific heat capacity of a
substance, but remember that to calculate this value we will always need to know:
the mass of the substance,
the amount of heat energy supplied,
its starting temperature, and
the final temperature.
All of these slightly different approaches of specific heat measurement methods
involve heat exchange. This is done by heating one material and bringing it in
thermal contact with a relatively colder body so that they exchange heat. The heat
from the hot body is used to warm a colder body. In approaching these heat exchange
calculations we use the principle that for an isolated system, the heat energy lost
(Q₁₀ₛₜ) from the hot body will equal the heat gained (Qₐᵢₙ) by the cold body.
Heat gained by cold object = Heat lost by hot object
203
Physics I Student Text Book
Example 5.7
A 0.05 kg bar of unknown metal is heated to 200.0°C and then immersed into a
container with 0.40 kg of water initially at 20.0°C. If the final equilibrium temperature
of the system is 22.4°C, find the specific heat of the metal.
Solution:
Using the heat exchange method,
Qw = -Qₛ,
0.4 kgx(4186 J/kg)x(2.4°C-20.0°C) = -0.05 kg x(22.4°C-200.0°C)
Solving this for Cₛ, we obtain,
cₛ = 453J/kg.°C.
Electrical heating to determine the specific heat capacity of a solid
The electrical method can be used to find the specific heat capacity of a solid or a
liquid. The diagram in Figure 5.17 The electrical method can be used to find the
specific heat capacity of a solid or a liquid. The diagram in Figure 5.17 shows the
apparatus used to find the specific heat capacity of a solid by electric method. In this
case, the hot body losing the heat energy is the electrical heater. We assume only
the solid object gains heat. We ignore any heat energy supplied to the thermometer
and any heat lost to the surroundings, and assumed that the electrical heater is 100%
efficient in this calculation.
thermometer
+
electrical heater of
known power
insulation
solid sample of
known mass
Figure 5.17: Finding the specific heat capacity of a known mass
Key term:
Calorimetry is the measurement of the quantity of heat exchanged between
substances.
204
Grade 11
If we know the power rating of the heater and we know how long the heater is
switched on for we can determine the quantity of heat energy supplied to the block
as:
E = Pt
where E is the energy supplied in the time t, and P is the power rating of the heater.
For a given mass, mₛ, and change in temperature, T, the specific heat capacity, cₛ
, can be determined from the principle of calorimetry as
Pt = m&c AT
Example 5.8
A 100 W electrical heater, running for 5 minutes, warmed a 0.50 kg block of an
unknown metal. The initial temperature of the metal block was 20.0 °C and its final
temperature was 86.6 °C. Determine the type of the metal.
Solution
t = 60x5 S = 300 s, T = Tf - Tᵢ = 86.6°C - 20°C = 66.6°C
The total energy supplied to the metal block:
E = Pt = 100 Wx 300 S = 30000 J
The heat gained by the block: Q = mₛcₛAT = 0.5kg X X 66.6°C
Since heat supplied equals heat gained, we have
0.50 kg X Cₛ X 66.60 °C = 30000.00 J
30000.00J
cₛ
=
=
900.90J/kg.°C
0.50kgx66.60°C X
Comparing this value with the value given in Table 5.1, the metal block is an
aluminum block.
205
Physics I Student Text Book
I. Electrical heating to determine the specific heat capacity of a liquid
Electrical heating can also be used to determine
the specific heat capacity of a liquid. An insulated
Thermometer
container could be used for the liquid. Alternatively,
a calorimeter could be used to hold the liquid.
Stirrer
In this case, the liquid is continuously stirred and
we will take into account the heat energy supplied
Heater
to the calorimeter as well as that supplied to the
liquid. The diagram in Figure 5.18 shows the use of
Water
Insulated
a calorimeter to determine the specific heat capacity
base
Calorimeter
of water.
Figure 5.18: Determining the specific heat capacity of a liquid
Applying the heat exchange method for a given mass of liquid, m₁, specific heat
capacity, c₁, using a calorimeter of mass, mc specific heat capacity, C,, and change
in temperature, T,
mccc
Example 5.9
A copper calorimeter and stirrer of mass 350 g contains 227 g of a liquid. A 1000 W
heater running for 1 minute and 15 seconds heated this combination of liquid and
calorimeter from 20 °C to 88 °C. Calculate the specific heat capacity of this liquid
given that the specific heat capacity of copper is 420 J/kg.K.
Solution:
t = 75 s, P = 1000W, T = 88 °C - 20 °C = 68 °C, Cc = 420J/kg.K, m₁ = 0.225kg,
mc = 0.35 kg
Heat supplied: Pt = 1000W X 75 S = 75000J
Heat gained by the calorimeter and the liquid:
Q = 0.225kgxc X 68 °C + 0.350 kgx 420 J kg. 68 °C
Q = (17 kg.ºC)c,+9996 J
Using the heat exchange method,
II
75000 = (15.3 kg.°C)c₁+9996]
206
Grade 11
After some rearrangements, we obtain
75000 J - 9996 J
c₁ =
=
4,248.6J/kg.°C
15.3 kg. C
The type of the liquid is water.
Mixture method
This method can be adapted to measure the specific heat capacity of a solid or liquid.
The diagram in Figure 5.19 shows the method used to determine the specific heat
capacity of a solid. The solid, of known mass, mₛ, is heated in a water bath to a
temperature of Th. This temperature will be the initial temperature of the solid.
The solid is then quickly transferred to the cold water of known mass, mw , in the
calorimeter. Once in the calorimeter, the hot object (in this case a steel bolt) loses
some heat energy to the colder water, and the colder calorimeter and stirrer. We stir
the water and record the highest temperature on the thermometer, which will be the
final temperature, Tf, of the mixture.
cotton
thermometer
thread
stirrer
cover
cotton
thread
beaker
water
outer
jacket
steel
bolt
calorimeter
lagging
material
tripod
stand
HEAT
steel
bolt
Figure 5.19: Determining the specific heat capacity of a solid (bolt in this case) using the
method of mixtures
207
Physics I Student Text Book
In this case, the heat lost by the hot solid object (in this case, the bolt) will be equal
to the heat gained by the water and the calorimeter/stirrer.
-Qₛ
where,
The heat lost by the
The heat gained by the cold water: Qw = mwcw (Tf -T.)
The heat gained by the calorimeter: Qc = mccc (Tf -T.)
Substituting these expressions in the former equation, we obtain an expression, from
which the specific heat capacity of the liquid can be derived:
Example 5.10:
In the above activity, suppose the temperature and mass of the bolt is 100 °C and 125
g, respectively. Mass of water is 200 g, and mass of copper calorimeter, copper stirrer
is 100 g, and initial temperature of water and calorimeter is 20°C. If the equilibrium
temperature is 25°C, what is the specific heat capacity of the bolt?
Solution:
Heat lost by the bolt:
-Q = = = (9.375kg.°C)
Heat gained by the water and calorimeter + stirrer:
Q
Q =(0.2kgx4200J/ kg.°C +0.1kgx385I/kg.C)(75°C) = 65,887.5J
Now we know that,
Heat lost by the bolt = Heat gained by the water and calorimeter + stirrer
(9.375kg.ºC)c, = 65,887.5
?
Activity 5.3
Discuss uses of specific heat in your daily life in groups and share to your class
mates.
208
Grade 11
Uses of specific heat in our daily life are given below:
Utensils for making tea or coffee, or cooking vegetables or rice, are
made of low-specific heat materials. They have a polished bottom. As a
result, they heat up faster. For example, copper, aluminum, and so on.
High specific heat materials can be used as insulators. Wood, for ex-
ample, has high specific heat. During the summer, wooden houses will
keep the inside cooler. Builders can select appropriate building mate-
rials based on location and altitude. This enables the construction of
warmer or cooler houses.
Utensil handles at home are made of materials with high specific heat.
They provide thermal insulation. Specific heat also influences insulat-
ing capability and conductivity.
Probably the most relevant, real-life example of how a substance's spe-
cific heat capacity affects your everyday life is the specific heat of wa-
ter with regard to the ocean as a heat reservoir. Essentially, the oceans
of the Earth are enormous heat storage systems and the high specific
heat capacity of the ocean's water is why we have stable (or relatively
stable) temperature ranges within our climate systems.
5.6.2. Measuring specific latent heat
Measuring specific latent heat of ice or that of steam can be done by the two methods.
Electrical method: Energy is supplied for a known time by an electrical
heater of known power.
Method of mixture: Mixing water and ice in a calorimeter.
Measurement of specific latent heat of ice using mixture method
The apparatus in Figure 5.20 can be used to determine the specific latent heat of
fusion, Lf, of ice by mixture method. The copper calorimeter and stirrer is weighed
before being half filled with water. The mass of the water present in the calorimeter is
then determined before the water is heated to at least 10 °C above room temperature.
Small quantities of ice are then added to the water, while stirring, until the temperature
is below room temperature and all the ice has melted. The mass of the calorimeter,
stirrer and water is then determined to find out the mass of ice added.
209
Physics I Student Text Book
thermometer
stirrer
copper
calorimeter
ice
water
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.20: A simple experiment to determine the specific latent heat of fusion of ice.
We will use the principle here that the heat energy lost from the water and the
calorimeter will go to warming and melting the ice and then warming the cold water
produced when the ice melts.
Heat absorbed by ice and cold water = Heat liberated from calorimeter/stirrer and
water
Example 5.11:
The following experimental data are obtained using this method to determine
the specific latent heat of fusion of ice.
Mass of calorimeter, mc = 0.15 kg,
Mass of water, mw = 2.00 kg.
Mass of ice, mi , added = 0.60 kg
Initial temperature of ice, T₀ᵢ = - -10 °C
Initial temperature of water, Tow = 49 °C
Final temperature of water, Tf = 20 °C
Specific heat capacity of water, cw = 4200 J/kg.K
Specific heat capacity of ice, Cᵢ = 2100 J/kg.K
Specific heat capacity of calorimeter, Cc = 420 J/kg.K
210
Grade 11
Solution
The latent heat of fusion of ice Lf may be calculated from the following equation:
Substituting values in to this equation, we obtain
-f = 346,045
Measurement of specific latent heat of steam
When steam, at 100 °C, is bubbled into water, it first condenses to water and then its
temperature decreases as it loses heat to the surrounding water. If this occurs in an
insulated container then the heat lost by the steam is equal to the heat gained by the
water and the container.
The specific latent heat of vaporisation of water (Lᵥ) can then be calculated using
the formula:
where mₛ is mass of steam, mw and mc are masses of water and calorimeter,
respectively; cc and are specific heat capacities of calorimeter and water,
respectively; Tₛ =T-Tₛ = is fall in temp of condensed steam, and Tc =T-Tc = is
rise in temp of calorimeter or rise in temp of water; provided that T is the final
temperature and Tₛ (=100°C in this case) and Tc are initial temperatures of steam
and cold water, respectively.
Group Discussion
Discuss uses of specific latent heat in your daily life in groups and share to your
class mates.
Daily life is filled with examples of latent heat:
Steaming Food
Cooling drinks with cold water and ice
Extinguishing fire by using boiling water
Melting Ice on the road by using Salt
Steam electric energy
Transformation of water to cloud then to water/rain is the result Latent
211
Physics
Student Text Book
heat.
?
Activity 5.4
1. In a small group, devise and carry out an investigation into the amount of
heat necessary to convert a known quantity of ice to water at 0°. Show your
plans to your teacher. How will you measure how much heat is supplied? What
measurements will you need to take?
Review Questions 5.6
1. A 1.0 kg bar of unknown metal is heated to 400.0°C and then immersed into
a container with 2.0 kg of water initially at 15.0°C. If the final equilibrium
temperature of the system is 20.8°C, find the specific heat of the metal. What
is the type of the metal? Neglect the container specific heat and mass.
2. A calorimeter of mass 250 g contains 200 g of water. A 1000 W heater running
for 5 minutes, heated this combination of liquid and calorimeter from 20 °C to
80 °C. Calculate the specific heat capacity of this calorimeter
3. In an experiment to determine the specific heat of a metal, a 0.25 kg block
of the metal at 200 °C is dropped in a copper calorimeter of mass 0.02 kg
containing 150 cm³ of water at 25 °C. The final temperature is 40 °C. What
is the specific heat of the metal? If heat losses to the surroundings are not
negligible, is your answer greater or smaller than the actual value for specific
heat of the metal?
4. A copper block of mass 20 kg is heated in a furnace to a temperature of 500
°C and then immediately placed on a large ice block. What is the maximum
amount of ice that can melt?
212
Grade 11
UNIT SUMMARY
c
Heat is energy in transit due to temperature differences.
c
Two objects are said to be in thermal equilibrium if they are equal in temperature.
Two or more objects, which are in thermal equilibrium, do not exchange heat
energy.
c
Internal energy of a system or a body with well defined boundaries is the total of the
kinetic energy due to the motion of molecules and the potential energy associated
with the vibrational motion and electric energy of atoms within molecules. It
includes the energy in all the chemical bonds. Internal energy increases with rising
temperature and with changes of state or phase from solid to liquid and liquid to
gas.
c
Heat and work are two different ways of transferring energy from one system to
another. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between systems, while work is the
transfer of mechanical energy between two systems. Heat can be transformed into
work and vice verse, but they aren't the same thing. Heat and work both contribute
to the total internal energy of a system.
c
Conduction is the process by which heat energy is transmitted through collisions
between neighboring atoms or molecules.
c
Convection (or convective heat transfer) is the transfer of heat from one place to
another due to the movement of fluid.
c
Radiation heat transfer occurs via electromagnetic waves. Unlike conduction and
convection, radiation does not need a medium for transmission.
c
Heat capacity is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of an object
by 1 °C It is mathematically defined as
C=2T C
where Q is heat transferred to the object, T is change in temperature of
the object and C is heat capacity of the object. The SI unit of C is joule per
kelvin (J/K); you know that 1 J/K=1J/°C).
C
Specific heat capacity is the change in temperature of a unit mass of a substance by
1o C. The mathematical form of c is
The SI unit of specific heat capacity is J/kg.°C, or J/kg.K.
c
Thermal expansion is the tendency of matter to change in shape, volume, and area
in response to a change in temperature.
c
Thermal expansion of solids can be classified in to three: linear expansion, surface
(area) expansion and volume expansion. We can determine only cubic thermal
213
Physics I Student Text Book
expansion for liquids and gases as they do not have their own definite shapes.
c
When a changed in temperature T caused a change in length of L on a rod of
original length L₀ at an initial temperature T₀ and negligible width and thickness,
the fractional change in length is given by,
AL = aAT
where a is the linear coefficient of thermal expansion, has unit of °C-1.
c
When the area of a plate changes from A₀ to A when the temperature changes
from T₀ to T, we have the relation given by:
where ß = 2α is the area coefficient of thermal expansion, having a unit of °C-1.
c
Similarly, when the volume of an object changes from V₀ to V when the temperature
changes from T₀ to T, we have:
where γ = 2ß = 3α is the volume coefficient of thermal expansion, with a unit
of °C-¹.
In measuring he coefficient of cubic expansion of a liquid in a container, we get
an apparent value since the container itself experiences the change in volume. The
real value of coefficient of volume expansion of the liquid is given by
where γᵣ is the real value, γₐ is the apparent value and Vc is the coefficient
of cubic expansion of the container.
c
The energy absorbed or released by a substance during a change in its physical
state (phase) that occurs without changing its temperature is called latent heat.
Latent heat on by an object of mass, m, is given mathematically by
Q = mL
where L is called the latent heat of the substance; i.e., L = Lf for heat of fusion and
L = Lv for heat of vaporization. Its SI unit is joule per kilogram (J/kg).
c
Latent heat depends on the nature of the phase change as well as on the properties
of the substance.
c
Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat absorbed to convert a unit mass of a
substance from solid to liquid - leaving the temperature of the system unaltered.
c
Latent heat of vaporization is the amount of heat absorbed to change a unit mass
of liquid to gas.
c
Phase diagram is a graphical representation of the physical states of a substance
214
Grade 11
under different conditions of temperature and pressure.
c
The triple point represents the combination of pressure and temperature that
facilitates all phases of matter at equilibrium.
c
Critical Point is the point in temperature and pressure on a phase diagram where
the liquid and gaseous phases of a substance merge together into a single phase.
c
Calorimetry is the measurement of the quantity of heat exchanged between
substances. The experimental approach of measuring heat capacities and the
heat changes during chemical and physical processes is called calorimetry. A
calorimeter is a device used to measure specific heat capacity and specific latent
heat of solids or liquids.
c
There are several methods we can use to determine the specific heat capacity of a
substance, but all methods always involve heat exchange and the following should
be known:
the mass of the substance,
the amount of heat energy supplied,
its starting temperature, and
the final temperature.
c
The law of calorimetry states that for an isolated system, the heat energy lost from
the hot body will equal the heat gained by the cold body.
Heat gained by cold object = Heat lost by hot object
215
Physics
Student Text Book
END OF UNIT QUESTIONS
1. What is/are the condition/s for net heat flow from one place to another place? Is it
necessary to have a heat-conducting material for heat transfer?
2. When does net heat flow stop? Do two objects in thermal equilibrium exchange
heat?
3. What is the direction of the spontaneous flow of heat?
4. What is the relationship between temperature and heat? What about between tem-
perature and internal energy? Is internal energy of a confined gas solely dependent
on temperature?
5. If the temperature of a confined gas is increased, which form of energy is said to
be increased in the gas?
6. Suppose heat is supplied to an inflated balloon, which is firmly tied at its neck.
What are connections between the heat supplied, the thermodynamic work and
the internal energy in the balloon?
7. Describe conduction, convection and radiation heat transfer mechanisms. Name
the general mode of heat transfer in solids, in liquids and gases.
8. Which way is heat transfer believed to occur in a long, hollow cylinder kept at
consistent but varied temperatures on its inner and outer surfaces?
9. How can you change the boiling point of water?
10. At 20.0 degree Celcius, the length of a sheet of steel is 100.0 cm and the width is
50.0 cm. If the coefficient of linear expansion of steel is 0.000011/C, determine the
change in area and the final area at 100.0C.
11. The temperature of a metal bar rises by 10.0°C when it absorbs 9000.0 J of heat
energy. If the mass of the bar is 1000.0 g, what is its specific heat capacity?
12. Is thermal energy the same as heat, internal energy or has another definition?
13. What important properties can be obtained in the phase diagram?
14. What does the critical point of water at (217.7atm, 374.0°C) mean?
216
electrons
+
+
+
