
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
Physics Student Textbook - Grade 10
Physics
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
Student Textbook
Grade 10
+90 UC+
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
ISBN 978-99990-0-033-8
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
9
"789999"000338">
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
Take Good Care of
This Textbook
Physics
I TRANSPORT
10 1
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
1. Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic, old
newspapers or magazines.
2. Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3. Be sure your hands are clean when you use the book.
4. Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5. Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6. Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
7. Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8. Pack the book carefully when you place it in your school bag.
9. Handle the book with care when passing it to another person.
10. When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its back. Open
only a few pages at a time. Press lightly along the bound edge as
you turn the pages. This will keep the cover in good condition.
Physics
Student Textbook
Grade 10
Writers
Fikadu Eshetu (PhD)
Mideksa Kasahun (MSc)
Editors
Moges Tsega (PhD), content editor
Samuel Assefa (PhD), curriculum editor
Felekech G/Egziabher (PhD), language editor
Illustrator
Umer Nuri (MSc)
Designer
Derese Tekestebrihan (PhD fellow)
Evaluators
Zafu Abraha (MSc)
Girmaye Defar (MSc)
Dessie Melese (MSc)
+908C+
UPA
FLACA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
CHAWASSA 19/88/1976 UNIVERSITY
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
HAWASSA UNIVERSITY
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
iv
First Published in 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia,
Ministry of Education, under the General Education Quality Improvement
Program for Equity (GEQIP-E) supported by the World Bank, UK's Depart-
ment for International Development/DFID-now merged with the Foreign,
Common wealth and Development Office/FCDO, Finland Ministry for
Foreign Affairs, the Royal Norwegian Embassy, United Nations Children's
Fund/UNICEF), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and Danish
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through a Multi Donor Trust Fund.
© 2023 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Educa-
tion. All rights reserved. The moral rights of the author have been asserted.
No part of this textbook reproduced, copied in a retrieval system or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means including electronic, mechanical,
magnetic, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written
permission of the Ministry of Education or licensing in accordance with
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia as expressed in the Federal
Negarit Gazeta, Proclamation No. 410/2004 - Copyright and Neighboring
Rights Protection.
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the many individuals, groups
and other bodies involved - directly or indirectly - in publishing this Text-
book. Special thanks are due to Hawassa University for their huge contri-
bution in the development of this textbook in collaboration with Addis
Ababa University, Bahir Dar University and Jimma University.
Copyrighted materials used by permission of their owners. If you are the
owner of copyrighted material not cited or improperly cited, please con-
tact the Ministry of Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (P.O.Box 1367), Addis
Ababa Ethiopia.
PHOTO CREDIT:
Printed by:
GRAVITY GROUP IND LLC
13th Industrial Area,
Sharjah, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Under Ministry of Education Contract no. MOE/GEQIP-E/LICB/G-01/23
ISBN: 978-99990-0-033-8
Contents
1
Vector Quantities
1
1.1
Scalars and Vectors
2
1.2
Vector representations
3
1.3
Vector addition and subtraction
6
1.4
Graphical method of vector addition
8
1.5
Vector resolution
14
2
Uniformly Accelerated Motion
21
2.1
Position and Displacement
22
2.2
Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
25
2.3
Acceleration
30
2.4
Equations of motion with constant acceleration
36
2.5
Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
42
2.6
Relative velocity in one dimension
50
3
Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
59
3.1
Elasticity and plasticity
60
3.2
Density and specific gravity
63
3.3
Stress and Strain
67
3.4
The Young Modulus
72
3.5
Static equilibrium
77
3.5.1
First condition of equilibrium
78
3.5.2
Second condition of equilibrium
79
4
Static and Current Electricity
91
4.1
Charges in Nature
92
4.2
Methods of Charging a Body
94
4.3
The electroscope
97
4.4
Electrical Discharge
99
4.5
Coulomb's law of electrostatics
102
4.6
The electric field
104
4.7
Electric circuits
107
4.8
Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
110
V
vi
CONTENTS
4.9
Combination of resistors in a circuit
120
4.10 Voltmeter and ammeter connection in a circuit
128
4.11 Electrical safety in general and local context
132
4.12 Electric projects
136
5 Magnetism
151
5.1
Magnet
152
5.2
Magnetic Field
155
5.3
The Earth's magnetic field and the compass
159
5.4
Magnetic field of a current-carrying conductor
162
5.5
Magnetic force on a moving charge placed in a uniform
magnetic field
165
5.6
Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire
167
5.7
Magnetic force between two parallel current-carrying wires 170
5.8
Applications of magnetism
171
6
Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
177
6.1
Electromagnetic (EM) waves
178
6.2
EM Spectrum
180
6.3
Light as a wave
186
6.4
Laws of reflection & refraction
190
6.5
Mirrors and lenses
203
6.6
Human eye and optical instruments
228
6.7
Primary colors of light and human vision
238
6.8
Color addition of light
240
6.9
Color subtraction of light using filters
241
Unit 1
Vector Quantities
Introduction
In science, particularly in physics, you try to make measurements as pre-
Brainstorming
cise as possible. Several times in the history of science, precise mea-
question:
surements have led to new discoveries or important developments. Any
List some phys-
number or sets of numbers used for a quantitative description of a phys-
ical quantities,
ical phenomenon is called a physical quantity. Physical quantities can
and classify them
generally be divided in two groups: scalars and vectors. Scalars have only
as scalars and
magnitudes while vectors have both magnitude and direction. The con-
vectors.
cepts of vectors and scalars help us in understanding physics of different
natural phenomena. You will learn about this topics in this unit.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
understand the differences between scalar and vector quantities;
demonstrate vectors representation graphically;
know how to add and subtract two or more vectors graphically;
resolve a single vector into its components.
2
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
1.1 Scalars and Vectors
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define scalar and vector quantities;
Exercise 1.1
describe the difference between vector and scalar quantities;
jer
From what you
learnt in grade 9,
list some scalar and vector quantities.
what do you think
are the differences
As discussed in the introduction, physical quantities can be classified into
between vectors
two categories. Physical quantities that fall in the first category are those
and scalars?
that can be completely specified by a number together with an appropri-
ate unit of measurement. For instance, it makes perfectly good sense to
say that the length of an object is 1.42 m or that the mass of an object is
Key concepts
12.21 kg. You do not have to add anything to the description of length or
mass. Similarly, the statement that the density of water is 1000 kg/m³ is a
JET
Scalars are
complete description of density. Quantities that can be specified in this
quantities that
have only mag-
simple and straightforward way are called scalar quantities. Thus, scalar
nitude whereas
quantities are physical quantities that can be completely specified by a
Vectors are quan-
single number together with an appropriate unit of measurement. Time,
tities that have
distance, speed, length, volume, temperature, energy and power are other
both direction
examples of scalar quantities.
and magnitude.
On the other hand, quantities that fall in the second category are those
which require both magnitude and direction for their complete description.
Exercise 1.2
A simple example is velocity. The statement that the velocity of a train is
List examples of
100 km/h does not make much sense unless you also tell the direction in
scalars and vec-
which the train is moving. Force is another such quantity. You must specify
tors other than
not only the magnitude of the force but also the direction in which the
those discussed in
force is applied. Such quantities are called vectors. A vector quantity has
the textbook.
both magnitude and direction. Displacement, acceleration, momentum,
impulse, weight and electric field strength are other examples of vector
quantities.
1.2 Vector representations
3
Section summary
In physics, you deal generally with two kinds of quantities:
scalars and vectors.
Scalar are quantities that are specified only by their magni-
tude while vectors are quantities that are specified by their
magnitude and direction.
Review questions
1. Explain how vector quantities differ from scalar quantities
and give some examples for each.
2. Which of the following physical quantities are vectors and
which are not: force, temperature, volume, velocity, age,
weight?
1.2 Vector representations
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 1.3
identify the magnitude and direction of a vector;
How can you
discuss how vectors can be represented algebraically and graphi-
represent vectors?
cally;
discuss about the different types of vectors.
In the previous section, you learnt that vectors are represented both in mag-
nitude and direction. On the other hand, vector quantities are represented
either algebraically or geometrically. Algebraically, they are represented
by a bold letter as A or with an arrow over the letter, for example, A. For
example, a displacement can be represented by the expression S = 50 km,
Southwest. S = 50 km designates only the magnitude of the vector. The
magnitude is also indicated by placing the absolute value notation around
4
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
the symbol that denotes the vector; so, you can write equivalently that
S ≡ |S|.
On the other hand, vectors are represented geometrically by an arrow, or
an arrow-tipped line segment. Such an arrow having a specified length and
direction shows the graphical representation of a vector. You will use this
representation when drawing vector diagrams. The initial point of arrow
is called tail and the final point of the arrow is the head as it is indicated
in Figure 1.1. The arrow is drawn to scale so that its length represents the
magnitude of the vector, and the arrow points in the specified direction of
the vector. Hence,
magnitude
head
The length of the arrow represents the vector magnitude if it is drawn
direction,
in scale.
tail
The arrow head represents the vector direction.
Figure 1.1 Head and tail of a
vector.
Thus, in order to draw a vector accurately, you must specify a scale and
include a reference direction in the diagram. To do this, you need a ruler
to measure and draw the vectors to the correct length. The length of the
arrow should be proportional to the magnitude of the quantity being repre-
sented. So you must decide on a scale for your drawing. For example, you
might let 1 cm on paper represent 2 N (1 cm represents 2 N), a force of 20
N towards the East would be represented as an arrow 10 cm long. A scale
allows us to translate the length of the arrow into the vector's magnitude.
Key concepts
The important thing is to choose a scale that produces a diagram of rea-
sonable size. A reference direction may be a line representing a horizontal
Vectors are
surface or the points of a compass.
represented either
algebraically or
geometrically.
The following are the procedures that you might use for drawing vectors
graphically.
1. Decide upon a scale and write it down.
2. Determine the length of the arrow representing the vector by using
the scale.
1.2 Vector representations
5
3. Draw the vector as an arrow. Make sure that you fill in the arrow
Activity 1.1
head.
By using a ruler,
4. Fill in the magnitude of the vector.
a protractor, and
a square paper,
Example 1.1
graphically draw
Draw the vector, 16 km East, to scale by indicating the scale that you have
the following nu-
used:
merical vectors.
Solution
A) 10 cm, 60°
First, let us decide upon a scale. Let 1 cm represent 4 km. So if 1 cm = 4 km,
B) 15 cm , 120°
then 16 km = 4 cm and the direction is in the East. Using this information,
C) 3 cm, 30°
you can draw the vectors as arrows as follows.
16 km
Figure 1.2 A scaled diagram for a vector with a magnitude of 16 km.
On the other hand, the following are some of the different types of vectors.
1. Zero vector or Null vector: a vector with zero magnitude and no
direction.
2. Unit Vector: vector that has magnitude equal to one.
3. Equal vectors: vectors that have the same magnitude and same
direction.
Figure 1.3 Two equal vectors.
4. Negative of a vector: a vector that have the same magnitude but
opposite direction with the given vector.
Section summary
Algebraically, a vector is represented by a bold face letter or
an arrow over the letter.
Geometrically, a vector is represented by an arrow where the
length of the arrow represents magnitude and the arrow head
represents the direction for the vector.
6
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
1. Give an example of a vector stating its magnitude, units and
direction.
2. Choose your own scale and draw arrows to represent the fol-
lowing vectors:
A) À = 40 km North,
B) B = 32 m/s making an angle of 60° with the horizontal.
3. Discuss the different types of vectors.
1.3 Vector addition and subtraction
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 1.4
explain how to add and subtract vectors;
Is it possible to
add two vectors in
define the term resultant vector.
the same way as
you did in scalars?
Different mathematical operations can be performed with vectors. You
Explain.
need to understand the mathematical properties of vectors, like addition
and subtraction.
Addition of Vectors
The addition of scalar quantities is non problematic, it is a simple arith-
Key concepts
metic sum. For example, the total mass of 2 kg plus 3 kg is 5 kg. The
increase in temperature from 5° C to 12° C is 7°C. However, like scalars,
Scalars and
you cannot add two vectors. This is because when two vectors are added,
vectors can never
you need to take account of their direction as well as their magnitude. Of
be added.
For any two
course, you should remember that only vectors of the same kind can be
vectors to be
added. For example, two forces or two velocities can be added. But a force
added, they must
and a velocity cannot be added.
be of the same
nature.
The resultant of a number of vectors is the single vector whose effect is
the same as the individual vectors acting together. In other words, the
1.3 Vector addition and subtraction
7
individual vectors can be replaced by the resultant where the overall effect
is the same.
A+B
B
If vectors À and B have a resultant Ř, this can be represented mathemati-
cally as,
A
Ř = A+B
(1.1)
Figure 1.4 Addition of vectors À
and B.
Subtraction of Vectors
Vector subtraction is a straight forward extension of vector addition. If
you want to subtract B from Å, written À - B, you must first define what
is meant by subtraction. As it is discussed in the previous section, the
negative of vector B is defined to be - B; that is, graphically the negative of
B
any vector has the same magnitude but opposite in direction as shown in
Figure 1.5. In other words, B has the same length as - B, but points in the
-B
opposite direction. Essentially, you just flip the vector so that it points in
the opposite direction.
The subtraction of vector B from vector À is then simply defined to be the
addition of - B to À. That is,
Figure 1.5 Vector B and the
negative of Vector B.
A-B=A+(-B)
(1.2)
Note that vector subtraction is the addition of a negative vector. The order
B
of subtraction does not affect the results. Hence, as it is indicated in Figure
1.6, draw vector - B from the tip of À and join the tail of À with the tip of
-B
- B, then the resulting vector is the difference (A - B).
À
A-B
Section Summary
Vector addition is a means of finding the resultant of a number
Figure 1.6 Subtraction of B
of vectors.
from À.
Subtraction of a vector is addition of the negative of a vector.
8
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
Exercise 1.5
1. What is meant by subtraction of vector?
If two vectors
have equal mag-
2. What is meant by resultant vector?
nitude, what are
the maximum
and minimum
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
magnitudes of
their sum?
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the graphical method of vector addition;
use the graphical method of vector addition to solve problems.
You can add or subtract vectors using the algebraic or graphical method of
vector addition. You will learn about the algebraic method in your grade
11 physics. In this section, you will learn about the graphical method of
vector addition and subtraction.
As discussed above, one method for adding vectors involves manipulating
their graphical representations on paper. So using the graphical method of
vector addition, vectors are drawn to scale and the resultant is determined
using a ruler and protractor. The following is the discussion of the primary
graphical techniques: the triangle method, the parallelogram method, and
the polygon method.
Key concepts
Procedure for using graphical method of vector addition
Graphically, vec-
Decide on an appropriate scale. Record it on the diagram.
tors can be added
Pick a starting point.
using the triangle,
parallelogram and
Draw first vector with appropriate length and in the indicated
polygon method
direction.
of vector addition.
Draw the second and remaining vectors with appropriate
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
9
length and direction.
Draw the resultant based on the specific rule you are using.
Measure the length of the resultant; use the scale to convert
to the magnitude of the resultant.
Use a protractor to measure the vector's direction.
Triangle method of vector addition
Triangle law of vector addition is used to find the sum of two vectors. This
law is used to add two vectors when the first vector's head is joined to
the tail of the second vector and then joining the tail of the first vector
to the head of the second vector to form a triangle, and hence obtain the
resultant sum vector. That's why the triangle law of vector addition is also
called the head-to-tail method for the addition of vectors.
Thus, if two vectors acting simultaneously on a body are represented both
B
in magnitude and direction by two sides of a triangle taken in an order,
(a)
then the resultant vector (both magnitude and direction) of these two
vectors is given by the third side of that triangle taken in the opposite order.
A
This is the statement for the triangle law of vector addition.
R
Consider two vectors À and B shown in Figure 1.7 (a). To add these two
(b)
B
vectors using the triangle method, the head of vector À should be joined
A
to the tail of vector B. Then, the resultant vector R has its tail at the tail of
À and its head at the head of B as shown in Figure 1.7 (b). This is written
Figure 1.7 The triangle rule for
the addition of two vectors.
as:
Ř = A+B
(1.3)
10
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
NB
Activity 1.2
Consider adding two vectors À and B graphically. The two vectors
are shown in Figure 1.8. Using the above procedure of vector addi-
Θ
tion, add these two vectors using the triangle law of vector addition
if the angle Θ is 30°.
A = 5 N
Figure 1.8 Two vectors À and B.
Parallelogram method of vector addition
The vector addition may also be understood by the law of parallelogram.
The parallelogram law of vector addition is used to add two vectors when
the vectors that are to be added form the two adjacent sides of a parallel-
ogram by joining the tails of the two vectors. Then, the sum of the two
vectors is given by the diagonal of the parallelogram.
(a)
B
Thus, if two vectors are represented by the two adjacent sides (both in
A
magnitude and direction) of a parallelogram drawn from a point, then
their resultant vector is represented completely by the diagonal of the
A
parallelogram drawn from the same point. This is the statement for the
B
(b)
R-B-A
B
parallelogram law of vector addition
Suppose two vectors À and B are at arbitrary positions as shown in Figure
A
1.9 (a). Translate either one of them in parallel to the beginning of the other
Figure 1.9 The Parallelogram
vector, so that after the translation, both vectors have their origins at the
rule for the addition of two
same point. Now, at the end of vector À you draw a line parallel to vector B
vectors.
and at the end of vector B you draw a line parallel to vector À (the dashed
lines in Figure 1.9 (b)). In this way, you obtain a parallelogram. From
Activity 1.3
the origin of the two vectors, you draw a diagonal of the parallelogram as
Repeat activity 1.2
shown in (Figure 1.9 (b)). The diagonal is the resultant Ř of the two vectors.
using the parallel-
Thus,
ogram method of
vector addition.
R=A+B =
(1.4)
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
11
Since vector addition is commutative,
A+B=B+A
A
(1.5)
B
Polygon method of vector addition
TO
C
(a)
This law is used for the addition of more than two vectors. According to
this law, if you have a large number of vectors, place the tail end of each
successive vector at the head end of previous one. The resultant of all
TO
A
vectors can be obtained by drawing a vector from the tail end of first to the
head end of the last vector.
C
Suppose you want to draw the resultant vector Ř of four vectors A, B,
TR
B
Č, and D shown in Figure 1.10 (a). You select any one of the vectors as
(b)
the first vector and make a parallel translation of a second vector to a
position where the origin ("tail") of the second vector coincides with the
Figure 1.10 The polygon rule
end ("head") of the first vector. Then, you select a third vector and make
for the addition of vectors.
a parallel translation of the third vector to a position where the origin of
the third vector coincides with the end of the second vector. You repeat
Activity 1.4
this procedure until all the vectors are in a head-to-tail arrangement like
Use the polygon
the one shown in (Figure 1.10 (b)). You draw the resultant vector Ř by
method of vec-
connecting the origin ("tail") of the first vector with the end ("head") of the
tor addition to
last vector. The end of the resultant vector is at the end of the last vector.
find the resultant
vector Ř of the
Thus, the resultant vector R is an arrow drawn from the tail of vector D
three vectors:
to the head of vector B, i.e., Ř = D + À + C + B as shown in Figure 1.10
À = 25.0m, 49.0⁰
(b). Because the addition of vectors is associative and commutative, you
North of East,
obtain the same resultant vector regardless of which vector you choose to
B = 23.0m, 15.0°
be first, second, third, or fourth in this construction.
North of East and
C = 32.0m,68.0⁰
Note: You will follow the same procedure during the subtraction of vectors.
South of East.
Let us now consider a few special cases of addition of vectors.
Choose a reason-
able scale.
1. When the two vectors are in the same direction (parallel to each
other)
12
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
If vectors À and B are parallel, then the magnitude of the resultant
vector Ř is the sum of the magnitudes of the two vectors. Hence, the
magnitude of the resultant vector is
|R|=|A+B|
(1.6)
Since the two vectors are in the same direction, the direction of the
resultant vector is in the direction of one of the two vectors.
Key concepts
To determine the resultant of two vectors acting:
À
B
+
tin the same direction, add the given vectors and take the
(East)
1R
(a)
common direction.
1R
rin opposite directions, get the difference and take the direc-
+
B
(East)
tion of the vector with the greater value.
À
(b)
Figure 1.11 Resultant vector Ř
2. When the two vectors are acting in opposite directions
of two vectors À and B when
If vectors À and B are anti-parallel (i.e., in opposite direction), then
they are (a) same direction and
the magnitude of the resultant vector Ř is the difference of the mag-
(b) opposite direction.
nitudes of the two vectors. Hence, the magnitude of the resultant
vector is
|R|=|A-B|
(1.7)
Since the two vectors are in opposite directions with one another, the
direction of the resultant vector is in the direction of the larger vector.
Note: The resultant of two vectors acting on the same point is maxi-
mum when the vectors are acting in the same direction and mini-
mum when they act in opposite directions.
3. When the two vectors are perpendicular
If vectors À and B are perpendicular to each other as shown in 1.12,
then the magnitude of the resultant vector Ř is obtained using the
1.4 Graphical method of vector addition
13
Pythagoras theorem. Hence, the magnitude of the resultant vector is
|R|= V A² + B²
(1.8)
1R
The direction of the resultant vector is obtained using the trigono-
B
metric equation:
Θ = tan
(1.9)
Θ
Note: You can compare the result you obtain in each of the three
À
cases with a ruler and protractor. Surely, you will obtain similar
Figure 1.12 Two perpendic-
result.
ular vectors À and B; and its
resultant vector Ř.
Example 1.1
Exercise 1.6
Two vectors have magnitudes of 6 units and 3 units. What is the magnitude
If two vectors À
of the resultant vector when the two vectors are (a) in the same direction,
and B are per-
(b) in opposite direction and (c) perpendicular to each other?
pendicular, how
you can find the
Solution:
sum of the two
You are given with two vectors of magnitudes 6 units and 3 units.
vectors?
(a) When the two vectors are in the same direction,
|R| = (6+3) units = 9 units.
(b) When the two vectors are in the opposite directions,
|R| = (6 3) units = 3 units.
(c) When the two vectors are perpendicular to each other,
|R| = + B² = + units = 6.7 units.
Please compare the result you obtained here with the value you obtained
with the direct measurement by a ruler.
Section Summary
Two vectors can be added by graphical means using the tri-
angle and the parallelogram method. But for more than two
vectors, the polygon method is used.
14
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
1. Two vectors À and B have the same magnitude of 5 units and
they start from the origin: B points to the North East and À
points to the South West exactly opposite to vector B. What
would be the magnitude of the resultant vector? Why?
2. If two vectors have equal magnitude, what are the maximum
and minimum magnitudes of their sum?
3. If three vectors have unequal magnitudes, can their sum be
zero? Explain.
4. Consider six vectors that are added tail-to-head, ending up
where they started from. What is the magnitude of the resul-
tant vector?
5. Vector C is 6 m in the x-direction. Vector D is 8 m in the
y-direction. Use the parallelogram method to work out C + D.
1.5 Vector resolution
Exercise 1.7
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
What do you
resolve a vector into horizontal and vertical components;
think is vector
find the resultant of two or more vectors using the component
resolution?
method.
In the previous discussion of vector addition, you saw that a number
of vectors acting together can be combined to give a single vector (the
resultant). In much the same way, a single vector can be broken down into
a number of vectors when added give the original vector. These vectors
which sum to the original are called components of the original vector.
The process of breaking a vector into its components is called resolving
into components.
1.5 Vector resolution
15
Placing vectors in a coordinate system that you have chosen makes it
possible to decompose them into components along each of the chosen
coordinate axes. In the rectangular coordinate system shown in Figure
1.13, vector À is broken up or resolved into two component vectors. One,
Ax, is parallel to the x-axis, and the other, Ay, is parallel to the y-axis.
The horizontal and vertical components can be found by two methods:
graphical method and simple trigonometry. Let us look at them one by one.
Graphical method of vector resolution:
The following are the steps that you follow to resolve a vector graphically.
1. Select a scale and draw the vector to scale in the appropriate direc-
tion.
y
2. Extend X- and y-axes from the tail of the vector to the entire length
of the vector and beyond.
A
Ay=A sin Θ
3. From the arrow head of the vector, construct perpendicular projec-
tions to the X- and the y-axes.
Θ
4. Draw the x-component from the tail of the vector to the intersection
x
Aₓ=A cos Θ
of the perpendicular projection with the x-axis. Label this compo-
nent as Ax.
Figure 1.13 The horizontal (Aₓ)
and vertical (Ay) components
5. Draw the y-component from the tail of the vector to the intersection
of vector Ã.
of the perpendicular projection with the y-axis. Label this compo-
nent as Ay.
6. Measure the length of the two components and use the scale to
determine the magnitude of the components.
Trigonometric method of vector resolution:
The trigonometric method of vector resolution relies on an understanding
of the sine, cosine, and tangent functions. You can find the components
by using trigonometry. The components are calculated according to these
16
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
equations, where the angle Θ is measured counterclockwise from the posi-
tive x-axis.
Aₓ = Acos 0
(1.10)
and
Ay= Asin Θ
(1.11)
You can see that the original vector is the sum of the two component
Key concepts
vectors.
Vectors can be
A = Aₓ + Ay
(1.12)
resolved into com-
Because Aₓ and Ay are at a right angle (90°), the magnitude of the resultant
ponents along a
vector can be calculated using the Pythagorean Theorem.
specified set of
coordinate's axes.
(1.13)
To find the angle or direction of the resultant, recall that the tangent of the
angle that the vector makes with the x-axis is given by the following.
Θ where tan Θ = Opposite Adjacent side side side
(1.14)
N
Example 1.2
W
E
A motorist undergoes a displacement of 250 km in a direction 30° North of
$-250 km
East. Resolve this displacement into its components.
SN
Solution:
Draw a rough sketch of the original vector. You can use trigonometry to
30°
calculate the magnitudes of the components (along North and along East)
SE
of the original displacement:
Figure 1.14 Resolving of resul-
tant displacement.
SN = (250) (sin 30°) = 125 km
SE = (250) (cos 30°) = 216.5 km
1.5 Vector resolution
17
Please check your answer with the graphical method, i.e., with ruler and
brotractor.
N
End
Example 1.3
A boy walks 3 km due East and then 2 km due North. What is the magnitude
5
SN=2 km
and direction of his displacement vector?
0
Start
SE=3 km
Solution:
You first make an overhead view of the boy's movement as shown in Figure
Figure 1.15 The magnitude and
1.15. The magnitude of the displacement |S| is given by the Pythagorean
direction of the boy's motion.
theorem as follows:
|S| = [(3 + (2 1/2 = 3.6 km
The direction that this displacement vector makes relative to east is given
by:
tan 0 = 2 km = 0.666 0.666
Thus,
= tan⁻¹(0.666)=33.699
Hence, the boy's displacement vector is 3.61 km with 56.31° East of North,
or 33.69° North of East.
Exercise 1.8
Could a vector
Please check your answer with the graphical method, i.e., with ruler and
ever be shorter
protractor.
than one of its
Section summary
components?
Could it be equal
Any vector can be resolved into a horizontal and a vertical
in length to one of
component.
its components?
Explain.
The combined effect of the horizontal and vertical compo-
nents of the vector quantity is the same as the original vector.
18
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
Review questions
1. What is resolution of a vector?
2. Draw simple vector diagrams and resolve them into their com-
ponents.
(a) 40 N at an angle of 30° from the horizontal.
(b) 10 m/s at an angle of 80° from the horizontal.
(c) 1900 km at an angle of 40° from the vertical.
3. A car travels 10 km due North and then 5 km due West. Find
graphically and analytically the magnitude and direction of
the car's resultant vector.
4. A girl walks 25.0° North of East for 3.10 km. How far would
she have to walk due North and due East to arrive at the same
location?
Virtual Lab
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiment on vector quantities unit under the guid-
ance of your teacher.
1. Vector Addition PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
Scalar is a quantity specified only by its magnitude.
Vectors is a quantity specified by its magnitude and direction.
The vector is represented by an arrow drawn at a suitable scale
where:
1.5 Vector resolution
19
- The arrow length represents the vector magnitude.
- The arrow head represents the vector direction.
Vector addition is nothing but finding the resultant of a num-
ber of vectors acting on a body while vector subtraction is
addition of the negative of a vector.
The sum of two or more vectors is called the resultant. The
resultant of two vectors can be found using either the paral-
lelogram method or the triangle method. For more than two
vectors, one can use the polygon method of vector addition.
The method of finding the components of vectors is called
resolving vector.
When vector À is decomposed along the rectangular coordi-
nate system, the horizontal component of À is Aₓ = Acos Θ
and the vertical component of À is Ay = Asin Θ.
End of unit questions and problems
1. A vector drawn 15 mm long represents a velocity of 30 m/s.
How long should you draw a vector to represent a velocity of
20 m/s?
2. A vector that is 1 cm long represents a displacement of 5 km.
How many kilometers are represented by a 3 cm vector drawn
to the same scale?
3. Describe how you would add two vectors graphically.
4. Which of the following actions is permissible when you are
graphically adding one vector to another? A) move the vector
B) rotate the vector C) change the vector's length.
5. In your own words, write a clear definition of the resultant of
two or more vectors.
20
Unit 1 Vector Quantities
6. Explain the method you would use to subtract two vectors
graphically.
7. You walk 30 m South and 30 m East. Find the magnitude and
direction of the resultant displacement both graphically and
algebraically.
8. A hiker walks 14.7 km at an angle 35° East of South. Find the
East and North components of this walk.
9. If two vectors have equal magnitudes, can their sum be zero?
Explain.
10. Based on the three vectors in Figure 1.16, which of the follow-
ing is true?
B
(a) A+B+C=0
(b) A=C+B
A
(c) C+A=B
Figure 1.16 Magnitude and
11. For the two vectors À and B with magnitude 6.8 cm and 5.5
y
cm in Figure 1.17, determine the magnitude and direction of:
(a) R=A+B
A
B
X
(b) R=A-B
(c) R=B-A
Figure 1.17 Magnitude and
12. Three vectors A, B and C have a magnitude and direction of
direction of two vectors
21 unit North, 16 unit East and 26 unit South, respectively.
Graphically determine the resultant of these three vectors?
13. If vx = 9.8 m/s and vy = 6.4 m/s, determine the magnitude and
direction of v.
Joma
GIRMA
Joma
BAREGA
Unit 2
Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Introduction
In your grade 9 Physics, you have learnt that uniform motion occurs when
Brain storm-
an object moves at a steady speed in a straight line. Most moving objects,
ing question
however, do not display uniform motion. Any change in an object's speed
In your everyday
or direction or both causes the motion of an object to become non uni-
life, you come
form. This non uniform motion, or changing velocity, is called accelerated
across a range of
motion. A car ride in a city at rush hour during which the car must speed
constant accel-
up, slow down, and turn corners is an obvious example of accelerated
eration motions.
motion. In this unit, you will learn about uniformly accelerated motion.
Can you give two
examples for such
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
type of motion?
know terms that are used to describe uniformly accelerated motion;
understand the different types of motions used to describe physical
phenomena;
know the equation of motions that describe the motion of an object
under uniform acceleration;
solve motion problems using uniformly accelerated formulas;
understand relative velocity in one dimension.
21
22
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2.1 Position and Displacement
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define terms such as position, displacement, and distance;
determine the distance and displacement traveled by an object;
describe the difference between distance and displacement.
Position
Exercise 2.1
To describe the motion of an object, you must first be able to describe its
Can two objects
position, or where it is at any particular time. The word position describes
be at the same
your location (where you are). However, saying that you are here is mean-
distance from a
ingless, and you have to specify your position relative to a known reference
single point while
point. So, you need to specify its position relative to a convenient frame of
being in different
reference. A frame of reference is an arbitrary set of axes from which the
positions? Why or
position and motion of an object are described.
why not?
To visualize position for objects moving in a straight line, you can imagine
the object is on a number line. The object may be placed at any point on
the number line in the positive numbers or the negative numbers. It is
common to choose the original position of the object to be on the zero
Key Concept
mark as shown in Figure 2.1. In making the zero mark the reference point,
The location
you have chosen a frame of reference. The exact position of an object is
of an object in a
the separation between the object and the reference point.
frame of reference
is called position.
Position is thus the location of an object with reference to an origin. It can
be negative or positive. It has units of length: centimeter (cm), meter (m)
or kilometer (km). For example, depending on that reference point you
choose, you can say that the new constructed school is 300 m from Kemal's
house (with Kemal's house as the reference point or origin).
2.1 Position and Displacement
23
Displacement
From your grade 9 Physics, you know that distance is the total length of the
Finish
path taken in going from the initial position to the final position. Distance
Distance
is a scalar. But the difference between the initial and final position vectors
of a body is called its displacement. Basically, displacement is the shortest
distance between the two positions and has a certain direction. Thus,
displacement is a vector quantity. In Figure 2.1, distance is the length of
Department
the dashed line, while displacement is the straight-line distance from the
starting point to the endpoint.
Start
Activity 2.1
Figure 2.1 The possible dis-
On a piece of graph paper, draw a scale map of your home and
tance and displacement of an
school area. Determine your displacement and estimate the dis-
object in motion between two
points.
tance you travel:
a) from home to school.
b) from school to home.
If the initial position (s₀) from which an object moves to a second position
(s) in a particular frame of reference, then the displacement s can be
written as:
Exercise 2.2
= s - S₀
(2.1)
What is the dif-
In order to answer exercise 2.2, consider the motion of an object moving
ference between
along a straight path. The object starts its journey from O which is treated
distance and
as its reference point as shown in Figure 2.2. Let A, B, and C represent the
displacement?
position of the object at different instants.
o
C
B
A
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
km
Figure 2.2 Positions of an object on a straight line path.
24
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Exercise 2.3
For motion of the object from O to A, the distance covered is 60 km and
Can the mag-
the magnitude of displacement is also 60 km. During its motion from O to
nitude of the
A and back to B, the distance covered = 60 km + 25 km = 85 km while the
displacement of
magnitude of displacement = 60 km - 25 km = 35 km. Thus, the magnitude
an object from its
of displacement (35 km) is not equal to the path length (85 km). Further,
original position
you will notice that the magnitude of the displacement for a course of
ever exceed the
motion may be zero, but the corresponding distance covered is not zero.
total distance
If you consider the object to travel back to O, the final position coincides
moved? Explain.
with the initial position, and therefore, the displacement is zero. However,
the distance covered in this journey is OA + AO = 60 km + 60 km = 120 km.
Thus, the two different physical quantities (distance and displacement),
are used to describe the overall motion of an object and to locate its final
position with reference to its initial position at a given time.
yn
Example 2.1
70 m
A person walks 70 m East, and then 30 m West. Find the displacement.
40 m
30 m
Displacement
Solution:
The displacement of a person walking 70 m to the East and then turning
Figure 2.3 A person walking 70
around and walking back (West) a distance of 30 m as shown in Figure 2.3
m East and then 30 m West.
is: s = s - S₀ = 70 m - 30 m as both vectors are in an opposite direction
with one another. Thus,
Key Concepts
A = 40 m East
JET Distance is
the actual path
The displacement is only 40 m since the person is now only 40 m from the
that is travelled
starting point but the total distance traveled is 70 m + 30 m = 100 m.
by a moving
body, where as
displacement
is the change in
position (final
position minus
initial position).
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
25
Section summary
A description of motion depends on the reference frame from
which it is described.
Position is the location of an object compared to a reference
Activity 2.2
frame (point).
Walk from one
The distance an object moves is the length of the path along
corner of your
which it moves.
classroom to its
opposite corner
Displacement is the difference between the initial and final
along its sides.
positions of an object.
Measure the dis-
tance covered
Review questions
by you and mag-
nitude of the
1. Explain the difference between position and displacement.
displacement.
2. Give an example that clearly shows the difference among dis-
What difference
tance traveled, displacement, and magnitude of displacement.
would you notice
between the two
Identify each quantity in your example.
in this case?
3. A body travels a distance of 15 m from A to B and then moves
a distance of 20 m at right angles to AB. Calculate the total
distance traveled and the displacement.
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
Exercise 2.4
Can the average
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
speed ever equal
define instantaneous and average velocity of a body in motion;
the magnitude
of the average
describe the difference between average velocity and instantaneous
velocity? If "no,"
velocity;
why not? If "yes,"
solve problems related to the average velocity.
give an example.
26
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Average velocity
In grade 9, you learnt that the rate of change of distance with time is called
speed, while the rate of change of displacement is known as velocity. Un-
like speed, velocity is a vector quantity.
Key Concept
When an object travels a certain distance with different velocities, its
motion is specified by its average velocity. The average velocity of a body
Velocity is the
is defined as the body's displacement (s) divided by the time interval
physical quantity
(t) during which that displacement occurs. Let S₀ and S be its positions
that describes
how a moving
at instants t₀ and t, respectively. You can express average velocity (vₐv)
object's displace-
mathematically as:
ment changes.
(2.2)
Exercise 2.5
where t - t₀ is change in time, and t₀ is the starting time which is com-
Does the
monly zero.
speedometer
of a car measure
speed or velocity?
The SI unit for average velocity is meters per second (m/s or m s⁻¹). But
there are also many other units, such as kilometer per hour (km/h), miles
per hour (mi/h (also written as mph)) and centimeter per second (cm/s) in
Exercise 2.6
common use.
jer
Describe how
the instantaneos
The average speed of an object is obtained by dividing the total distance
velocity differs
traveled by the total time taken:
from the averag
velocity?
Vav total total distance time taken travelled
(2.3)
jer
In which sit-
uation will the
If the motion is in the same direction along a straight line, the average
instantaneous
speed is the same as the magnitude of the average velocity. However, this
velocity and av-
is always not the case.
erage velocity of
an object be the
same?
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
27
Instantaneous velocity
Suppose the magnitude of your car's average velocity for a long trip was 20
m/s. This value, being an average, does not convey any information about
Key Concept
how fast you were moving or the direction of the motion at any instant
Instantaneous
during the trip. Both can change from one instant to another. Surely, there
velocity is the ve-
were times when your car traveled faster than 20 m/s and times when it
locity at a specific
traveled more slowly.
instant in time (or
over an infinitesi-
The instantaneous velocity of the car indicates how fast the car moves and
mally small time
the direction of the motion at each instant of time. Thus, it is the rate of
interval).
change in displacement as change in time approaches zero. Mathemati-
cally, the instantaneous velocity (v) of a body is given by
v-st-so S₀ when t - to approaches 0
(2.4)
The magnitude of the instantaneous velocity of a moving car is the reading
of the speedometer.
Road traffic accidents are among the main causes of mortality in Ethiopia.
Speed is still the most common factor in fatal road accidents, accounting
Figure 2.4 A fatal car accident.
for more than half of all road deaths each year. Figure 2.4 shows one of
the fatal car crash where at least 5 people were died and 17 others injured
Exercise 2.7
after a minibus collided with a parked car somewhere in Ethiopia. It may
jer
Can you imag-
not seem like much, but driving even a few kilometers per hour above
ine the things that
the speed limit greatly increases the risk of an accident. Speed limits are
would happen if
used to set the legal maximum or minimum speed at which road vehicles
a driver does not
may travel on a given stretch of road. They are generally indicated on a
obey the speed
traffic sign reflecting the maximum or minimum speed permitted that is
limits set and
expressed usually in kilometers per hour (km/h). Speed limits are being
are moving in
started to be monitored by traffic officers in the various streets and roads
uniformly acceler-
of our country. Speed limits are used to regulate the speed of vehicles in
ated motion?
certain places and it also controls the flow of traffic. It is also observed to
minimize accidents from happening.
28
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Example 2.2
It takes you 10 minutes to walk with an average velocity of 1.2 m/s to the
North from the bus stop to the museum entrance. What is your displace-
ment?
Solution:
You are given with st = 10 minutes = 600 s and Vₐv = 1.2 m/s, s North.
You want to find s.
Since
di=vmxAr=12=x600s=720m,No th
This means the displacement has a magnitude of 720 m and a direction to
the North.
Example 2.3
A passenger in a bus took 8 s to move 4 m to a seat on provided place
forward. What is his average velocity?
Solution:
You are given = 4 m and t=8s.
What you want to find is Vₐᵥ.
The average velocity is thus
Example 2.4
A car travels at a constant speed of 50 km/h for 100 km. It then speeds up
to 100 km/h and is driven another 100 km. What is the car's average speed
for the 200 km trip?
2.2 Average velocity and instantaneous velocity
29
Solution:
You are given S₁ = 100 km, v₁ = 50 km/h, S₂ = 100 km, v₂ = 100 km/h.
In order to find the average speed, you first need to find the total distance
traveled and total time taken.
Thus, the total distance traveled is 100 km + 100 km = 200 km. The total
time taken is t₁ + t₂ where
h
The car's average speed is thus
Exercise 2.8
Vav total total distance time taken travelled 200 km
Cheetahs, the
world's fastest
land animals, can
Note: Averaging the two speeds ( 50 km/l + 100 ) gives you a wrong
2
run up to about
answer which is 75 km/h. The average speed of an object is obtained by
125 km/h. A chee-
dividing the total distance traveled by the total time taken.
tah chasing an
impala runs 32 m
Section summary
north, then sud-
denly turns and
Average velocity is change in displacement divided by time
runs 46 m west
taken.
before lunging at
the impala. The
Instantaneous velocity is the velocity of an accelerating body
entire motion
at a specific instant in time.
takes only 2.7 S.
The magnitude of instantaneous velocity is its instantaneous
(a) Determine the
speed.
cheetah's average
speed for this
Review questions
motion.
(b) Determine the
1. How do you find the average velocity of an object in motion
cheetah's average
between two points?
velocity.
30
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2. Explain the difference between average speed and average
velocity?
3. There is a distinction between average speed and the magni-
tude of average velocity. Give an example that illustrates the
difference between these two quantities.
4. If an object has the instantaneous velocity of 20 m/s to East,
what is its instantaneous speed?
5. A car moves with an average velocity of 48.0 km/h to the East.
How long will it take him to drive 144 km on a straight high-
way?
6. An athlete runs 12 km to the North, then turns and runs 16
km to the East in three hours.
a) What is his/her displacement?
b) Calculate his/her average velocity.
c) Calculate average speed.
Exercise 2.9
1) If a body has
constant velocity
2.3 Acceleration
on straight level
surface, what is
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
the magnitude of
explain acceleration in one dimension;
its acceleration?
distinguish between instantaneous acceleration and average accel-
2) Does the di-
rection of ac-
eration;
celeration be in
calculate the average acceleration.
the direction of
velocity itself?
While traveling in a bus or a car, you might have noticed that sometimes its
speed increases and sometimes it slows down. That is, its velocity changes
with time. The quantity that describes the rate of change of velocity in a
given time interval is called acceleration. Any change in velocity whether
positive, negative, directional, or any combination of these is acceleration.
2.3 Acceleration
31
In everyday conversation, to accelerate means to speed up. Thus, the
greater the acceleration is, the greater the change in velocity over a given
time is.
Average acceleration
When you watch the first few seconds of a liftoff, a rocket barely seems to
move. With each passing second, however, you can see it move faster until
it reaches an enormous speed. How could you describe the change in the
rocket's motion? When an object changes its motion, it is accelerating.
The magnitude of the average acceleration is defined by the change in an
object's velocity divided by the time interval in which the change occurs.
That is,
Change in velocity
Average acceleration =
time taken
à
(2.5)
where v₀ is the initial velocity of an object and v is the final velocity of an
object at instants t₀ and t, respectively. In this equation, t - t₀ is the length
of time over which the motion changes. In SI units, acceleration has units
of meters per second squared (m/s²).
The direction of average acceleration is the direction of change in velocity.
Key Concept
If an object speeds up, the acceleration is in the direction that the object is
Acceleration
moving. You get on a bicycle and begin to pedal. The bike moves slowly at
occurs whenever
first, and then accelerates because its speed increases. When the speed
an object speeds
of an object increases, it is said to be accelerating. On the other hand, if
up, slows down, or
an object slows down, the acceleration is opposite to the direction that
changes direction.
the object is moving. This is commonly referred to as deceleration. In
Figure 2.5, a light train in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, decelerates as it comes
into a station. Thus, the train is accelerating in a direction opposite to its
direction of motion.
32
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Figure 2.5 A decelerating light train.
When you speed up, your final speed will always be greater than your
initial speed. So subtracting your initial speed from your final speed gives
Exercise 2.10
a positive number. As a result, your acceleration is positive when you
jer
What do you
are speeding up. When you slow down, the final speed is less than the
mean by an in-
initial speed. Because your final speed is less than your initial speed, your
stantaneous ac-
acceleration is negative when you slow down.
celeration for an
object in motion?
Instantaneous acceleration
The object moving in a straight line may undergo an increase, or decrease
Key Concept
in acceleration or it may move with a uniform acceleration or zero acceler-
JET
Instantaneous
ation. Thus, in such cases, the average acceleration does not describe the
acceleration is
motion of the object at every instant. The average acceleration only pro-
the average ac-
vides the mean value of the acceleration instead of the actual acceleration
celeration at a
of the object during the motion while the instantaneous acceleration gives
specific instant
the exact acceleration at every instant during the motion.
in time (or over
an infinitesimally
Instantaneous acceleration is a quantity that tells us the rate at which
small time inter-
val).
an object is changing its velocity at a specific instant in time anywhere
2.3 Acceleration
33
along its path. Hence, instantaneous acceleration a, or acceleration at a
specific instant in time, is obtained using the same process discussed for
instantaneous velocity. That is, you calculate the average velocity between
two points in time separated by t and let St approach zero. You see that
average acceleration a = At approaches instantaneous acceleration as St
approaches zero. The instantaneous acceleration is, thus mathematically
expressed as,
Exercise 2.11
For what type
as approaches 0.
(2.6)
of motion does
the average and
For uniformly accelerated motion, the instantaneous acceleration has the
instantaneous
same value as the average acceleration.
acceleration be
the same?
Example 2.5
A car accelerates on a straight road from rest to 75 km/h in 5 S. What is the
magnitude of its average acceleration?
Solution:
You are given with V₀ = 0, v = 75 km/h and t=5s.
You want to find the average acceleration.
Exercise 2.12
Think about
The average acceleration can be calculated by
the greatest ac-
a
celerations you
have experienced.
Where did they
This is read as "fifteen kilometers per hour per second" and means that,
occur? Did they
on average, the velocity changed by 15 km/h during each second. That
involve speeding
is, assuming the acceleration was constant, during the first second, the
up or slowing
car's velocity increased from zero to 15 km/h. During the next second, its
down? What ef-
velocity increased by another 15 km/h, reaching a velocity of 30 km/h at
fects did they
t = 2.0 s, and so on. This result contains two different time units: hours
have on you?
and seconds. You usually prefer to use only seconds. To do so, you can
change km/h to m/s:
34
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
a
5 s - Os
Note that acceleration tells us how quickly the velocity changes, whereas
velocity tells us how quickly the position changes.
Exercise 2.13
jer
Discuss the
Example 2.6
concept of de-
An automobile is moving to the right along a straight highway, which you
celeration and
choose to be the positive x-axis. Then the driver steps on the brakes. If the
negative accelera-
initial velocity (when the driver hits the brakes) is 15 m/s and it takes 5.0 s
tion.
to slow down to 5 m/s, what was the car's average acceleration?
Solution:
In this example, you are given with V₀ = 15 m/s, v=5m/s and t = 5.0 s.
The required quantity is average acceleration.
Average acceleration can thus be calculated using the formula time.
The negative sign appears because the final velocity is less than the initial
velocity. Thus, the direction of the acceleration is to the left (in the negative
x-direction) even though the velocity is always pointing to the right. You can
say that the acceleration is to the left. That is the automobile is decelerating.
But be careful: deceleration does not mean that acceleration is necessarily
negative. There is a deceleration whenever the magnitude of the velocity is
decreasing; thus, the velocity and acceleration point in opposite directions
when there is a deceleration.
2.3 Acceleration
35
Activity 2.3
jer
Estimate your maximum running velocity, and estimate the aver-
age acceleration you undergo from rest to reach that velocity.
jer
Design an experiment to check your estimates in (a). Include the
equations you would use.
jer Get your design approved by your teacher, and then carry it out.
Compare your results with your estimates.
Section summary
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity in a given time
interval.
Acceleration occurs whenever an object speeds up, slows
down, or changes direction.
Instantaneous acceleration is the acceleration of the object at
a specific instant during the motion.
Review questions
1. Describe the similarities and differences between average ac-
celeration and instantaneous acceleration.
2. A car moves along the x- axis. What is the sign of the car's
acceleration if it is moving in the positive X direction with (a)
increasing speed (b) decreasing speed?
3. A race horse coming out of the gate accelerates from rest to
a velocity of 15.0 m/s due west in 1.80 S. What is its average
acceleration?
4. A car is traveling at 14 m/s when the traffic light ahead turns
red. The car decelerates and comes to a stop in 5.0 S. Calculate
the acceleration of the car.
36
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2.4 Equations of motion with constant accelera-
tion
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
derive the equations of motion with constant acceleration;
use appropriate equations of motion to solve motion-related prob-
lems.
Exercise 2.14
If an object travels in a straight line and its velocity increases or decreases
How can you de-
by equal amounts at equal intervals of time, the acceleration of the ob-
rive the equations
ject is said to be uniform. Such type of motion is said to be a uniformly
of a uniformly ac-
accelerated motion. A bicycle that slowly decreases its speed to stop and
celerated motion?
a ball dropped from the top of a ladder are some examples of uniformly
accelerated motions.
When an object moves along a straight line with a uniform acceleration,
it is possible to relate its velocity, acceleration during motion and the
distance covered by it in a certain time interval by a set of equations known
as the equations of motion. If an object's average acceleration during a
time interval is known, the change in velocity during that time can be
calculated. For convenience, you let the starting time tf = t, where t is any
arbitrary time. Also, let v₀ be the initial velocity at time t₀ = 0 and v be the
velocity at any time t. With this notation, you can express
Since acceleration is constant in a uniformly accelerated motion, the aver-
age and instantaneous accelerations are the same. So, you can replace Ăₐᵥ
by à. Moreover, in one-dimensional motion, direction can be indicated
"_" or "+" signs. In this case, you can ignore the vector nature of symbols.
Finally, replacing the vector notations by ordinary symbols, setting t₀ = 0
and rearranging the result gives
v = v₀ + at
(2.7)
2.4 Equations of motion with constant acceleration
37
This linear relationship enables us to find the velocity at any time t. You
can make use of the fact that when the acceleration is constant (i.e., when
the velocity varies linearly with time), the average velocity is given as:
Vav= Vo+v
(2.8)
To find the displacement as a function of time, you first let S₀ be the initial
position at time t₀ = 0 and Sf = s be the position at any time t. If the initial
position is at the origin, S₀ = 0, and hence s = s. So from the expression
of average velocity, you can write s as
s = Vavt
(2.9)
Substituting equation 2.8 into 2.9 gives:
Key Concept
JV Equations of
uniformly accel-
Again substituting v₀ + at in place of v and making rearrangement gives:
erated motions
are used to solve
s
(2.10)
problems in-
volving constant
Sometimes, there are times when the time of motion is unknown. For
acceleration.
such cases, you need to derive an equation that is independent of time as
follows:
s
(2.11)
Rearranging gives:
v² = v₀² + 2as
(2.12)
Example 2.7
A car starts from rest and accelerates uniformly over a time of 5 s for a
distance of 100 m. Determine the acceleration of the car.
Solution:
You are given with v₀ = 0, t = 5 s, and s = 100 m.
38
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
The required quantity is acceleration, a.
From the expression for displacement, i.e.,
s
By making v₀ = 0, you can easily derive and solve for a as
= 2s = 2 x 100 m 25 s² = m/s²
Substitution gives
a = 2 x 100 m 25 s² = 8m/s²
Example 2.8
An airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70 m/s and then decelerates at
1.5 m/s² for 40 S. What is its final velocity?
Solution:
You are given with v₀ = 70 m/s, t = 40 s, and a = 1.5 m/s².
You want to find the final velocity, v.
You can find for the final velocity using the formula
v = v₀ + at = 70 m/s 1.5 X 40 s = 10 m/s
The final velocity is much less than the initial velocity, as desired when
slowing down, but is still positive.
Example 2.9
An automobile starts at rest and speeds up at 3.5 m/s² after the traffic light
turns green. How far did the automobile travel when it was traveling at 25
m/s?
2.4 Equations of motion with constant acceleration
39
Solution:
In this example, you are given with v₀ = 0, v = 25 m/s, and a = 3.5
You are asked to find the displacement, s.
You can find s using the equation
s 2
Free fall
It is well known that, in the absence of air resistance, all objects dropped
near the Earth's surface fall toward the Earth with the same constant accel-
eration under the influence of the Earth's gravity. A freely falling object is
any object moving freely under the influence of gravity alone, regardless
of its initial motion.
Figure 2.6 The freely falling of
An object that is released from rest falls freely once it is released. Any freely
an apple with uniform accelera-
falling object experiences an acceleration directed downward, regardless
tion due to gravity.
of its initial motion.
Activity 2.4
Suppose you hold
You shall denote the magnitude of the free-fall acceleration by the symbol
a book in one
g. The value of g is maximum on the Earth's surface and decreases with
hand and a flat
increasing altitude from the surface. Furthermore, slight variations in g
sheet of paper
occur with changes in latitude. At the Earth's surface, the value of g is
in another hand.
approximately 9.80 m/s².
You drop them
both and they
If you neglect air resistance and assume that the free-fall acceleration
fall to the ground.
does not vary with altitude over short vertical distances, then the motion
Explain why the
of a freely falling object moving vertically is equivalent to motion in one
falling book is a
dimension under constant acceleration. Therefore, the equations derived
good example of
above for objects moving with constant acceleration can be applied. The
free fall, but the
only modification that you need to make in these equations is to replace
paper is not.
the acceleration 'a' of the equations with 'g' and the distance 's' with the
40
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
height 'h' since the vertical distance of the freely falling bodies is known as
height'h'.
The equation of motion can thus be modified as:
v=v₀+gt
(2.13)
h=v₀t+¹₂₈ₜ²
(2.14)
v² = v₀² + 2gh
(2.15)
where V₀ is the initial velocity, h is the vertical height, g is acceleration due
Exercise 2.15
to gravity and t is the elapsed time.
As a freely falling
body speeds up,
Example 2.10
what is happening
A mango fruit has fallen from a tree. Find its velocity and vertical height
to acceleration
when it reached the ground if it took 1 s to reach the ground.
due to gravity?
Solution:
You are given with V₀ = 0, g = 9.8 m/s², and t = 1 s.
The required quantities are final velocity and height.
You can find the velocity using the equation
v = V₀ + = 0 + 9.8 ml = 9.8 m/s
On the other hand, the vertical height can be calculated using the equation
X
2.4 Equations of motion with constant acceleration
41
Section summary
Uniformly accelerated equations are equations that are used
to solve problems involving constant acceleration.
The five quantities or variables commonly encountered in the
uniformly accelerated motion equations are displacement,
time, initial velocity, final velocity, and constant acceleration.
Since the freely falling bodies with uniformly accelerated mo-
tion, the equations of motion derived for bodies under uni-
form acceleration can be applied to the motion of freely falling
bodies by substituting 'a' by 'g' and 's' by 'h'.
Review questions
1. What type of motion is experienced by a free-falling object?
2. A cyclist is traveling at 5.6 m/s when she starts to accelerate at
0.60 ml s² for a time interval of 4.0 S.
(a) How far did she travel during this time interval?
(b) What velocity did she attain?
3. A stone that is dropped from the top of a building is in free fall
for 8.0 S.
(a) Calculate the stone's velocity when it reaches the ground.
(b) What is the height of the building from which the stone
had been dropped?
42
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accel-
erated motion
Exercise 2.16
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Would you re-
draw position-time, velocity-time and acceleration-time graphs of
member the
uniformly accelerated motion;
graphs of a uni-
explain the concept of instantaneous velocity using position-time
form motion
graphs;
that you learnt in
grade 9?
distinguish between instantaneous acceleration and average accel-
eration using the graphical method;
draw a velocity-time graph for a motion using the concept of instan-
taneous acceleration.
In your grade 9 physics, you learnt about the graphs of uniform motion.
Figure 2.7 shows the summary of the graphs of a uniform motion.
Position,s (m)
Velocity ,V (m.s⁻¹)
Acceleration, a (m. .s⁻²)
Time, t (s)
Time, t (s)
Time, t (s)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.7 Graphs for motion at constant velocity (a) position-time
(b) velocity-time (c) acceleration-time.
In this section, you will discuss about the graphs of a uniformly accelerated
motion.
Position-time graph
A position-time graph is a graph that describes the motion of an object,
with the position s of a particle on the y-axis and the time on the x-axis.
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
43
This graph will tell you the exact change in position of a body.
The position-time equation for uniformly accelerated motion along a
Exercise 2.17
straight line is s = v₀ + 1/2at². Dependence of s on t² shows that it is a
How does uni-
quadratic equation or quadratic function of t. So, the position-time graph
form acceleration
for uniformly accelerated motion is a parabola, as shown in Figure 2.8 (a).
motion differ
from uniform
As you learnt in grade 9, position-time graph's slope represents the velocity
motion?
of the object. Because the line is curved, however, its slope keeps changing.
Thus, you must find the slope of the curved line. A tangent is a straight line
that touches a curve at a single point and has the same slope as the curve
at that point. Thus, choose a point on the curve and draw a tangent to the
curve at that point, as shown in Figure 2.8(b). The slope of the tangent line
is therefore an instantaneous velocity.
Position, S (m)
Position, S (m)
s
At
Time, t (s)
Time, t (s)
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8 (a) The position-time graph with constant acceleration,
(b) the slope of the tangent line at a particular point gives the instan-
taneous velocity.
You may recall from your mathematics studies that the slope of a line
describes its steepness. Slope is determined by comparing the magnitude
Key Concept
of the rise (the change between points on the y-axis) and the magnitude of
jo
The slope of
the run (the change between the same points on the x-axis).
the tangent to the
graph of position-
rise = instantaneous velocity
(2.16)
time is velocity.
44
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
The instantaneous velocity of an object at a specific point in time is thus
the slope of the tangent to the curve of the position-time graph of the
object's motion at that specific time. That means, the magnitude of the
velocity of an object at the point where the tangent line touches the graph
is the slope of the tangent line.
Example 2.11
A car starts from rest and accelerates at a 10 m/s² for 10 s on the straight,
level road. Draw a position-time graph and calculate the instantaneous
velocity at 4 S.
Solution:
In this example, you are given v₀ = 0 m/s, a = 10 m/s², and t = 10 s.
To draw the position-time graph, first solve for s using the equation s =
1 at² for the different values of t. Record and compare the result you ob-
2
tained with the following table.
180
Position (m)
0
5
20
45
80
125
180
160
140
Time (s)
0123456
Position, S (m)
120
100
Then plot the position on the y-axis and time on the x-axis. The graph is
80
As
shown as in the Figure 2.9.
60
40
At
20
On the other hand, to find the instantaneous velocity, draw the tangent line
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time, t(s)
at the given time. The slope of the tangent line drawn at 4 s of the x-axis
coordinate represents the instantaneous velocity at instant of 4 s. The slope
Figure 2.9 Position-time of the
given problem.
of tangent line becomes:
Slope = = 120 5s-3s m 40 m = 80 2 s m = 40 s
Thus, the instantaneous velocity is 40 m/s.
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
45
Activity 2.5
Suppose a truck accelerates with average accelerations of 20.0
m/s² starting from rest for 5.0 S.
a) How far does it travel in this time? Draw position-time graph?
b) Draw the tangent line at different point on the graph.
c) Find the slope of each tangent line that you draw.
Velocity, V (m/s)
B
Velocity-time graph
A graph plotted with time along the x-axis and the velocity along the y-axis
0
t
Time t (s)
is called the velocity-time graph. The velocity-time graph of the given
(a)
motion shows how its velocity changes as it travels over a given time. If
the particle starts from rest and experiences uniform acceleration, the
velocity-time graph will be a straight line passing through the origin and
Velocity, V (m/s)
B
having a positive slope (as shown in Figure 2.10 (a)).
A
If the particle has an initial velocity, the graph will be a straight line, but
D
will not pass through the origin as shown in Figure 2.10 (b). In Figure 2.10
0
t
(b)
Time, t (s)
(b), the ordinate OA gives the initial velocity and the ordinate BD gives the
final velocity.
Figure 2.10 The velocity-time
graph.
The velocity-time graph of a particle moving along a straight line with
uniform acceleration may be used to measure the displacement of the
particle and also the acceleration.
Velocity, V (m/s)
B
v
A) Area under velocity-time graph
A
Consider a particle moving along a straight line with uniform acceleration
v₀
C
D
a. Let v₀ be the velocity of the particle at the instant t = 0 and v at a later
0
Time, t (s)
instant t. The velocity-time graph of such a motion is shown in Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11 The area under
The area under the velocity-time graph during the interval 0 to t is ABDO.
velocity-time graph.
46
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Area, ABDO = Area of rectangle ACDO + Area of triangle, ABC.
Key Concept
Area, ABDO = AO AC X BC
It The area un-
1
der the curve
in a velocity-
time graph is
the change in
= displacement
position or dis-
placement.
Thus, area under the velocity-time graph gives the total displacement of
the particle in that given time interval.
B) Slope of a velocity-time graph
As discussed earlier, for a particle moving along a straight line with con-
stant acceleration, the velocity-time graph will be a straight line inclined
to the time axis, as shown in Figure 2.11. Let v₀ be the velocity at t₀ = 0
Velocity, V (m/s)
and v be the velocity after a time interval t.
A
The acceleration,
(2.17)
B
That is, the slope of the velocity-time graph gives the acceleration of the
particle.
0
Time, t (s)
Figure 2.12 Velocity-time graph
Let us now consider two special cases.
for uniform retardation.
Velocity, v(m/s)
1. Velocity-time graph for uniform retardation
For a particle moving with uniform retardation or deceleration, the velocity-
time graph will be a straight line with a negative slope, as shown in Figure
2.12. If the body is brought to rest, the graph will touch the time axis.
0
t₁
t2
t3
t₄ Time (t)
Figure 2.13 Velocity-time graph
2. Velocity-time graph for non-uniform motion
for non uniform motion.
In the case of a particle moving with variable velocity, the velocity-time
curve will be irregular in shape. For example, consider a car starting from
point O. Let it be moving along a straight line with uniform acceleration
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
47
a during the time interval t₁ to t₂ and then start moving with uniform
velocity during the interval of time t₂ to t₃. Thereafter, let the velocity of
the car decrease uniformly and the car come to a stop at the instant t₄.
The motion of the car can be represented by the velocity-time graph, as
shown in Figure 2.13. Then the area under the velocity-time graph gives
the total displacement of the car.
Example 2.12
The velocity-time graph of a certain motion is plotted in Figure 2.14 below.
Calculate the total distance and displacement of the truck after 15 S.
5
B
D
4
Velocity, (m.s⁻¹)
3
2
Exercise 2.18
1
C
E
F
H
It
What quantity
0
A
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
is represented by
-1
Time, t (s)
the area under
-2
G
the velocity-time
-3
graph?
Figure 2.14 Velocity-time graph.
Solution:
To calculate the total distance and total displacement, you have to find the
area under velocity-time graph.
S₁ = area of a triangle ACB
= 1/2 (base) X (height) = 1/2 (t) X (v) = 1/2 (4 s) X (4 m/s) = 8 m.
S₂ = area of rectangle CBDE
= (base) X (height) = (t) X (v) = (8 s m/s) X (4 m/s) = 32 m.
S₃ = area of a triangle EDF
= 1/2 (base) X (height) = 1/2 (t) X (v) = 1/2 (2 s) X (4 m/s) = 4 m.
S₄ = area of a triangle EHG
= 1/2 (base) X (height) = 1/2 (t) X (v) = 1/2 (1 s) X (2 m/s) = 1 m.
48
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Thus, the total distance is S₁ + S₂ + S₃ + S₄ = 45 m.
On the other hand, the total displacement is S₁ + S₂ + S3 - S₄ (since velocity
is negative) = 44 m in the positive direction.
Acceleration a (m. (m.s⁻²)
Acceleration-time graph
The acceleration-time graph shows the acceleration graph plotted against
time for a particle moving in a straight line. The acceleration-time plots
acceleration values on the y-axis and time values on the x-axis. For a
Time, t(s)
uniformly accelerated motion, acceleration is constant with time. Hence,
the acceleration-time graph will be a straight line parallel to the time axis.
Figure 2.15 Acceleration-time
graph.
For a straight line parallel to the time axis, slope equals zero.
An acceleration-time graph can be used to find the change in velocity
during various time intervals. This is accomplished by determining the
area under the line on the acceleration-time graph.
a (m/s²)
4
Example 2.13
3
For the acceleration-time graph shown in Figure 2.16, find the change in
2
velocity of an object.
Solution:
t (s)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
In this example, the change in velocity can be obtained by finding the area
Figure 2.16 Acceleration-time
under the acceleration-time graph. Thus,
graph of the given problem.
area = base X height = 9 s X 4 m/s² = 36 m/s
Hence, the change in velocity of the moving object is 36 m/s.
2.5 Graphical representation of uniformly accelerated motion
49
Activity 2.6
The table below shows a set of position-time data for uniformly
accelerated motion.
Position (m)
0
8
32
72
128
Time (s)
02468
1. By plotting the position-time graph, find the slopes of tan-
gents at appropriate times.
2. By plotting the velocity-time graph, determine the area under
the graph. State what this area represent.
3. Also plot the acceleration-time graph and determine the area
under the graph. State what this area represent.
Position, S (m)
Section summary
In a uniformly accelerated motion:
(a)
Time, t (s)
The position-time equation is quadratic, and hence the graph
is parabolic as shown in Figure 2.17 (a).
The slope of the tangent line (at a point) of the position-time
velocity (m.s⁻¹)
graph is equal to the instantaneous velocity at that time.
The velocity-time equation is linear and hence the graph is a
(h)
Time, t (s)
straight line as shown in Figure 2.17 (b).
The slope of velocity-time graph is equal to the acceleration
while the area under the graph is the displacement.
The acceleration-time graph is a straight line parallel to the
Acceleration (m.s²²)
time axis as shown in Figure 2.17 (c).
(c)
The area under acceleration-time graph is the change in ve-
Time, t (s)
locity of an object.
Figure 2.17 Graphs of motion
in uniform acceleration.
50
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Review questions
1. In a uniformly accelerated motion, state what each of the
following represents:
(a) the slope of a tangent on a position-time graph.
(b) the slope of a line on a velocity-time graph.
(c) the area under the line on an acceleration-time graph.
Exercise 2.19
jer
How long does
2. The velocity-time graph below shows the motion of an air
it take a car to
plane. Find the displacement of the airplane at St = 1.0 S and
cross a 25.0 m
at At = 2.0 S.
wide intersection
after the light
30
turns green, if
the car acceler-
Velocity, V (m.s⁻¹)
25
ates from rest at
20
a constant ac-
celeration of 2.0
15
m/s²? Draw the
acceleration-time
10
graph.
5
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time, t (s)
Figure 2.18 Velocity-time graph.
Exercise 2.20
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
What is meant by
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
relative velocity
in one dimension.
explain relative velocity in one-dimension using a frame of reference;
Give an example?
calculate the relative velocity.
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
51
Any measurement of distance, speed, velocity, and so on; must be made
with respect to a reference frame, or frame of reference. When you say an
object has a certain velocity, you must state its velocity with respect to a
given reference frame. In everyday life, when you measure the velocity of
an object, the reference frame is taken to be the ground or the earth. For
example, if you are traveling in a train and the train, is moving at a speed
of 100 km/h, then your speed according to another passenger sitting on
that train is zero. According to him, you are not moving. But if someone
observes you from outside the train, standing on the ground, according to
him, you are moving at 100 km/h as you are on the train and the train is
moving at 100 km/h. Hence, the motion observed by the observer depends
on the location (frame) of the observer. This type of motion is called rela-
tive motion.
The relative velocity of object A with respect to object B is the rate of
Key Concept
change of position of the object A with respect to the object B. If VA and
jer
Relative veloc-
VB be the velocities of objects A and B with respect to the ground, then
ity is the velocity
The relative velocity of A with respect to B is VAB = VA - VB.
of an object with
respect to an-
The relative velocity of B with respect to A is VBA = VB - VA.
other object or
In one-dimensional motion, objects move in a straight line. So there are
observer.
only two possible cases: objects are moving in the same direction or in
opposite directions. Thus, while using the above expressions, the signs of
velocities needs to be the same (say, positive) for bodies that are moving in
the same direction. But if they are moving in opposite directions, one of the
velocities (say to the right) should be positive while the other one becomes
negative. Thus, if the two objects are moving in the same direction, the
magnitude of the relative velocity of one object with respect to another
is equal to the difference in magnitude of two velocities. But if the two
objects are moving in opposite directions, the above expression becomes
VAB = VA vB) =
VBA = - VB - VA = - (vA if object A is moving to the right and
object B is moving to the left.
52
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Thus, for objects that are moving in opposite directions, the magnitude of
relative velocity of one object with respect to other is equal to the sum of
magnitude of their velocities.
Example 2.14
Two cars, A and B are traveling with the same speed of 100 km/h in opposite
directions, as in the Figure 2.19 (a). Find the relative velocity of car A with
respect to car B and the relative velocity of car B with respect to car A.
VA
Solution:
VB
In this example, suppose that right is positive and left is negative. So you
are given VA = 100 km/h and VB = - 100 km/h.
(a)
The relative velocity of A with respect to B is VAB = VA - VB
VA
= [100 - 100)] km/h = 100 + 100 km/h = 200 km/h.
VB
The relative velocity of B with respect to A is VBA = VB - VA
= [(-100) - 100] km/h = -200 km/h.
(b)
Figure 2.19 Two cars moving
Thus, when objects are moving in the opposite directions, the magnitude of
(a) in opposite directions (b) in
the relative velocity between them is the sum of the velocities of the objects.
same direction.
In the same question, if both bodies are moving in the same direction (say
to the right) as in the Figure 2.19 (b) with the same speed, then
The relative velocity of A with respect to B is VAB = VA - VB
= [100 - 100] km/h = 0km/h.
The relative velocity of B with respect to A is UBA = VB - VA
= [100 - 100] km/h = 0 km/h.
That means A is at rest with respect to B, and B is at rest with respect to A;
but both are moving at 100 km/h with respect to the ground. This shows
that, when objects are moving in the same direction, the magnitude of
the relative velocity between them is equal to the difference between the
magnitude of their velocities.
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
53
Section summary
Exercise 2.21
When you say that an object has certain velocity, you must
Why do a car
state its velocity with respect to a given frame of reference.
coming in the
opposite direction
If two objects are moving in the same direction, the magnitude
while travelling
of relative velocity of one object with respect to another is
in a car seems to
equal to the difference in magnitude of two velocities. On
come at a very
the other hand, if they are moving in opposite directions, the
large speed?
magnitude of relative velocity of one object with respect to
other is equal to the sum of magnitude of their velocities.
Review questions
1. A motorcycle traveling on the highway at a velocity of 120
km/h passes a car traveling at a velocity of 90 km/h. From the
point of view of a passenger on the car, what is the velocity of
the motorcycle?
2. An automobile is moving at 80 km/h, and a truck is moving
at 60 km/h, approaching an automobile. What is the relative
velocity of an automobile with respect to a truck when the
observer on the automobile measures it?
3. A thief is running away on a straight road on a jeep moving
with a speed of 9 m/s. A police man chases him on a motor
cycle moving at a speed of 10 m/s. If the instantaneous
separation of jeep from the motor cycle is 100 T, how long
does it take for the policemen to catch the thief?
54
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on uniformly accelerated motion unit
under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Forces and Motion: Basics PhET Experiment.
2. Moving-man PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
An object is in motion if it changes position relative to a refer-
ence point.
Distance is the length of the path taken by an object whereas
displacement is simply the distance between where the object
started and where it ended up.
Average velocity is defined as the change in position (or dis-
placement) over the time of travel while instantaneous veloc-
ity is the velocity of an object at a single point in time and is
calculated by the slope of the tangent line.
Average acceleration is the change in velocity divided by the
elapsed time; instantaneous acceleration is acceleration at a
given point in time.
For uniformly accelerated motion, the position-time graph is
a parabola. On the other hand, the velocity-time graph is an
inclined line while the acceleration-time graph is a straight
line parallel to the time axis.
The summary of the equations of motion at uniform accelera-
v = v₀ + at
tion are:
s=(v₀+v)t
s=v₀t+1/2at²
v²=v₀²+2as
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
55
Relative velocity is the velocity of an object in relation to an-
other object. It is a measure of how fast two objects are moving
with respect to each other.
End of unit questions and problems
1. A runner travels around rectangular track with length 50 m
and width 20 T. After traveling around the rectangular track
twice, the runner back to its starting point. Determine the
distance and displacement of the runner.
2. How do intervals of constant acceleration appear on a velocity-
time graph?
3. A truck on a straight road starts from rest, accelerating at
2 m/s² until it reaches a speed of 20 m/s. Then the truck
travels for 20 s at constant speed until the brakes applied, are
stopping the truck in a uniform manner in an additional 5 S.
(a) how long is the truck in motion? (b) What is the average
speed of the truck for the motion described?
4. If a student rides her bicycle in a straight line for 15 minutes
with an average velocity of 12.5 km/h South, how far has she
ridden?
5. A race car travels on a racetrack at 44 m/s and slows at a con-
stant rate to a velocity of 22 m/s over 11 S. How far does it move
during this time?
6. A truck is traveling at 22 m/s when the driver notices a speed
limit sign for the town ahead. He slows down to a speed of 14
m/s. He travels a distance of 125 m while he is slowing down.
(a) Calculate the acceleration of the truck. (b) How long did it
take the truck driver to change his speed?
56
Unit 2 Uniformly Accelerated Motion
7. A rock is dropped from a bridge. What happens to the magni-
tude of the acceleration and the speed of the rock as it falls?
[neglect friction]
8. A brick is dropped from rest from a height of 4.9 m. How long
does it take the brick to reach the ground?
9. The velocity of a car changes over an 8 s time period as shown
in the following table.
(a) Plot the velocity-time graph of the motion.
(b) What is the displacement of the car during the entire 8 s?
(c) Find the slope of the line between t = 0 s and t = 4 s? What
does this slope represent?
(d) Find the slope of the line between t = 5 s and t = 7 S. What
does this slope represent?
Position (m) 0 4 8 12 16 20 20 20 20
Time (s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10. For the motion described by the velocity-time graph below,
A) What is the acceleration between 0 and 2 s?
B) During what time period does the object have a constant
speed?
C) What is the displacement of the motion?
Velocity, V (m/s)
12
B
10
8
C
6
A
4
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time, t (s)
2.6 Relative velocity in one dimension
57
11. Given the position-time graph below, find the velocity-time
graph.
0.6
0.5
Position, S (m)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time, t (s)
12. A jet cruising at a speed of 1000 km/h ejects hot air in the
opposite direction. If the speed of the hot air with respect
to the jet is 800 km/h, then find its speed with respect to the
ground.
13. Copy and complete the following concept map on motion.
Motion
can be described by
velocity
which is a
which
which equals
change in
includes
position
change in
velocity
which equals
time
distance
time
Unit 3
Elasticity and Static Equilibrium
of Rigid Body
Introduction
In grade 9 physics, you studied the effect of force on a body to produce
Brainstormi
displacement. The force applied on an object may also change its shape
question
or size. Some objects regain their original shape and size whereas others
What do you thin
do not. Such a behavior of objects depends on the microscopic structure
are the impor-
of the material called elasticity and plasticity. In this unit, you will learn
tant elastic and
about the topics related to elasticity, plasticity, and static equilibrium of a
plastic properties
rigid body.
of bridges and
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
ladders?
understand the differences between elasticity and plasticity for an
object;
describe density and specific gravity;
comprehend the concept of stress and strain;
know that Young modulus is the ratio of the stress to the strain of an
object;
understand the physical conditions of static equilibrium;
apply the conditions of equilibrium for a body in static equilibrium
in everyday activity.
60
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
3.1 Elasticity and plasticity
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define elasticity and plasticity;
explain the deformation of an object.
A rigid body generally means a hard solid object having a definite shape
and size. However, in reality, all bodies can be stretched, compressed
and bent. Even the appreciably rigid steel bar can be deformed when a
sufficiently large external force is applied on it. You may have seen iron
rods at construction sites. This means that all practical solid bodies are
never perfectly rigid. A solid has a definite shape and size. In order to
Figure 3.1 Helical spring
change (or deform) the shape or size of a body, a force is required. Such
a force is called a deforming force. If you stretch a helical spring shown
in Figure 3.1 by gently pulling its ends, the length of the spring increases
slightly. When you leave the ends of the spring, it regains its original size
and shape.
You might have experienced the use of such a spring in some materials
like the one shown in Figure 3.2. Pressing the pen cap allow the writing
point to come out of the pen casing (with a click sound). On pressing it
Figure 3.2 Spring pen.
again the writing point goes back inside the pen casing. Two points are to
be noted here are:
The spring inside the pen gets deformed on pushing the pen cap.
It regains the original shape once the deforming force is removed.
If a body regains its original shape and size after the removal of deforming
force, it is said to be elastic and the property is called elasticity. The defor-
mation caused is known as elastic deformation. Examples: rubber, metals
Figure 3.3 The hammer force
applied on the nail which bent,
and steel ropes. However, if you apply force to a lump of putty, or potters
showing permanent deforma-
clay, they have no gross tendency to regain their previous shape; they tend
tion of the nail.
to get permanently deformed. If a body does not regain its original shape
and size after removal of the deforming force, it is said to be plastic body
3.1 Elasticity and plasticity
61
and the property is called plasticity.
Plastic deformation is defined as the persistent deformation or change in
the shape of a solid body caused by a sustained force. This happens when
a great amount of tension is applied to a material. Plastic deformation
is permanent and irreversible. Plasticity is the ability to be permanently
formed or molded.
Activity 3.1
A rubber band shown in Figure 3.4 gets stretched when you apply
force on it. However, it (almost) regains the original shape once the
force is removed. But does it always come back to its original shape
and size irrespective of the magnitude of force? Discuss in group.
Students, have you observed that elastic bodies show the property of elas-
ticity up to a certain value of deforming force? If you go on increasing the
deforming force, then a stage is reached when on removing the force, the
body will not return to its original state. The maximum deforming force
up to which a body retains its property of elasticity is called elastic limit of
Figure 3.4 Stretched rubber
the material of the body. Beyond the elastic limit, the solid does not regain
band.
its original shape and size.
Key Concept
It Elastic limit is the property of a body whereas elasticity is the
property of material of the body. All materials are elastic up to
a certain deformation; then they turn plastic. Springs lose their
springiness if subjected to large external force and tend to become
plastic.
The elastic limit of ductile material is the beginning point of plastic defor-
mation. The elastic limit of a solid is the utmost amount to which it may
be stretched without permanently changing size or form. If the tension is
placed beyond the elastic limit, the substance will deform plastically. Plas-
62
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
tic deformation occurs in ductile materials such as metals (for example,
copper) when the distortion surpasses the elastic limit. Plastic deforma-
tion is vital in the manufacture of new goods utilizing heat or pressure
treatments as well as molding.
Activity 3.2
Elastic behavior of materials plays an important role in our day to day life.
The following are some of the practical applications of elasticity.
A slingshot used
to shoot a body
1. The metallic parts of machinery are never subjected to a stress be-
involves the uses
yond elastic limit; otherwise they will get permanently deformed.
of rubber bands.
The body, placed
2. The thickness of the metallic rope used in the crane in order to lift
at the centre
a given load is decided from the knowledge of elastic limit of the
of the band, is
material of the rope and the factor of safety.
drawn back as far
3. The bridges are declared unsafe after long use because during its
as possible and
released, thus
long use, a bridge undergoes quick alternating strains continuously.
striking the tar-
It results in the loss of elastic strength.
get with a great
4. Maximum height of a mountain on earth can be estimated from the
impact. If you
elastic behavior of earth.
replace the rubber
used with a cotton
Section summary
cord, would it still
work in the same
External forces applied on an object cause deformation.
way?
An object or material is elastic if it comes back to its original
shape and size when the external force is removed.
Review questions
1. Define elasticity and plasticity.
2. List some plastic materials in your locality.
3. The body will regain its previous shape and size only when the
deformation caused by the external forces is within a certain
3.2 Density and specific gravity
63
limit. What is that limit?
3.2 Density and specific gravity
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define the density and the specific gravity of an object;
Exercise 3.1
determine the density of an object;
Do you know the
compare the density of an unknown object with a standard value.
reason why oil
floats on water or
Density
why iron needles
Density is defined as the mass of an object per unit of its volume. You
sink while giant
can also state it as the ratio between mass and volume. Thus density is
iron ships float on
the measure of the fact that how much mass of the object is contained
water?
in the unit volume of the substance. It also helps us in determining the
compactness of the substance.
Activity 3.3
Suppose that
Density is represented using the symbol, "p". The density of a substance
you are given an
can thus be calculated using the formula:
iron and copper
block. Determine
p=m
(3.1)
the density of
the two blocks
where m is the mass of the substance and V is the volume of the substance.
by first measur-
The SI unit of density is kg/m³. Sometimes densities are given in g/cm³.
ing the masses
The relation between them is given by: 1kg/m³ = 10⁻³g/cm³.
and the volumes.
Compare your
Temperature and pressure are the two common factors affecting the den-
result with the
sity of the substance. Other general factors such as size, mass as well as
standard for
arrangement of atoms in the substance also widely affect the density of
iron 7.86g/cm³
the material.
and for copper
8.92g/cm³.
Here are a few everyday examples of density.
64
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Key Concept
Rock sinks in the water, while wood, being less dense than the water,
Density is a
floats on the surface.
characteristic
property of any
Oil is less dense than water. It rises to the surface in cases of an oil
pure substance. It
spill in the ocean creating an oil slick on the surface of the water.
is used in deter-
mining whether
Specific gravity
an object sinks or
Specific gravity is defined as the ratio of the density of the given substance
floats in a fluid.
to that of a standard substance (generally this standard substance is water
at 4 °C but not for all). While considering water at 4°C as a reference or
standard parameter for comparison, a question arises why water is taken
at 4 °C only, and not at 0 °C or 100 °C which is its freezing and boiling
points, respectively. This is because at 4 °C, water has the highest density
and not at 0 °C or 100 °C. That is the reason why it is common to use the
density of water at 4 °C as a reference point.
The specific gravity (SG) of a substance can thus be calculated using the
expression:
SG Psubstance Pwater
=
(3.2)
Since specific gravity is the ratio of two like terms, i.e., density of two
Key Concept
substances, it is a unitless quantity. As discussed earlier, with change in
temperature and pressure, the density of an object is affected and hence
Specific Grav-
affecting the specific gravity of the given substance.
ity is a unitless
quantity as it is
the ratio of two
The following are some of the applications of specific gravity.
densities.
Geologists and mineralogists use the concept of specific gravity in
determining the mineral content of the rock.
You apply the concept of specific gravity in comparing the purity of
the newly found gem with the standard one.
Specific gravity helps us in urinalysis and extracting the contents
information of the urine.
3.2 Density and specific gravity
65
Table 3.1 Density and specific gravity of substance at 0 °C and 1 atm.
Material type
Material name
Density (Kg/m³)
Relative density
Helium
0.179
1.79 X 10⁻⁴
Gas
Air
1.29
1.29 X 10⁻³
Carbon dioxide
1.98
1.98 X 10⁻³
Liquid
Alcohol
7.9 X 10²
0.79
Gasoline
8.6 X 10²
0.86
Water (4°C)
1 X 10³
1
Mercury
13.6 X 10³
13.6
Glass (common)
(2.4 - 2.8) X 10³
2.5
Aluminum
2.7 X 10³
2.7
Iron
7.86 X 10³
7.86
Solid
Copper
8.92 X 10³
8.92
Silver
10.5 X 10³
10.5
Uranium
19.07 X 10³
19.07
Activity 3.4
Gold
19.3 X 10³
19.3
Suppose that a
block of brass and
a block of wood
An object made of a particular pure substance such as pure gold, can have
have exactly the
any size or mass, but the density will be the same for each.
same mass. If
both blocks are
Example 3.1
dropped in a tank
of water, which
A mining worker gets an unknown mineral with a volume of 20 cm³ and a
one floats and
mass of 54 g. Determine the density and the specific gravity of the mineral.
which one sinks?
Solution:
why?
In this example, you are given with m = 60 g and V = 20cm³.
The required quantities are density and specific gravity.
The density can be calculated using the formula
p=m V
Substitution gives
p = 54 20 10-3 10⁻⁶ kg = 10³ kg/m³
66
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
The specific gravity can be calculated by
From table 3.1 above, this unknown rock is aluminium.
Example 3.2
What is the mass of a solid iron ball of radius 18 cm?
Solution:
You are given with r = 18 cm. Moreover, from table 3.1 above, the density
of iron is p = 7860 kg/m³.
You want to find the mass m.
From equation 3.1, you get m = (p)(V). To use this formula, you first have
to find the volume of the sphere. The volume of the sphere is given by 4πʳ³.
Hence, the volume of iron ball (V) is thus:
V = 4 3 m)³ = 0.024 m³
So the mass becomes:
m = (7860 kg/m³)(0.024 m³)
m = 188.64 kg
Section summary
The density of a material is defined as the mass per unit vol-
ume.
Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of the material to the
density of a substance that is taken as a standard.
3.3 Stress and Strain
67
Review questions
1. What is the approximate mass of air in a living room of 5.6 m X
3.6 m X 2.4 m?
2. You have a sample of granite with density 2.8 g/cm³. The
density of water is 1.0 g/cm³. What is the specific gravity of
your granite?
3. Calculate the average density and specific gravity of the Earth
given that the mass and radius of the Earth are mE = 5.98 X 10²⁴
kg and RE = 6.37 X 10⁶ m, respectively.
Exercise 3.2
3.3 Stress and Strain
If you apply equal
forces on a copper
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
and silver wire
define stress and strain;
of equal length
and thickness,
apply the formula of stress and strain to solve problems;
can they stretch
equally? Explain.
apply physical concept of stress and strain on your daily life activity.
From the previous discussion, you observed that a change in shape due to
the application of a force is known as a deformation. Even very small forces
are known to cause some deformation. Deformation is experienced by
objects or physical media under the action of external force, for example;
this may be squashing, squeezing, ripping, twisting, shearing, or pulling
the objects apart. In the language of physics, two terms describe the forces
on objects undergoing deformation: stress and strain.
Stress
Stress is a quantity that describes the magnitude of forces that cause de-
formation. If the magnitude of deforming force is F and it acts on area A,
stress is generally defined as force per unit area.
68
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Key Concept
JET Stress is a quan-
Stress
tity that is pro-
Stress = Arce = Area A
(3.3)
portional to the
The SI unit of stress is N/m².
force causing de-
formation; more
When forces pull on an object and cause its elongation, like the stretching
specifically, stress
of an elastic band, you call such stress a tensile stress. When forces cause
is the external
a compression of an object, you call it a compressive stress. When an
force acting on
object is being squeezed from all sides, like a submarine in the depths of
an object per unit
cross-sectional
an ocean, you call this kind of stress a bulk stress (or volume stress). In
area.
other situations, the acting forces may be neither tensile nor compressive,
and still produce a noticeable deformation. For example, suppose you
hold a book tightly between the palms of your hands, then with one hand
you press and-pull on the front cover away from you, while with the other
Exercise 3.3
hand you press-and-pull on the back cover toward you. In such a case, the
What is meant
deforming forces act tangentially to the object's surface and you call them
by tensile stress
'shear' forces and the stress they cause is called shear stress.
and compressive
stress?
Strain
An object or medium under stress becomes deformed. The quantity that
Key Concept
describes this deformation is called strain. Strain is given as a fractional
change in either length (under tensile stress) or volume (under bulk stress)
It Strain is a
or geometry (under shear stress).
dimensionless
quantity that
gives the amount
Therefore, strain is a dimensionless number. Strain under a tensile stress
of deformation
is called tensile strain, strain under bulk stress is called bulk strain (or
of an object or
volume strain), and that caused by shear stress is called shear strain. Their
medium under
equations are given as follows.
stress.
3.3 Stress and Strain
69
Tensile/Linear strain: If on application of a longitudinal deforming
F
force, the length L₀ of a body changes by L as in Figure 3.5, then
F
L
A
L
Tensile (or compressive) strain =
(3.4)
L₀
L
Volumetric strain: If on application of the deforming force, the
Lo
L₀
volume V₀ of the body changes by V without change of shape of
the body as in Figure 3.6, then
V
Volumetric strain =
(3.5)
V₀
F
F
Shearing strain: When the deforming forces are tangential, the
(a)
(b)
shearing strain is given by the angle through which a line perpendic-
Figure 3.5 An object under (a)
ular to the fixed plane is turned due to deformation. This is shown
tensile stress (b) compressive
stress.
in Figure 3.7. Then, you can write
F
A
Volume V₀
51%
Volume
Shearing strain =
(3.6)
L₀
F
V₀ V
In 1678, Robert Hooke obtained the stress-strain curve experimentally for
F
F
a number of solid substances and established a law of elasticity known as
F
Hooke's law. According to this law, within elastic limit, stress is directly
proportional to corresponding strain.
F
Stress α Strain
Figure 3.6 An object under
volume strain.
Stress = k X Strain
(3.7)
Ax
A
F
This constant of proportionality K is a measure of elasticity of the sub-
stance and is called modulus of elasticity. As strain is a dimensionless
Lo
quantity, the modulus of elasticity has the same dimensions (or units) as
stress. Its value is independent of the stress and strain but depends on the
F
nature of the material.
Figure 3.7 An object under
You can also see from the above equation that when an object is charac-
shear stress.
terized by a large value of elastic modulus, the effect of stress is small. On
70
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
the other hand, a small elastic modulus means that stress produces large
strain and noticeable deformation. For example, a stress on a rubber band
produces larger strain (deformation) than the same stress on a steel band
of the same dimensions because the elastic modulus for rubber is two
orders of magnitude smaller than the elastic modulus for steel. The elastic
modulus for tensile stress is called the Young modulus; that for the bulk
stress is called the bulk modulus; and that for shear stress is called the
shear modulus.
Example 3.3
Find the tensile stress when a force of 9.8 N acts over a cross-sectional area
of 2 X 10⁻³ m².
Solution:
You are given with F = 9.8 N and A = 2 X 10⁻³ m².
You want to find the tensile stress.
Substituting the given values into the formula of tensile stress, you obtain:
Tensile stress = F A = 2 X 9.8N 10⁻³
= 4.9 X 10³ N1m²
Example 3.4
When a weight of 98 N is suspended from wire of length 3 m and diameter
0.4 mm, its length increases by 2.4 cm. Calculate tensile stress and tensile
strain.
Solution:
You are given with F = W = 98 N, L₀ = 3 m, D = 2r = 0.4 mm. The area of
the wire can be calculated by
3.3 Stress and Strain
71
L = 2.4 cm = 2.4 X 10² m
You want to find the tensile stress and tensile strain.
The tensile stress is thus obtained by:
Tensile stress = F = A = 98 N = 1.56 X 10⁸ N/m²
On the other hand, the tensile strain can be obtained by:
Tensile strain = = 2.4 X 3m 10⁻² = 0.008
The amount of elongation of the wire due to the suspended load is 0.008.
Section summary
Activity 3.5
The force per unit area acting on an object is the stress, and
What type of
the resulting fractional change in length is the strain.
stress are you ap-
plying when you
Tensile (or compressive) stress causes elongation (or shorten-
press on the ends
ing) of the object and is due to an external forces acting along
of a wooden rod?
only one direction perpendicular to the cross-section.
When you pull on
its ends?
Tensile (or compressive) strain is the response of an object to
tensile (or compressive) stress.
Review questions
1. Review the relationship between stress and strain. Can you
find any similarities between the two quantities?
2. Can compressive stress be applied to a rubber band?
3. A nylon string that has a diameter of 2 mm is pulled by a force
of 100 N. Calculate the tensile stress.
4. A load of 2.0 kg is applied to the ends of a wire 4.0 m long,
72
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
and produces an extension of 0.24 mm. If the diameter of the
wire is 2.0 mm, find the stress on the wire and the strain it
produces.
3.4 The Young Modulus
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define the Young modulus;
Exercise 3.4
apply the formula of the Young modulus to solve problems;
What did you
know about the
demonstrate the tensile strain and stress using the Young modulus
Young modulus of
from local materials.
a material?
In the previous section, you have learnt that there are three kinds of elastic
modulus. The elastic modulus for tensile stress is called the Young modu-
Activity 3.6
lus; that for the bulk stress is called the bulk modulus; and that for shear
stress is called the shear modulus. In this section, you will study about the
Suppose you have
the Young modulus.
a copper wire
and you stretch
it and there is an
The Young modulus is the elastic modulus when deformation is caused by
increase in its
either tensile or compressive stress. Experimental observation show that
length. On remov-
for a given material, the magnitude of the strain produced is same whether
ing the stretching
the stress is tensile or compressive. The ratio of tensile (or compressive)
force, the wire
stress to the longitudinal strain is known as the the Young modulus of the
does not regain
material; it is denoted by the symbol Y.
its original length.
Tensile stress
Can you calcu-
Young modulus(Y) =
Tensile strain
late the Young
modulus in this
Since strain is a dimensionless quantity, the unit of the Young modulus is
situation?
the same as that of stress i.e., Nm² or Pascal (Pa).
The relation between the tensile stress and the tensile strain is linear when
3.4 The Young Modulus
73
Stress (N/m²)
F1
4x109
A
Breaking
3x109
Elastic
point
limit
L₀
Lo + LL
2x109
Elastic
1x109
behavior
2x10⁻³
4x10-3
6x10-3
8x10⁻³
Strain
F1
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8 (a). A rod of length L₀ can be stretched by an amount L after appli-
cation of a tensile stress F₁. (b) The stress versus strain diagram for a ductile
material.
the rod is in its elastic range.
Consider a metallic rod of original length L₀ and cross sectional area A.
When an external force F₁ is applied perpendicularly to the cross sectional
area A of a rod, its length increases to a new length L₀ + L as shown in the
Key Concept
Figure 3.8 (a). The Young modulus is thus
The Young
Y (A) =
(FA)
modulus is a
(3.8)
( AL )
property of the
material that tells
If the wire of radius r is suspended vertically with a rigid support and a
us how easily it
mass m hangs at its lower end, then A = π X r² and F = mg.
can stretch and
deform and is de-
Y
(3.9)
fined as the ratio
of tensile stress to
Figure 3.8 (b) shows a typical stress-strain curve for a ductile metal under a
tensile strain.
load, the relation between the tensile stress and the tensile strain is linear
74
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
when the rod is in its elastic range (elastic behavior). When the stress
exceeds its elastic limit, the rod is permanently deformed and it does not
return to its original shape after the stress is removed. As the stress is
increased even further, the rod reaches its breaking point.
Table 3.2 below shows the Young modulus of different substances.
Table 3.2 The Young modulus of different substance in N/m²
Substance
Young modulus (N/m²)
Tungsten
35 X 10¹⁰
Steel
20 X 10¹⁰
Copper
11 X 10¹⁰
Brass
9.1 X 10¹⁰
Aluminum
7.0 X 10¹⁰
Glass
6.5 - 7.8 X 10¹⁰
Quartz
5.6 X 10¹⁰
Water
-
Mercury
-
You can notice that for metals the Young moduli are large. Therefore, these
materials require a large force to produce a small change in their length.
Exercise 3.5
The value of Young modulus is maximum for steel and thus steel is more
A copper wire is
elastic in comparison to other materials mentioned in the table. For the
1.0 m long and
same change in length, steel requires a large amount of force. To increase
its diameter is 1.0
the length of a thin steel wire of 0.1cm² cross-sectional area by 0.1 percent,
mm. If the wire
a force of 2000 I is required. The force required to produce the same strain
hangs vertically,
in Aluminium, brass and copper wires, having the same cross-sectional
how much weight
area, are 690 N, 900 N and 1100 N, respectively. It means that steel is more
must be added
elastic than copper, brass and aluminium. It is for this reason that steel is
to its free end in
preferred in heavy-duty machines and in structural designs. Wood, bone,
order to stretch it
concrete and glass have rather small values for their Young moduli.
3.0 mm?
The Young modulus is relevant only for solids since only solids can have
well defined lengths and shapes.
3.4 The Young Modulus
75
Example 3.5
A 1.60 m long steel piano wire has a diameter of 0.20 cT. How great is the
tension in the wire if it stretches 0.25 cm when tightened?
Solution:
In this example, you are given with L₀ = 1.6 m, Y = 2 X 10¹¹ N/m² and D =
0.2 X 10⁻².
The required quantity is the tension or force on the wire.
From the formula of Young modulus, you can derive the expression for F
as
where
A = πr² = (3.14)(0.0010 m)² = 3.14 10⁻⁶ m²
Thus,
F =
F = 980 N
The large tension in all the wires in a piano must be supported by a strong
frame.
Example 3.6
A pendulum consists of a big sphere of mass m = 30 kg hung from the end
of a steel wire that has a length of 15 m, a cross-sectional area of 9 X 10⁻⁶ m²,
and the Young modulus of 200 X 10⁹ N/m². Find the tensile stress on the
Do you know?
wire and the increase in its length.
Thomas Young
(1773 - 1829, English) was English
physician and physicist who described
Solution:
the elastic properties of a solid undergo-
You are given with m = 30 kg, L₀ = 15 m, A = 9 X 10⁻⁶ m², and Y =
ing tension or compression in only one
200 X 10⁹ N/m².
direction.
You need to find the tensile stress and L.
76
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
The tensile stress can be calculated by
stress F
Substitution gives
Tensile stress = 30 X 9.8 = 3.27 X 10⁷ N1m²
9 X 10⁻⁶
In the above equation, the applied force on a wire must be equal to the
weight of the sphere, i.e., F = mg.
On the other hand, from the expression of the Young modulus, Y (A)
you can derive the expression for L as
L Y A
Substitution gives
L 1
:. AL= 2.45 mm
Note that this large stress produces a relatively small change in length.
Section summary
The relation between the tensile stress and the tensile strain
is linear when the rod is in its elastic range.
The ratio of the tensile stress and the tensile strain is called
the Young Modulus.
The Young Modulus measures the resistance of a solid to a
change in its length.
3.5 Static equilibrium
77
Review questions
1. In the Young experiment, if the length of the wire and the
radius are both doubled, what will happen to the value of the
Young modulus?
2. A wire increases by 10⁻³ of its length when a stress of 1 X
10⁸ Nm⁻² is applied to it. Calculate the Young modulus of
material of the wire.
3. A wire is stretched by 0.01 m by a certain force F. Another wire
of same material whose diameter and length are double to the
original wire is stretched by the same force. What will be its
elongation?
4. A 200 kg load is hung on a wire having a length of 4.0 T,
cross-sectional area 0.20 X 10⁻⁵ m², and the Young modulus
8.00 X 10¹⁰ N/m². What is its increase in length?
3.5 Static equilibrium
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define static equilibrium of rigid body;
state the first and second conditions of equilibrium;
apply the first and second conditions for equilibrium to solve prob-
lems.
Exercise 3.6
List examples of
A massive frame hung on a wall using two cables is in static equilibrium.
bodies that are
A horizontal beam supported by a strut is also in static equilibrium. So,
in static equilib-
what is the definition of static equilibrium, and when do objects fall under
rium from your
this category?
surroundings.
Static equilibrium occurs when an object or a system remains at rest and
78
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Exercise 3.7
When is a sys-
does not tilt nor rotate. The word "static" means that the body is not in
tem or an object
motion, while the term "equilibrium" indicates that all opposing forces
considered to be
are balanced. Thus, a system is in static equilibrium if it is at rest and all
in static equilib-
forces and other factors influencing the object are balanced.
rium?
Two conditions need to be satisfied for a system to be in static equilibrium:
the first condition of equilibrium and the second condition of equilibrium.
Firstly, the net force acting upon the object must be zero. Secondly, the
net torque acting upon the object must also be zero. In other words, both
Key Concept
static translational and static rotational equilibrium conditions must be
satisfied. You will now look at each of the two conditions one by one.
It
Static equi-
librium is a type
of equilibrium
3.5.1 First condition of equilibrium
that occurs when
The first condition of equilibrium states that for an object to remain in
a body is at rest
equilibrium, the net force acting upon it in all directions must be zero.
and there is no
Simply put, the above statement means that the body must not be experi-
net force or net
encing acceleration. Remember that Newton's second law states that an
torque acting on
object will not accelerate if the sum of all the forces acting on it is equal
it.
to zero. In the form of an equation, the first condition of equilibrium is
denoted as follows:
Key Concept
(3.10)
JET The first con-
Since force is a vector, both the magnitude and the direction of its com-
dition of equilib-
ponents should also be considered. For example, a negative sign should
rium states that
be used if an object moves in the opposite direction. Therefore, for static
the sum of the
equilibrium to be reached, the condition of static equilibrium should be
forces acting on a
body must add up
fulfilled such that the component of the forces in all dimensions should
to zero.
be equal to zero. Thus,
For one dimensional forces applied on an object (for instance, if the
forces are along the x-axis), the first condition of equilibrium is given
by:
Fx=0
3.5 Static equilibrium
79
For two dimensional forces applied on an object, the first condition
of equilibrium is given by:
Fₙₑₜ = 0, so that and ΣFγ=0
(3.11)
The above condition is true for both static equilibrium, where the object's
velocity is zero, and dynamic equilibrium, where the object moves at a
constant velocity.
3.5.2 Second condition of equilibrium
If the body does not achieve equilibrium even though the first condition
Key Concept
for equilibrium is satisfied, it is because it tends to rotate. This situation de-
The second
mands another condition in addition to the first condition for equilibrium.
condition neces-
A body satisfies the second condition for equilibrium when the resultant
sary to achieve
torque acting on it is zero.
equilibrium is
that the net exter-
Torque is the twisting force or the amount of force that causes an object to
nal torque on a
rotate when it is applied to a certain distance from the axis of rotation. The
system must be
axis of rotation or pivot point can be arbitrarily assigned, which means
zero.
that any axis can be used to calculate torque as long as proper conventions
are used. A door, for example, experiences torque when a force is applied
to a certain distance from the hinge. It is influenced by two factors: the
force applied and the location of the force relative to the pivot point. The
magnitude of torque is thus given by the equation:
τ = Frsin Θ
Θ
where T is the symbol for torque in Nm, È is the magnitude of the force in
F
N and r the distance from the pivot point to the point where the force is
Figure 3.9 A force applied on
applied in m and Θ is the angle between the force and the vector directed
one side of a nut at an angle
from the point of application to the pivot point.
makes it to rotate.
If r is perpendicular to F like in Figure 3.10, the magnitude of the torque
80
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
can be obtained by:
T = Fr
F
pivot point
Rotational equilibrium, the second condition for static equilibrium, en-
sures that either there is no torque acting on the body or that the torques
Figure 3.10 A force applied
present are balanced and sum up to zero. Mathematically it is represented
perpendicularly on one side of
as:
a nut makes it to rotate.
(3.12)
It means that the clockwise torque acting on the object is also equal to
the counter clockwise torque. This is rotational equilibrium, which is the
second condition for static equilibrium.
Static Equilibrium Examples
Static equilibrium can be commonly observed in everyday life. Objects
at rest are considered systems in static equilibrium, where both net force
and net torque are zero. The following are examples that are used to
demonstrate objects in static equilibrium.
1. A book placed on top of a table
A book placed on top of a table is considered to be in static equilibrium.
N
A free-body diagram, or a diagram showing all the forces acting on the
object, can be used to check whether or not the object satisfies the two
conditions of equilibrium.
As shown in Figure 3.11, the only forces acting on the book are gravity and
mg
normal force. Gravity acts downward, while normal force acts upward,
perpendicular to the surface. Since the book is at rest, these two forces are
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. Thus, the net force acting
Figure 3.11 A book at rest on
the top of a table.
on the book is zero. Taking a pivot at any point, you will get the vector sum
of the torque due to these forces to be zero satisfying both the first and
second conditions of static equilibrium.
3.5 Static equilibrium
81
2. A seesaw balanced by two children
A seesaw (shown in Figure 3.12) balanced by two children sitting on oppo-
site sides is considered to be in static equilibrium. Consider a 6 m seesaw
with negligible mass and a pivot point exactly at its center. If the girl has a
mass of 30 kg and sits 2.5 m away from the pivot point, 25 kg boy has to
sit 3.0 m away from the pivot point of the seesaw for a seesaw to become
Girl
Boy
in static equilibrium. Thus, to determine whether the seesaw is in static
equilibrium or not, the two conditions for equilibrium should be satisfied.
Point P
Figure 3.12 A balanced seesaw
Activity 3.7
in static equilibrium.
A uniform meter stick supported at the 25 cm mark is in equilibrium
when a 1 kg rock is suspended at the 0 cm end as shown in the Figure
below. Is the mass of the meter stick greater than, equal to, or less
than the mass of the rock? Explain your reasoning.
25
50
The following general procedure is recommended for solv-
ing problems that involve objects in equilibrium.
1. Choose one object at a time for consideration. Make a careful free-
body diagram by showing all the forces acting on that object, includ-
ing gravity and the points at which these forces act. If you aren't sure
of the direction of a force, choose a direction; if the actual direction
of the force (or component of a force) is opposite, your eventual
calculation will give a result with a minus sign.
2. Choose a convenient coordinate system, and resolve the forces into
82
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
their components using:
Fₓ=FcosΘ
(3.13)
Fy=FsinΘ
(3.14)
where Θ is given in an anticlockwise direction from the positive X-
axis.
3. Using letters to represent unknowns, write down the equilibrium
equations for the forces: and assuming all the forces act in a plane.
Fx=0
(3.15)
Fy=0
(3.16)
4. For the torque equation,
Στ=0
(3.17)
Choose any axis perpendicular to the xy-plane that might make the
calculation easier. (For example, you can reduce the number of
unknowns in the resulting equation by choosing the axis so that one
of the unknown forces acts through that axis; then this force will
have zero lever arm and produce zero torque, and so won't appear
in the torque equation.) Pay careful attention to determining the
lever arm for each force correctly. Give each torque a + or - sign to
indicate torque direction. For example, if torques tending to rotate
the object counterclockwise are positive, then those tending to rotate
it clockwise are negative.
5. Solve these equations for the unknowns. Three equations allow a
maximum of three unknowns to be solved for. They can be forces,
distances, or even angles.
3.5 Static equilibrium
83
Example 3.7
An object shown in Figure below is in static equilibrium. The horizontal
cord has a force of 30 N. Find the force F of the cord and weight Fw of the
object.
30°
F
Fₕ=30 N
P
Weight (Fw)
Solution:
You are given Fw = Fx = 30 N.
What you want to find is F and Fw.
a) Drawing free body diagram: all forces acting on the given mass are
indicated on the free body diagram shown in the Figure below.
y
F
Fy = F sin 30°
30°
Fₕ = 30 N
X
Fx = F cos 30°
Fw
b) Resolving vectors in to their components: the only force that have
components is F. Hence,
Fx = F cos 30⁰ = 0.86F
84
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
and
Fy = F sin 30⁰ = 0.5F
c) By applying the first condition of equilibrium,
Σ Fₓ = 0 yields 30 N - F cos 30° = 0
0.86 F = 30 N
F = 30 0.86 N = 34.9 N
ΣFy = 0 yields F sin 30° - Fw = 0
0.5 F = Fw
Substituting the value of F into the above expression gives
Fw = 0.5 X 34.9 N = 17.5 N
Example 3.8
A uniform board of mass 'M' serves as a seesaw for two children as shown in
Figure below. Child A has a mass of 30 kg and sits 2.5 m from the pivot point,
P. At what distance x from the pivot must child B, of mass 25 kg, place herself
mA = 30 kg
ᵐв = 25 kg
y
A
B
2.5 m
x
+ Torque
- Torque
P
to balance the seesaw?
Solution:
You are given mA = 30 kg, mB = 25 kg, and XA = 2.5 m.
The required quantity is the value of XB = x.
You can easily solve this problem using the above stated steps.
(a) Draw free body diagram. The forces acting on the board are the
forces exerted downward on it by each child, and the upward force
3.5 Static equilibrium
85
exerted by the pivot and the force of gravity on the board which acts
at the center of the uniform board. This is indicated in the Figure
shown below.
FN
2.5 m
x
P
FA=mAg
FB=mBg =
(b) Coordinate system. You choose y to be vertical, with positive upward,
and x horizontal to the right, with origin at the pivot.
(c) Force equation. All the forces are in the y-(vertical) direction. So,
ΣFₓ=0
ΣFᵥ=0
(d) Torque equation. Let us calculate the torque about an axis through
the board at the pivot point, P. Then, the lever arms for the weight of
the board are zero, and they will contribute zero torque about point
P. Thus, the torque equation will involve only the forces FA and FB
which are equal to the weights of the children. The torque exerted
by each child will be mg times the appropriate lever arm, which is
the distance of each child from the pivot point. FA tends to rotate
the board counterclockwise (+) and FB clockwise (-) so the torque
equation is
Σ=0
mA (2.5 m) - mB g (x) = 0
(e) Solve. You solve the torque equation for x and find
x
Thus, to balance the seesaw, child B must sit 3.0 m from the pivot
point.
86
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Section summary
Static equilibrium occurs when an object or a system remains
at rest and does not tilt nor rotate.
Two conditions need to be satisfied before a system is in static
equilibrium: the first and second conditions of equilibrium.
In the first condition of equilibrium, all external forces acting
on the body balance out and their vector sum is zero.
In second condition of equilibrium, the sum of all the torques
(calculated about any arbitrary axis) must also be zero.
Torque is the product of the distance from the support or pivot
(r) and the component of force perpendicular to the object.
Review questions
1. What does static equilibrium mean?
2. What conditions are necessary for static equilibrium?
3. Mention some examples of a rigid body that is in static equi-
librium in your surroundings.
4. Four beams of the same length each have three
forces acting on them. Which beam has both zero
resultant force and zero resultant torque acting?
30N
50N
36N
70N
A)
C)
50 cm
30 cm
50 cm
30 cm
90N
106N
28N
35N
42N
70N
B)
D)
50 cm
30 cm
50 cm
30 cm
63N
112N
3.5 Static equilibrium
87
5. The two children shown in the Figure below are balanced on
a seesaw of negligible mass. The first child has a mass of 26.0
kg and sits 1.60 m from the pivot.
(a) If the second child has a mass of 32.0 kg, how far is he from
the pivot?
(b) What is Fₚ, the supporting force exerted by the pivot?
m₂=32.0kg
m₁=26.0kg
Fₚ
"2
"1
(1.60 m)
W₂
W₁
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on elasticity and static equilibrium of a
rigid body unit under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Density PhET Experiment.
2. Balancing Act PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
Solids tend to regain their original shape and size once exter-
nal deforming force is removed.
The property of solids by virtue of which they regain their
original shape and size even when the deforming forces are
removed is called elasticity.
The property of solids by virtue of which they do not regain
88
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
their original shape and size, even when the deforming forces
are removed, is called plasticity.
Beyond a limit, called elastic limit, the solid does not regain
its original shape and size.
Stress is a quantity that is proportional to the force causing
a deformation; more specifically, stress is the external force
acting on an object per unit cross-sectional area. The result of
a stress is strain, which is a measure of the degree of deforma-
tion.
Hooke's law states that within the elastic limit, the stress de-
veloped in a body is directly proportional to the strain.
The Young modulus (Y) = Tensile stress /Tensile strain.
A body is in equilibrium when it remains either in uniform
motion or at rest.
Conditions for equilibrium require that the sum of all external
forces acting on the body is zero (first condition of equilib-
rium), and the sum of all external torques from external forces
is zero (second condition of equilibrium).
End of unit questions and problems
1. Define the term elasticity. Give examples of elastic and plastic
objects.
2. You have a rock with a volume of 15 cm³ and a mass of 45 g.
What is its density?
3. A bar measures 12 mm X 20 mm x 1 m. It has a specific gravity
of 2.78. Determine its mass.
4. A golden-colored cube is handed to you. The person wants
you to buy it for 5000 birr, saying that is a gold nugget. From
3.5 Static equilibrium
89
a book you read that the density of gold is 19.3g/cm³. You
measure the cube and find that it is 2 cm on each side, and
weighs 40 g. What is its density? Is it gold? Should you buy it?
5. Explain the terms stress, strain and Hooke's Law.
6. A wire is stretched 3 mm by a force of 150 N. Assuming the elas-
tic limit is not exceeded, calculate the force that will stretch
the wire 5 mm.
7. A circular rod of cross-sectional area 100mm² has a tensile
force of 100 kN applied to it. Calculate the value for the stress
in the rod.
8. A steel wire of length 6 m and diameter 0.6 mm is extended by
a force of 60 N. The wire extends by 3 mm. Calculate:
a) the applied stress.
b) the strain on the wire.
c) the Young Modulus of the steel.
9. A wire increases by 10⁻³ of its length when a stress of
1x10⁸ Nm⁻² is applied to it. Calculate the Young modulus
of the wire.
10. Two wires are made of the same metal. The length of the first
wire is half that of the second and its diameter is double that
of the second wire. If equal loads are applied on both wires,
find the ratio of the increase in their lengths?
11. Find the tension in the two cords shown in the Figure below.
Neglect the mass of the cords, and assume that the angle is
33 0 and the mass m is 190 kg.
90
Unit 3 Elasticity and Static Equilibrium of Rigid Body
Θ
m
12. A beam pivoted at one end has a force of 5.0 N acting vertically
upwards on it as shown in the Figure below. What is the weight
of the beam?
5.0 N
2.0 cm
3.0 cm
Pivot
Weight of the beam
13. A force of 20 N at angle of 30 0 to the horizontal and a force
F₂ at an angle of 60 o to the horizontal are applied on an
object as shown in the Figure below so as to make the object
in equilibrium. Calculate the magnitude of the force F₂ and
weight of the object.
60°
30°
F2
F1 = 20 N
W
Unit 4
Static and Current Electricity
Introduction
Physical phenomenon associated with the presence and flow of electric
charge is known as electricity. In Ethiopia and elsewhere around the world,
people depend on electricity to provide power for most appliances in the
home, at work and out in the world in general. For example, lights, electric
heating and electric stoves that you use in your home all depend on elec-
Brain storm-
tricity to work. To realize just how big impact electricity has on our daily
ing question
lives, just think about what happens when there is a power failure. Thus,
What constitutes
electricity has an important place in modern society. It is a controllable
electricity?
and convenient form of energy for a variety of uses in homes, schools,
industries and so on. In this unit, you will learn topics related to electricity.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
understand the basic properties of electric charge;
explain the charging and discharging processes;
have a conceptual understanding of an electrical force;
understand the concept of an electric field;
understand the relationship among voltage, current and resistance;
describe arrangement of resistors in a circuit;
apply the concept of electricity in solving real life problems.
91
92
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.1 Charges in Nature
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
distinguish between the two types of electric charges;
show that the total electric charge in an isolated system is conserved;
use conservation of charge to calculate quantities of charge trans-
ferred between objects.
Objects surrounding us (including people) contain large amounts of elec-
tric charge. There are two types of electric charge: positive charge and
negative charge. Protons have a positive charge, and electrons have a
negative charge. If the same amounts of negative and positive charge are
brought together, they neutralize each other and there is no net charge.
Positive and negative charges are present in neutral objects, but their num-
bers are equal. However, if there is a little bit more of one type of charge
than the other, then the object is said to be electrically charged.
Exercise 4.1
When do you
Unit of Charge
say that a body
The SI unit of electric charge is Coulomb (C). One coulomb (1 C) of charge
is charged posi-
is carried by 6.25 X 10¹⁸ electrons. An electron possesses a negative charge
tively?
of 1.6 X 10⁻¹⁹ C. In electrostatics, you often work with charge in micro
Coulombs = X 10⁻⁶ C) and nano coulombs (1nC = 1 X 10⁻⁹ C).
Key Concept
Conservation of Charge
It If an object
gains electrons,
During electrification, electric charges are neither created nor destroyed,
it becomes nega-
but are transferred from one material to another. This is called the law
tively charged; if
of conservation of charge. There are some practical examples of charge
it loses electrons,
transfer from one material to another. For example, have you ever seen
it becomes posi-
the old comb and hair trick where your hair rises and sticks to the comb?
tively charged.
This arises because of the simple conservation of charge, i.e., the transfer
of charge either from the comb to the hair or vice versa. Thus, the total
4.1 Charges in Nature
93
charge in an isolated system never changes. By isolated, you mean that no
particles are allowed to cross the boundary of the system.
Exercise 4.2
Quantization of charge
A conductor
The smallest charge that is possible to obtain is that of an electron or
possesses a pos-
itive charge of
proton. The magnitude of this charge is denoted by e. Charge is said to
3.2
X
10⁻¹⁹ C.
be quantized when it occurs as the integral multiples of e. This is true for
How many elec-
both negative and positive charges and is expressed as;
trons does it
have in excess
q = ne where n is positive or negative integer.
(4.1)
or deficit (use:
e = 1.60 X 10⁻¹⁹
Section summary
C)?
There are two types of electric charges: positive and negative.
Neutral objects have equal number of positive and negative
charges.
The total electric charge in an isolated system, that is, the
algebraic sum of the positive and negative charges present at
any time, does not change.
Electric charges are quantized, occurring only in discrete
amounts.
Review questions
1. What are the different types of charges that exist in nature?
2. When do you say that a body is negatively charged?
3. What does the law of conservation of charges say?
4. What does it mean by quantization of a charge?
5. Write the properties of electric charges.
94
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.2 Methods of Charging a Body
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
demonstrate different charging processes;
explain the results of different charging processes.
In the previous section, you discussed that charges are transferred from
one body to another by a process known as charging. Charging is the
process of electrifying bodies, by removing or adding charges.
Activity 4.1
The following are the different methods of charging a body:
In groups, try
i Charging by rubbing
to think of the
different ways of
ii Charging by conduction
charging a body?
iii Charging by induction
Charging by rubbing
Charging by rubbing occurs when two different neutral materials are
rubbed together and electric charges are transferred from one object to
(a)
the other. Some materials, such as silk are more likely to attract extra
electrons and become negatively charged, where as others, such as glass
and ebonite rod, are more likely to give electrons and become positively
(b)
charged. This is because some kinds of atoms are more strongly attracted
Figure 4.1 (a) The comb and
to electrons than others. For example, in Figure 4.1 (a), the hair and the
the hair are both neutral. (b) Af-
comb are both neutral. When they are rubbed together, the atoms in the
ter being rubbed together, the
comb gain electrons and the atoms in the hair lose electrons (Figure 4.1
comb is negatively charged and
the hair is positively charged.
(b)). Due to this, the comb attracts tiny pieces of paper.
4.2 Methods of Charging a Body
95
Activity 4.2
Exercise 4.3
Tear a piece of paper into several small pieces. Charge a plastic pen
Charge an object
and two other objects by rubbing them on your hair or on some
by friction and
fabric. Bring each charged object near the pieces of paper.
bring it near a
(a) Describe what you observe, listing the three materials you
stream of smoke
charged.
rising from a
(b) Why are the pieces of paper attracted to the charged object?
wooden splint.
(c) Why do some pieces of paper fall off your charged objects after a
What do you see?
short while?
Explain why it
(d) When using a conducting sphere with a large charge, the paper
happens.
"jumps" off instead of falling. Explain why this happens.
Key Concept
Charging by
Charging by Conduction
rubbing leaves the
two bodies with
Charging by conduction occurs when a charged object make contact with a
an opposite sign
neutral object. Figure 4.2 depicts the use of a positively charged aluminum
of charges.
plate being touched by a neutral metal sphere. A positively charged alu-
minum plate has an excess of protons. When looked at from an electron
perspective, a positively charged aluminum plate has a shortage of elec-
trons. So when the positively charged aluminum plate is touched to the
neutral metal sphere (Figure 4.2 (b)), countless electrons on the metal
sphere migrate towards the aluminum plate. There is a mass migration of
Key Concept
electrons until the positive charge on the aluminum plate-metal sphere
system becomes redistributed. Having lost electrons to the positively
Charging
charged aluminum plate, there is a shortage of electrons on the sphere
by conduction
leaves the charged
body and the
uncharged body
+
with the same
sign of charge but
a weaker strength
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
than the original
object.
Figure 4.2 Charging by conduction.
96
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
and an overall positive charge as shown in Figure 4.2 (c). The aluminum
plate is still charged positively; only it now has less excess positive charge
than it had before the charging process began. This process is called
charging by conduction, or "by contact" and the two rods end up with the
same sign on charge.
Charging by Induction
Charging by induction is a process where the charged object is held near to
an uncharged conductive material that is grounded on a neutrally charged
material. When a charge flows between two objects and the uncharged
conductive material develops a charge with the opposite polarity.
Ebonite rod
Metal
sphere
Grounding
+
wire
Insulated
stand
(a)
(b)
Connecting to
(c)
the ground
Figure 4.3 Charging by induction.
In Figure 4.3, a negatively charged ebonite rod is brought close to, but does
not touch a neutral metal sphere. In the sphere, the free electrons closest
to the rod move to the other side, as part (a) of the drawing indicates.
Key Concept
As a result, the part of the sphere closer to the rod becomes positively
Charging by in-
charged and the opposite part becomes negatively charged. If the rod were
duction leaves the
removed, the free electrons would return to their original places, and the
charged body and
charged regions would disappear. Under most conditions the earth is a
the uncharged
good electrical conductor. So when a metal wire is attached between the
body with the
sphere and the ground, as in Figure 4.3 (b), some of the free electrons leave
opposite sign of
the sphere and distribute themselves over the much larger earth. If the
charge.
grounding wire is then removed, followed by the ebonite rod, the sphere is
left with a positive net charge, as part (c) of the picture shows.
4.3 The electroscope
97
Section summary
Charging is the process of supplying the electric charge (elec-
trons) to an object or losing the electric charge (electrons)
from an object.
An uncharged object can be charged in different ways: charg-
ing by rubbing, conduction and induction.
Review questions
1. State the three methods of charging a body.
2. Describe how uncharged objects can be charged by contact
and rubbing.
4.3 The electroscope
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 4.4
describe the function of an electroscope;
What do you
think about the
use a simple electroscope to detect charges;
purpose of an
make a simple electroscope out of locally available materials.
electroscope?
The electroscope is a very sensitive instrument which can be used to de-
Key Concept
tect the type of electric charge, to identify whether an object is charged
For detecting
or not, to measure the quantity of charge and to know whether an object
the presence of
is conductor or insulator. It consists of a glass container with a metal rod
a charge on the
inside that has two thin pieces of gold foil attached. The other end of the
body, you use
metal rod has a metal plate attached to it outside the glass container. A
the collapsing
diagram of a gold leaf electroscope is shown in Figure 4.4.
or diverging of
the leaf of the
When a charged object, like the positively charged rod in Figure 4.4 is
electroscope.
brought close to (but not touching), the neutral metal plate of the elec-
98
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Metal pan
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Metal rod
Plastic or glass
Glass
+
+
Foil
+
+
Plastic or glass
Neutral electroscope
Electroscope
Electroscope
Approached with a
Approached with a
negative rod like
positive rod like
charge foils repel
charge foils repel
Figure 4.4 Charging an electroscope.
troscope, the negative charge in the gold foil, metal rod, and metal plate
would be attracted to the positively charged rod. The charge can move
freely from the foil up the metal rod and onto the metal plate because the
metal (gold is a metal too) is a conductor. There is now more negative
charge on the plate and more positive charge on the gold foil leaves. This
is called inducing a charge on the metal plate. It is important to remember
that the electroscope is still neutral; the charges have just been induced to
move to different parts of the instrument. The induced positive charge on
the gold leaves forces them apart since like charges repel. This is how you
can tell that the rod is charged.
When the rod is now moved away from the metal plate, the charge in the
electroscope spreads out evenly again, and the leaves will fall down again
because there is no longer an induced charge on them.
4.4 Electrical Discharge
99
Activity 4.3
Section summary
Based on what
An electroscope is a device that is used to detect the presence
you have learnt
of an electric charge on a body.
here, try to design
or construct a sim-
Review questions
ple electroscope
in groups using
1. What is the function of an electroscope?
easily available
2. How do you know that whether or not an electroscope is
materials.
charged?
Exercise 4.5
Can a charged
4.4 Electrical Discharge
object become
neutral again?
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
explain the nature of electric discharge;
describe how lightning happens;
Key Concept
list the importance of grounding.
it
Once an ob-
ject is charged,
So far, you have learnt about the techniques of charging a material. There is
the charges are
also a technique for removing the excess electric charges from the charged
trapped on it
objects. This process of removing electric charges from a charged body
until they are
is called discharging. A charged body can be made to lose its charges
given a path to
by touching it with a conductor. When a body is discharged, it becomes
escape. When
neutral.
electric charges
are transferred
Lightning
very quickly, the
process is called
Lightning is a very large electrical discharge caused by induction. In a
an electrical dis-
thunderstorm, a charged area, usually negative, builds up at the base of a
charge. Sparks
cloud (Figure 4.5 (a)). The negative charge at the base of the cloud creates
are an example
a temporary positively charged area on the ground through the induc-
of electrical dis-
tion process (Figure 4.5 (b)). When enough charge has built up, a path of
charge.
charged particles is formed (Figure 4.5 (c)). The cloud then discharges its
100
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
excess electrons along the temporary path to the ground, creating a huge
spark (Figure 4.5 (d)). This discharge also causes a rapid expansion of the
air around it, causing thunder.
Activity 4.4
Air is normally an insulator. If it were not, lightning would occur every
time that cloud formed. For lightning to happen, charges in the clouds
Lightning are a
must build up to the point where the air cannot keep them separated from
common expe-
the ground. Then, the air stops being an insulator and becomes a fair
rience during
rainy season. But,
conductor, resulting in a lightning strike.
how it is formed?
Discuss in groups.
One way to avoid the damage caused by electric discharges is to make
the excess charges flow harmlessly into the Earth's surface. The Earth is a
donator or receiver of charge and is so large that, overall it is not affected
by the electron transfer of huge lightning strikes. So, it can absorb an
Activity 4.5
enormous quantity of excess charge. As a result, the ground is always
considered neutral.
In your commu-
nity, what did
The process of providing a pathway to drain excess charge into the earth
people do when
they encountered
is called grounding. The pathway is usually a conductor such as a wire
a person struck by
or a pipe. You might have noticed lightning rods at the top of buildings
lightning? Have
and towers. A lightning conductor is often fitted to the top of a building
you observed
that they bury
some parts of the
person's (usually
below the neck) i
the ground?
electron
electron
Figure 4.5 Lightning is an atmospheric electrical discharge.
4.4 Electrical Discharge
101
to help discharge the clouds safely. These rods are made of metal and are
connected to metal cables that conduct electric charge into the ground if
the rod is struck by lightning. The idea is that it should get struck before
Exercise 4.6
the building and conduct the surge of charge harmlessly into the Earth's
Have you ever
surface.
heard of someone
being killed by
Most lightning deaths and injuries occur outdoors. If you are outside and
lightning?
can see lightning or hear thunder, take shelter indoors immediately. If you
cannot go indoors, you should take these precautions: avoid high places
and open fields; stay away from tall objects such as trees, flag poles, or light
towers; and avoid objects that conduct current such as bodies of water,
metal fences, picnic shelters, and metal bleachers.
It is very rare that people are struck by lightning, and certainly you will
Exercise 4.7
not be struck while you are inside a car or in an airplane. The metal shell
Would you please
around you would divert charges away.
add any other
mechanisms that
Section summary
you know to make
peoples safe from
Lightning is a gigantic (very large) discharge between clouds
lightning?
and the earth, or between the charges in the atmosphere and
the earth.
Review questions
1. Describe the terms "charging" and "discharging".
2. Explain what causes the lightning that is associated with a
thunderstorm.
3. What is grounding?
102
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Exercise 4.8
4.5 Coulomb's law of electrostatics
You might already
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
know that like
charges repel
state Coulomb's laws of electrostatics;
each other and
find the magnitude of electric force between two charges using
unlike charges
Coulomb's law.
attract each other.
But have you
The magnitude of the forces between charged spheres was first investi-
taken a minute
gated quantitatively in 1785 by Charles Coulomb (1736-1806), a French
to wonder how
scientist. He observed that the electrostatic force between the two charges
strong these
is proportional to the product of the charges and is inversely proportional
forces are?
to the square of their distance apart.
+F
Coulomb's law can be stated in mathematical terms as
-F
q₁
+
q₂
r
(a)
F α | q₁|q₂|,
F x 1/2
(4.2)
-F
+
q₁
q₂
+F
+
r
(b)
F x Fα 91/92
Figure 4.6 (a) Attractive and
where F is the magnitude of the electric force between the two charges q₁
(b) repulsive electrostatic force
and q2, and r is the distance between the two charges.
between two charges.
You can convert the above proportionality expression to an equation by
Key Concept
writing
It The electro-
static force ex-
F = k r²
(4.3)
erted by a point
where, k = 1 ≈ 9 10⁹ Nm² is the electrostatic constant;
charge on a test
= 8.85 X 10 Nm² is called permittivity of free space.
charge at a dis-
tance r depends
The SI unit of force is the Newton. The electrostatic force is directed along
on the charge of
the line joining the charges, and it is attractive if the charges have unlike
both charges, as
signs and repulsive if the charges have like signs. Figure 4.6 shows the
well as the dis-
attractive and repulsive electrostatic forces.
tance between the
two.
4.5 Coulomb's law of electrostatics
103
Example 4.1
Charges q₁ = 5.0µC and q₂ = - 12.0µC are separated by 30 cm on the x-axis.
What is the magnitude of the force exerted by the two charges?
Solution:
You are given q₁ = 5.0µC, q₂ = 12.0µC and r = 30 cm.
You want to find the magnitude of the force F.
Using Coulomb's law,
(0.3m)²
Since the two charges are of opposite sign, the force between the charges is
an attractive force.
Section summary
The force between two point charges is
directly proportional to the magnitude of each charge.
inversely proportional to square of the separation between
their centers.
directed along the line joining their centers.
Review questions
1. Two charges 1 C and - 4C exist in the air. What is the direction
of the force between them?
2. Two charges q₁ = 2 X 10⁻⁶ C and q₁ = -4 X 10⁻³ C are placed
30 cm apart. Determine the magnitude and direction of the
force that one charge exerts on the other.
104
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.6 The electric field
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
state the meaning of an electric field;
distinguish the elements that determine the strength of the electric
field at a given location;
Exercise 4.9
What do you think
show electric field lines diagrammatically;
is the definition
calculate the strength of an electric field.
for an electric
field?
An electric field is a region where an electric charge experiences a force,
just as a football field is an area where the game is played. Electric field
lines are an excellent way of visualizing electric fields. They were first
introduced by Michael Faraday.
The space around a charge or an arrangement of charges differ from space
in which no charges are present. You can test whether a space has an
electric field by bringing a small, point positive charge q₀ into the space. If
q₀ experiences an electric force, then there is an electric field. If no force
is experienced, then there is no electric field. For this reason, the small
charge is called a test charge: it tests for the existence of electric fields. It
has to be small so that its presence does not disturb the electric field it is
Key Concept
trying to detect. Figure 4.7 shows the electric field lines of a positively and
negatively charged body.
It A test charge is
a positive electric
charge whose
charge is so small
that it does not
significantly dis-
turb the charges
that create the
electric field.
Figure 4.7 Electric field lines from positive and negative charges.
4.6 The electric field
105
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8 Electric field lines between (a) similar charges (b) opposite charges.
Properties of electric field lines
The field lines never intersect or cross each other.
The field lines are perpendicular to the surface of the charge.
The magnitude of the charge and the number of field lines are pro-
portional to each other.
Field lines originate at a positive charge and terminate at a negative
charge.
The lines of force bend together when particles with unlike charges
attract each other. The lines bend apart when particles with like
Key Concept
charges repel each other. This is clearly indicated in Figure 4.8
The magnitude
of È is the force
per unit charge
Electric Field Strength
and its direction
is that of È (i.e.,
The strength of the electric field, E, at any point in space is equal to the
the direction of
force per unit charge exerted on a positive test charge. Mathematically,
the force which
acts on a positive
E=F E F / q F q or F = Eq
(4.4)
charge).
106
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Thus, È is a vector. If q is positive, the electric field È has the same direction
as the force acting on the charge. If q is negative, the direction of È is
opposite to that of the force F. On the other hand, the SI unit of electric
field is Newton per Coulomb (C).
Electric field strength due to a point charge
In order to measure the electric field in a given region, you introduce a test
charge and measure the force on it. However, you should realize that the
test charge q₀ exerts forces on the charge that produce the field, so it may
change the configuration of the charges.
+q
+q₀
Since the electric field is force per unit charge, you divide the force by the
F
+
+
charge q₀ to obtain the field due to q at the location of q₀. That is
r
Figure 4.9 Electric field at a
q₀ where F=k9oq
(4.5)
distance r from a charge.
The above equation gives the field arising due to the charge q at any
Exercise 4.10
location which is at a distance r from q. The direction of the field is taken
as the direction of the force that is exerted on the positive charge. Thus,
It
What is the
direction of the
the electric field extends radially from a positive charge and inwards from
electric field due
a negative point charge.
to a positive pont
charge?
Example 4.2
Calculate the strength and direction of the electric field E due to a point
charge of 2.0 nC at a distance of 5.0 mm from the charge.
Solution:
In this example q = 2.00 X 10⁻⁹ C and r = 5.00 X 10⁻³ m.
You want to find the magnitude and direction of the electric field.
You can find the electric field created by a point charge using the equation
E = k
4.7 Electric circuits
107
Substituting those values into the above equation gives
This electric field strength is the same at any point 5.00 mm away from the
charge q that creates the field. It is positive, meaning that it has a direction
pointing away from the charge q.
Section summary
A test charge is a positive electric charge whose charge is so
small that it does not significantly disturb the charges that
create the electric field.
Electric field lines are directed radially outward from a positive
charge and directed radially inward towards a negative charge.
Review questions
1. What is an electric field line?
2. What is the magnitude and direction of the force exerted on a
3.50µ C charge by a 250 N/C electric field that points due East?
3. Calculate the magnitude of the electric field 2.00 m from a
point charge of 5.00 mC.
4.7 Electric circuits
Activity 4.6
What do you think
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
are the differences
define what an electric circuit is;
between an open
and closed cir-
describe the components of a simple circuit;
cuits? Discuss in
sketch an electric circuit diagram.
groups.
108
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
When a wire connects the terminals of the battery to the light bulb, as
shown in Figure 4.10, charges built up on one terminal of the battery have
a path to follow to reach the opposite charges on the other terminal. The
charge that flows around a circuit is carried by electrons. The charges
moving through the wire cause the filament to heat up and then give off
light.
Together, the bulb, battery, switch, and wire form an electric circuit. Thus,
an electric circuit is a path through which charges can flow. A schematic
diagram for a circuit is sometimes called a circuit diagram.
Light bulb
Switch
wire
Any element or group of elements in a circuit that dissipates energy is
BATTERY
called a load. A simple circuit consists of a source of potential difference
and electrical energy, such as a battery, and a load like a bulb or group of
Figure 4.10 Simple electric
bulbs. Because the connecting wire and switch have negligible resistance,
circuit.
you will not consider these elements as part of the load.
For the simple circuit shown in Figure 4.11 (a), a closed path is formed by
wires connected to a light bulb and to a battery. As long as there is a closed
path for electrons to follow, electrons can flow in a circuit. They move away
from the negative battery terminal and toward the positive terminal. Thus,
electric charge flows in the circuit as long as none of the wires, including
(a)
(b)
the glowing filament wire in the light bulb, are disconnected or broken.
Figure 4.11 (a) Closed circuit
Such a circuit is called a closed circuit.
(b) open circuit.
If the circuit is broken anywhere (or the switch is turned off), the charge
Key Concept
stops flowing and the bulb does not glow. Thus, without a complete path,
A physical cir-
there is no charge flow and therefore no current. This situation is an open
cuit is the electric
circuit. If the switch in Figure 4.11 were open, as shown in Figure 4.11(b),
circuit you create
the circuit would be open, the current would be zero, and the bulb would
with real compo-
not light up.
nents. It consists
of a battery, wire,
Electric circuits are incorporated into our lives in many different ways.
switch, and load.
They are used in nearly every type of item that uses electricity, from a
4.7 Electric circuits
109
phone to a lamp.
Components of electrical circuits
As you studied earlier, some common elements (components) that can be
found in electrical circuits include light bulbs, batteries, connecting wires,
switches, resistors, voltmeters, and ammeters. You will learn more about
these items in later sections, but it is important to know what their symbols
are and how to represent them in circuit diagrams. Table 4.1 summarizes
the symbols of electrical components.
Exercise 4.11
Table 4.1 Names of electrical components and their circuit symbols
What would hap-
pen to the lamp if
Components
Symbol
Usage
the circuit is bro-
ken somewhere?
Bulb or lump
bulb glows when charge moves
through it
+
Battery
provides energy for charge to
move
Open
Switch
Closed
allows a circuit to be open or
closed
Resistor
resists the flow of charge
V
Voltmeter
measures potential difference
A
Ammeter
measures current in a circuit
connecting lead
connects circuit elements to-
gether
110
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Section summary
The simplest electric circuit contains a source of electrical
energy (such as a battery), an electric conductor (such as a
wire connected to the battery) and a load (like lamps). Charges
flow through a circuit.
A closed path, or closed circuit, is needed for making electric
charge to flow through the circuit.
Review questions
1. What does an electric circuit mean?
2. What is the name of the unbroken path that current follows?
3. What is the difference between an open electric circuit and a
closed electric circuit?
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
define current, voltage, and resistance;
state Ohm's Law;
calculate current, and solve problems involving Ohm's Law.
Exercise 4.12
Dear students, if the electric charge flows through a conductor (for exam-
How would you
ple, through a metallic wire), you say that there is an electric current in the
explain what an
conductor. In a torch, you know that the cells (or a battery, when placed in
electric current is?
proper order) provide flow of charges or an electric current that makes the
torch bulb to glow.
The flow of charge particles or the rate of flow of electric charge through
a point in a conducting medium is called electric current. The charge
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
111
particles can be negative or positive. Since electrons were not known at
the time when the phenomenon of electricity was first observed, electric
current was assumed to be the flow of positively charged particles. The
current produced due to the flow of positively charged particles is called
conventional current (or simply current) and it flows out from the positive
terminal of the battery into the negative terminal. This was the convention
chosen during the discovery of electricity. But this assumption was found
to be wrong once the electron was discovered. So, in practice, the electric
current is the flow of electrons (negatively charged particles). Electron cur-
rent is the flow of negatively charged particles from the negative terminal
of the battery to the positive terminal, as shown in Figure 4.12. However,
the direction of the current does not affect the properties of the circuit as
long as you keep it consistent. Therefore, the conventional current is taken
as the standard current direction.
If a net charge Q, flows across any cross-section of a conductor in time
Key Concept
t, then the current I, through the cross-section is
Electric cur-
I=AQ
rent is defined as
(4.6)
the rate at which
electric charges
The SI unit for electric current is the ampere (A), named after the French
flow.
scientist Andre-Marie Ampere (1775-1836). One ampere is constituted
by the flow of one coulomb of charge per second, that is, 1 A = 1 C/s. Small
quantities of current are expressed in milliampere (1mA = 10⁻³ A) or in
Conventional current
Switch
Light bulb
Electron current
wire
BATTERY
+
Figure 4.12 Conventional current and electron current.
112
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
microampere (1µA = 10⁻⁶ A). An instrument used to measure electric
current is called the ammeter.
Example 4.3
A current of 0.5 A is drawn by a filament of an electric bulb for 10 minutes.
Find the amount of electric charge that flows through the circuit.
Solution:
You are given I = 0.5 A, and t = 10 minutes = 600 s.
You want to find the net charge, Q.
From the equation for current, you have
QQ = I X = 0.5 A X 600 s = 300 C
Potential Difference
Exercise 4.13
Charges do not flow in a copper wire by themselves, just as water in a
What makes elec-
perfectly horizontal tube does not flow. If one end of the tube is connected
tric charges to
to a tank of water kept at a higher level, such that there is a pressure differ-
flow?
ence between the two ends of the tube, water flows out of the other end
of the tube. Thus, in a water circuit, a pump increases the gravitational
potential energy of the water by raising the water from a lower level to a
higher level.
For the flow of charges in a conducting metallic wire, the electrons move
only if there is a difference of electric pressure called the potential differ-
ence along the conductor. This difference of potential may be produced
by a battery, consisting of one or more electric cells. A battery supplies
energy to an electric circuit. When the positive and negative terminals of
a battery are connected in a circuit, the electric potential energy of the
electrons in the circuit is increased. As these electrons move toward the
positive battery terminal, this electric potential energy is transformed into
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
113
other forms of energy, just as gravitational potential energy is converted
into kinetic energy as water falls.
A battery supplies energy to an electric circuit by converting chemical
Key Concept
energy to electric potential energy. The chemical action within a cell gen-
The voltage or
erates the potential difference across the terminals of the cell, even when
potential differ-
no current is drawn from it. When the cell is connected to a conducting
ence in a circuit is
circuit element, the potential difference sets the charges in motion in the
a measure of the
conductor and produces an electric current. In order to maintain the cur-
electrical poten-
rent in a given electric circuit, the cell has to expend its chemical energy
tial energy of the
stored in it.
electrons in the
circuit. A battery
The electric potential difference (V) between two points in an electric
supplies energy
circuit carrying some current is defined as the work done to move a unit
to an electric cir-
charge from one point to the other.
cuit by increasing
the electric po-
V= Work Charge done (Q) (W) W Q
tential energy of
electrons in the
circuit.
The SI unit of electric potential difference is the volt (V), named after
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827), an Italian physicist. One volt (1 V) is the
potential difference between two points in a current-carrying conductor
when 1 Joule (1 J) of work is done to move a charge of 1 coulomb (1 C) from
one point to the other. Therefore, 1 V = 1 On the other hand, potential
difference is measured by means of an instrument called the voltmeter.
You might have seen birds sitting and even running along electric line
Exercise 4.14
wires high in the air. There are times when these wires can be filled with
How can birds
dozens of birds. Since birds are not good conductors, that is one reason
sit on those wires
they don't get shocked when they sit on electrical wires. The energy by-
in Figure 4.13 and
passes the birds and keeps flowing along the wire instead.
not get an electric
shock?
There is another reason why birds can sit on a wire without getting shocked.
There is no voltage difference on a single wire. There must be a difference
114
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Figure 4.13 Birds on an electric cable.
in electrical potential for electrons to move. For example, energy flows
from areas of high voltage to areas of low voltage. If it flows through a
Activity 4.7
single power line at 35,000 volts, it will continue along the path of least
resistance. That means it will bypass birds because there is no difference
Would you be
in electrical potential.
harmed if you
touch one of the
wires of a high-
It would be a different story if a bird is connected to the ground through
voltage transmis-
some means (like a tree) while sitting on the wire. That would cause it to
sion line just like
get shocked. This would also happen if a bird touched another wire with a
birds without
different voltage. In these cases, the bird's body would become a path for
having contact
electricity. It would move through the bird to reach either the ground or
with the ground?
another place with a different voltage. This is why power lines tend to be
If yes, then how
high in the air with plenty of space between the wires.
can birds not die
when they sit on
Example 4.4
such lines?
How much work is done in moving a charge of 2 C across two points having
a potential difference 12 V?
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
115
Solution:
In this example, you are given with V = 12 V and q = 2C.
What you want to find is the work done.
The amount of work W, done in moving the charge is
W=VQ=12 V x2 C =24J
Ohm's Law
In an electric circuit, charges do not flow freely. So the electrical current in
Exercise 4.15
a wire can be reduced by many factors including impurities in the metal of
Is there a rela-
the wire that increases the resistance of the wire or collisions between the
tionship between
electrons and nuclei in the material. These factors create a resistance to
the potential dif-
the electrical current. Resistance is a description of how much a wire or
ference across
other electrical component opposes the flow of charge through it.
a conductor
and the current
In the 19th century, the German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787-1854)
through it?
found experimentally that current through a conductor is proportional to
the voltage drop across a current-carrying conductor.
In other words,
V α I
In an equation form,
Exercise 4.16
V I = R or V = IR
(4.7)
Describe how
the current in a
This relationship is called Ohm's law. It can be viewed as a cause-and-
circuit changes
effect relationship, with voltage being the cause and the current being the
if the resistance
effect. Ohm's law is an empirical law like that for friction, which means
increases and the
that it is an experimentally observed phenomenon.
voltage remains
constant.
In the above expression, R is a constant for the given metallic wire at a
116
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
given temperature and is called its resistance. It is the property of a conduc-
tor to resist the flow of charges through it. Thus, the motion of electrons
through a conductor is retarded by its resistance. The units of resistance
are volts per ampere, or V/A. You call a V/A an "ohm", which is represented by
the uppercase Greek letter omega (Ω). Thus, 1 Ω = 1 V/A.
In many practical cases, it is necessary to increase or decrease the current
in an electric circuit. In an electric circuit, a device called a rheostat is
Key Concept
often used to change the resistance in the circuit.
It Resistance
Ohm's law is an empirical relationship valid only for certain materials.
is a measure of
how difficult it is
Materials that obey Ohm's law and hence have a constant resistance over
for electrons to
a wide range of voltage, are said to be ohmic materials. Ohmic materi-
flow through a
als include good conductors like copper, aluminum, and silver. Ohmic
material.
materials have a linear current-voltage relationship over a large range of
applied voltages (Figure 4.14 (a)). Non-ohmic materials have a nonlinear
current-voltage relationship (Figure 4.14 (b)).
I
I
V
Exercise 4.17
V
(a)
(b)
Would you please
Figure 4.14 The current-voltage characteristics of (a) ohmic materi-
think of an anal-
als and (b) non-ohmic materials.
ogy for current,
The magnitude of the electric current depends on the material of the
voltage and resis-
wire, length of the wire, area of cross section, and etc. The resistance of
tance?
an ohmic conductor increases with length, which makes sense because
the electrons going through it must undergo more collisions in a longer
conductor. A smaller cross-sectional area also increases the resistance of a
conductor, just as a smaller pipe slows the fluid moving through it. The
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
117
resistance, then, is proportional to the conductor's length, and is inversely
proportional to its cross sectional area A. Thus,
R α L/A
R=p- =
(4.8)
A = area
L = length
P = resistivity
Figure 4.15 A uniform conductor of length L, and cross-sectional
area A.
Exercise 4.18
where the constant of proportionality, p, is called the resistivity of the ma-
For the same
terial. Resistivity is the electrical resistance of a conducting material per
crossection of
unit length. In other words, it is the degree to which a conductor opposes
a wire, describe
the flow of electricity through itself, instead allowing the energy to flow
how the electric
out of the electrical circuit, most often as heat. The SI unit of resistivity is
resistance of a
Ωm. It is a characteristic property of the material.
wire changes as
the wire becomes
On the other hand, conductivity is resistivity's reciprocal. So a high resis-
longer. How does
tivity means a low conductivity, and a low resistivity means a high conduc-
the resistance
tivity.
change as the
wire becomes
thicker for the
Example 4.5
same length of a
How much current will an electric bulb draw from a 220 V source, if the
wire?
resistance of the bulb filament is 1200 Ω?
Solution:
You are given V = 220 V and R = 1200 Ω.
You want to find the value for the current, I.
118
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
From Ohm's law, current can be calculated by:
I 1200 0.18 A
Example 4.6
The potential difference between the terminals of an electric heater is 60 V
when it draws a current of 4A from the source. What current will the heater
draw if the potential difference is increased to 120 V?
Solution:
You are given V = 60 V and I = 4 A.
What you want to find is the resistance, R.
According to Ohm's law,
R=V=60V=15Ω Ω
When the potential difference is increased to 120 V, the current is given by
15 Ω 8A
The current through the heater becomes 8 A.
Example 4.7
The resistance of a metal wire of length 1 m is 26 Ω at 20 °C. If the diam-
eter of the wire is 0.3 mm, what will be the resistivity of the metal at that
temperature?
Solution:
You are given the resistance R of the wire = 26 Ω, Ω, the diameter d = 0.3 mm =
3 X 10⁻⁴ m, and the length L of the wire = 1 m. You want to find the resistivity.
4.8 Current, Voltage, and Ohm's Law
119
From the expression of the resistance, the resistivity of the given metallic
wire is
THE
Substitution of values in the above expression gives
The resistivity of the metal at 20 °C is 1.84 X 10⁻⁶ Ωm. This is the resistivity
of manganese.
Section summary
Resistance is a property that resists the flow of electrons in a
conductor. It controls the magnitude of the current. The SI
unit of resistance is ohm (Ω).
The potential difference, also referred to as voltage difference
between two given points is the work in joules required to
move one coulomb of charge from one point to the other.
According to Ohm's law, the potential difference across the
ends of a resistor is directly proportional to the current
through it, provided its temperature remains the same.
The resistance of a conductor depends directly on its length,
inversely to its cross-sectional area, and also on the material
of the conductor.
Review questions
1. What is the term used to state the flow of an electric charge
per unit time?
2. What is the relationship among voltage, current, and resis-
tance in a circuit?
120
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
3. What is meant by the potential difference between two points
is 1 V?
4. What are the factors that determine the resistance of a con-
ductor?
5. Will current flow more easily through a thick wire or a thin wire
of the same material, when connected to the same source?
Why ?
6. Let the resistance of an electrical component remains con-
stant while the potential difference across the two ends of the
component decreases to half of its former value. What change
will occur in the current through it?
Exercise 4.19
4.9
Combination of resistors in a circuit
How many dif-
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
ferent paths can
electric current
draw a diagram that shows series and parallel connections of resis-
follow in a series
tors;
circuit?
describe what happens to the current and potential difference when
the resistors are connected in series and in parallel;
Exercise 4.20
If a series cir-
calculate the equivalent resistance for a circuit of resistors in series
cuit containing
or in parallel;
mini-light bulbs is
opened and some
calculate the current and potential difference across resistors con-
of the light bulbs
nected in series and parallel.
are removed,
what happens
In this section, you consider simple circuits containing only resistors and
when the circuit is
batteries. Such circuits often contain a number of resistors connected in
closed?
series or in parallel.
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
121
Resistors in Series
Key Concept
Students, what if you wanted to watch TV and had to turn on all the lights,
$ A series dcir-
a refrigerator, and every other electrical appliance in the house to do so?
cuit describes two
That is what it would be like if all the electrical appliances in your house
or more compo-
were connected in a series circuit.
nents of a circuit
that provide a
A series circuit is a circuit that has only one path for the electric current to
single path for
follow, as shown in Figure 4.16. If this path is broken, then the current will
current.
no longer flow and all the devices in the circuit will stop working. As an
example, if the entire string of lights went out when only one bulb burned
out, then the lights in the string were wired as a series circuit.
Exercise 4.21
R₁
I₁
What happens
A
A
to the value
V₁
+
of the current
AV
V2
R₂
+
V
Req
V3
when a number
B
I₂
of resistors are
I₃
B
R₃
(a) Three resistors in a serious
(b) Equivalent resistance has same current
connected in
series circuit?
Figure 4.16 Series connection of three resistors.
What would be
Since charge is conserved, charges cannot build up or disappear at one
their equivalent
point. As there is only one path for a charge to flow, the amount of charge
resistance?
entering and exiting the first resistor must equal the amount of charge that
enters and exits the second resistor in the same time interval. Because the
Key Concept
current is the amount of charge moving past a point per unit of time, the
In a series
current in the first resistor must equal the current in the second resistor.
combination of
This is true for any number of resistors arranged in series. When many
resistors, the cur-
resistors are connected in series, the current in each resistor is the same.
rent is the same
in every part of
The potential difference across the battery, V, must equal the sum of the
the circuit or the
potential differences across the load, V₁ + V₂ + V₃, where V₁, V₂, and V₃
same current
are the potential differences across R₁, R₂, and R₃ respectively. That is,
through each
resistor.
V = V₁ + V₂ + V₃
(4.9)
122
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Let I be the current through the circuit. The current through each resistor
is also I. It is possible to replace the three resistors joined in series by an
equivalent single resistor of resistance Rₑ₉ such that the potential differ-
ence V across it, and the current I through the circuit remain the same.
Applying Ohm's law to the entire circuit, you have
V = IRₑq
By making use of equation 4.9,
Since V₁ = IR₁,V₂ = IR₂, V₃ = IR₃,
Key Concept
IRₑq= IR₁ + IR₂+ IR₃
JET The equivalent
resistance in a
series circuit is
(4.10)
the sum of the cir-
cuit's resistances.
Thus, when several resistors are joined in series, the resistance of the
combination Rₑ₉ equals the sum of their individual resistances, R₁, R₂, R₃,
and is thus greater than any individual resistance.
Resistors in Parallel
Exercise 4.22
As discussed above, when a single bulb in a series light set burns out, the
Explain why build-
entire string of lights goes dark because the circuit is no longer closed. A
ings are wired
wiring arrangement that provides alternative pathways for the movement
using parallel cir-
of a charge is a parallel circuit. A parallel circuit is a circuit that has more
cuits rather than
than one path for the electric current to follow, as shown in Figure 4.17.
series circuits.
The figure shows the arrangement of three resistors joined in parallel with
a combination of cells (or a battery). The current branches so that elec-
trons flow through each of the paths.
The bulbs of the decorative light set that you use in your home are arranged
in parallel with each other. Thus, if one path is broken, electrons continue
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
123
to flow through the other paths. Adding or removing additional devices in
one branch does not break the current path in the other branches, so the
devices on those branches continue to work normally. Houses, schools,
and other buildings are wired using parallel circuits.
I
A
A
I
Exercise 4.23
AV
R₁
R₂
R3
V
Req
How does con-
I₁
I2
II₃
B
B
necting devices in
(a) Three resistors in a parallel
(b) Equivalent resistance has same current
parallel affect the
electric current in
Figure 4.17 Parallel connections of three resistors.
a circuit?
Because charge is conserved, the sum of the currents in each bulb equals
the current I delivered by the battery. This is true for all resistors in parallel.
I = I₁ + I₂ +
(4.11)
Key Concept
JF
Parallel de-
Therefore, the total current I is equal to the sum of the separate currents
scribes two or
through each branch of the combination.
more components
of a circuit that
Let Rₑ₉ be the equivalent resistance of the parallel combination of resistors.
provide sepa-
By applying Ohm's law to the parallel combination of resistors, you have
rate conducting
paths for cur-
I V V
rent because the
components are
Since I = I₁ + I₂ + I₃, applying Ohm's law to each resistor gives you
connected across
common points
Rₑ₉ V = R₁ V₁ + R₂ V₂ + R₃ V₃
or junctions. A
parallel circuit
has more than
Because the potential difference across each bulb in a parallel arrangement
one path for the
equals the terminal voltage V = V₁ = V₂ = V₃, you can divide each side of
current to follow.
the equation by V to get the following equation.
11
124
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Thus, the reciprocal of the equivalent resistance of a group of resistances
joined in parallel is equal to the sum of the reciprocals of the individual
resistances. An extension of this analysis shows that the equivalent re-
sistance of two or more resistors connected in parallel can be calculated
using the following equation.
(4.12)
Example 4.8
In the circuit shown in Figure 4.18, find:
a) the equivalent resistance,
b) the current through each resistor.
Solution:
You are given R₁ = 12 Ω, Ω, R₂ = 3.0 Ω, R₃ = 4.0 Ω, Ω, R₄ = 5.0 Ω and V = 12 V.
The required quantities are Rₑ₉ and I.
5Ω
12Ω
3Ω
4Ω
a) Since all the four resistors are in series combination,
I]
I
Rₑ₉ = R₁ + R₂ + R₃ + R₄ = 12 Ω + 3.0 Ω + 4.0 Ω + 4.0 Ω = 24 Ω.
12v
b) The current through all resistors in a series circuit is the same. Thus,
Figure 4.18 Circuit diagram
using Ohm's law,
for four resistors connected in
series.
Example 4.9
12v
6Ω
12Ω
120
In the circuit shown in Figure 4.19, find:
a) the equivalent resistance,
Figure 4.19 Circuit diagram for
b) the current through the battery and each resistor.
three resistors connected in
parallel.
Solution:
The given quantities are R₁ = 12 Ω, R₂ = 12 Ω, R₃ = 6.0 Ω and V = 12 V.
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
125
The required quantities are Rₑ₉ and I.
a) The three resistors are in a parallel combination. So
Rₑ₉ 1 = R₁ 1 + R₂ 1 + R₃ 1 = 12 Ω 1 + 12 Ω 1 + 6.0 Ω 1 = 3.0 Ω 1
Rₑ₉ = 3.0Ω
Therefore, the equivalent resistance should be less than the smallest resis-
tance as expected.
b) From Ohm's law,
3.0 Ω
Since the voltage is constant in a parallel connection,
12 Ω
6.0 Ω A
On the other hand, resistors in a circuit may be connected in a variety of
series-parallel combinations. The general procedure for analyzing circuits
with different series-parallel combinations of resistors is to find the voltage
across and the current through the various resistors as follows:
Start from the resistor combination farthest from the voltage source,
find the equivalent series and parallel resistances.
Reduce the current until there is a single loop with one total equiva-
lent resistance.
Find the total current delivered to the reduced circuit using Ohm's
law.
126
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Expand the reduced circuit in the reverse order of the above steps to
find the currents and voltages for the resistors in each step.
Example 4.10
Find the equivalent resistance and the current across the 4.0 Ω resistor
shown in Figure 4.20.
Solution:
You are given R₁ = 4.0 Ω, Ω, R₂ = 5.0 Ω, R₃ = 9.0 Ω, and V = 6 V.
You want to find the value for Rₑ₉ and I.
5.0 Ω
Since the 5.0 Ω and 9.0 Ω resistors are connected in parallel,
4.0 Ω
1 = 1 + 1 = 1 + 1 = 14
Rparallel R₂ R₃ 5Ω 9Ω 45 Ω Ω
9.0 Ω
Rparallel = 3.21 Ω
6.0 V
Now the 4.0 Ω and Rparallel resistors are connected in parallel. Therefore,
Figure 4.20 Circuit diagram for
Rₑ₉ = 4.0 Ω + Rparallel = 4.0 Ω + 3.21 Ω = 7.21 Ω.
series-parallel combination of
resistors.
The current through the circuit can be calculated by
I = V R = Rₑ₉ V = 7.21 Ω 6V = 0.830 A.
This is equivalent to the value of the current across the 4.0 Ω resistor as
the 4.0 Ω resistor is connected in parallel with Rparallel.
Section summary
The formulae made about both series and parallel circuits are
summarized in Table 4.2.
4.9 Combination of resistors in a circuit
127
Table 4.2 Summary for a series and parallel circuits
Resistors in
Series
Parallel
Current
I = I₁ = I₂ = I₃ = = same I = I₁ + I₂ + I₃ + sum of
for each resistor
currents.
Potential
V = V₁ + V₂ + V₃ + = sum
=
difference
of potential differences
same for each resistor.
Equivalent
Rₑ₉ = R₂ + R₃ = sum
resistance
of individual resistances
reciprocal sum of resis-
tances.
Review questions
1. Which type of circuit has more than one path for electrons to
follow?
2. A 4.0 Ω resistor, an 8.0 Ω resistor, and a 12.0 Ω resistor are
connected in series with a 24.0 V battery.
a. Calculate the equivalent resistance.
b. Calculate the current in the circuit.
c. What is the current in each resistors?
3. A length of wire is cut into five equal pieces. The five pieces
are then connected in parallel, with the resulting resistance
being 2.00 Ω. What was the resistance of the original length of
wire before it was cut up?
4. How can you tell that the headlights of the car are wired in
parallel rather than in series? How would the brightness of the
bulbs differ if they were wired in series across the same 12 V
battery instead of in parallel?
128
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
4.10 Voltmeter and ammeter connection in a cir-
cuit
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
list the devices used for measuring current and voltage;
use voltmeter and ammeter to measure the voltage and current in
an electric circuit, respectively;
explain why an ammeter is connected in series and voltmeter is
connected in parallel.
As you have seen in previous sections, an electric circuit is made up of
a number of different components such as batteries, resistors and light
bulbs. There are devices that are used to measure the properties of these
components. These devices are called meters. Meters are of two types:
analog and digital. Analog meters have a needle that swivels to point at
numbers on a scale as opposed to digital meters, which have numerical
readouts similar to a hand-held calculator.
Battery
Voltmeter
Ammeter
<
Switch
A
R
Voltmeter
Ammeter
Light bulb
@@@@@@@@@@
Resistor
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.21 (a) Ammeter and voltmeter connection in a circuit. (b) Circuit
diagram with ammeter and voltmeter.
4.10 Voltmeter and ammeter connection in a circuit
129
Voltmeter
A voltmeter is a device that is used to measure potential differences across
a resistor or any other component of a circuit that has a voltage drop. In
Key Concept
analogy with a water circuit, a voltmeter is like a meter designed to mea-
Voltmeters
sure pressure differences.
are connected
in parallel with
To measure the potential difference between two points in a circuit, a
whatever device's
voltmeter must be connected in parallel with the portion of the circuit on
voltage is to be
which the measurement is made. A parallel connection is used because
measured.
objects in parallel experience the same potential difference. Since the
resistance of a voltmeter is high, it draws minimum current from the main
circuit and, thus, the potential difference of the component that is going
to be measured is not affected. If a voltmeter is connected in series, it
would increase the equivalence resistance of the circuit and no current
Exercise 4.24
would flow through it. Hence, it should be connected in parallel. Figure
4.21 shows a voltmeter is connected in parallel with a resistor. One lead of
How do we con-
the voltmeter is connected to one end of the battery and the other lead is
nect the ammeter
and voltmeter
connected to the opposite end.
in an electrical
circuit? Draw a
VOLTS
8
12.00
VOLTMETER
circuit diagram
-5472-
in order to jus-
V
tify your answer.
What will be
happening if the
(a)
(b)
(c)
positions of these
instruments are
Figure 4.22 (a) Analog voltmeter (b) Digital voltmeter (c) Voltmeter
symbol.
interchanged?
Specify the rea-
Ammeter
sons.
An ammeter is a device that is used to measure the the flow of electric
current in amperes. To measure the current of a circuit, the ammeter
shown in Figure 4.23 is connected in series in the circuit so that the same
current that is in the circuit flows through it and gets measured. Ammeter
130
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
has low (nearly zero) resistance because you do not want to change the
current that is flowing through the circuit. So its inclusion in series in the
circuit does not change the resistance and hence the main current in the
circuit. A series connection is used because objects in a series have the
same current passing through them. All of the current in this circuit flows
through the meter.
DIGITAL AMMETER
A
(b)
(c)
(a)
Figure 4.23 (a) Analog ammeter (b) A digital ammeter (c) Ammeter
symbol.
If an ammeter is connected in parallel, it would draw most of the current
and get damaged. Hence, it must be connected in series.
Key Concept
Table 4.3 summarizes the use of each measuring instrument that you
discussed and the way it should be connected to a circuit component.
It
Ammeters are
connected in se-
Table 4.3 Summary of the use and connection of an ammeter and a voltmeter
ries with whatever
device's current is
Instrument
Measured Quantity
Proper Connection
to be measured.
Voltmeter
Voltage
In Parallel
Ammeter
Current
In Series
On the other hand, multimeter is a measuring instrument that can mea-
sure multiple electrical properties. Figure 4.24 shows a digital multimeter,
a convenient device with a digital readout that can be used to measure
voltage, current, or resistance.
4.10 Voltmeter and ammeter connection in a circuit
131
09.38
Figure 4.24 Multimeter used for measuring electrical properties.
Section summary
Voltmeters measure voltage and ammeters measures current.
Voltmeter is connected in parallel with the voltage source to
receive full voltage and must have a large resistance to limit
its effect on the circuit.
An ammeter is connected in series to get the full current flow-
ing through a branch and must have a small resistance to limit
its effect on the circuit.
Review questions
1. Explain why a voltmeter is connected in parallel with a resis-
tor.
2. Explain why an ammeter is connected in series with a resistor.
3. What will happen when you connect an ammeter in parallel
and a voltmeter in a series circuit?
3
4
+
4. In Figure 4.25, there are four positions available for the place-
1
2
ment of meters.
Figure 4.25 Ammeter and volt-
a) Which position(s) would be appropriate for placement of
meter connection in a circuit.
an ammeter?
b) Which position(s) would be appropriate for placement of a
voltmeter?
132
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
c) Which position could hold an ammeter that would read the
total current through the circuit?
d) Which position could hold a voltmeter that would read the
total voltage drop through the circuit?
5. Suppose you are using a multimeter to measure current in a
circuit and you inadvertently leave it in voltmeter mode. What
effect will the meter have on the circuit? What would happen
if you were measuring voltage but accidentally put the meter
in ammeter mode?
Exercise 4.25
4.11 Electrical safety in general and local context
Have you ever had
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
a mild electric
shock?
state the safety measures to be taken to protect us from electrical
accidents or shocks.
Key Concept
You probably felt only a mild tingling sensation from the electric shock,
JE The first pre-
but electricity can have much more dangerous effects. In some ways your
caution to take for
body is like a piece of insulated wire. The fluids inside your body are good
personal safety
conductors of current. The electrical resistance of dry skin is much higher.
is to avoid com-
Skin insulates the body like the plastic insulation around a copper wire.
ing into contact
with an electrical
conductor that
Your skin helps keep electric current from entering your body. A current
might cause a
can enter your body when you accidentally become part of an electric
voltage across a
circuit. If direct body contact is made with an electrically energized part
human body or
while a similar contact is made simultaneously with another conductive
part of it, thus
surface that is maintained at a different electrical potential, a current will
causing a current
flow, entering the body at one contact point, traversing the body, and then
through the body
exiting at the other contact point, usually the ground.
that could be
dangerous.
A person can be electrocuted by touching a live wire while in contact with
4.11 Electrical safety in general and local context
133
the ground. Such a hazard is often due to frayed insulation that exposes
the conducting wire. The ground contact might be made by touching a
water pipe (which is normally at ground potential) or by standing on the
Exercise 4.26
ground with wet feet because impure water is a good conductor. Obviously,
Try to identify
such situations should be avoided at all costs.
what determines
the damage
Electric shock can result in fatal burns or cause the muscles of vital organs,
caused to the
such as the heart, to malfunction. The degree of damage to the body
human body by
depends on the magnitude of the current, the length of time it acts, and
an electric shock.
the part of the body through which it passes. Currents of 5 mA or less can
cause a sensation of shock, but ordinarily do little or no damage. If the
current is larger than about 10 mA, the hand muscles contract, and the
person may be unable to let go of the live wire. If a current of about 100 mA
passes through the body for just a few seconds, it can be fatal. Such large
currents paralyze the respiratory muscles. The current that flows through
the wires connected to a 60 W light bulb is about 0.5 A. This amount of
current entering your body could be deadly. In some cases, currents of
about 1 A through the body produce serious (and sometimes fatal) burns.
A fuse is the cheapest protection device in an electrical circuit against short
circuits and overloading of circuits. A fuse is a metal wire or thin metal
strip that has the property of having low melting point which is inserted
Figure 4.26 A Fuse.
into the electrical circuit as protective device. A fuse provides protection
against excessive currents which can flow in circuit during short circuits.
Under normal working conditions, the current flowing through the circuit
is within safe limits, but when fault occurs, such as a short circuit occurs,
or when load greater than the circuit capacity is connected to it, the cur-
rent exceeds the limiting value, resulting in a fuse wire that gets heated up,
AVR-1000VA
melts, and breaks the current. Thus, fuse protects the machine or electrical
FULL
AUTOMATIC
equipment against excessive currents. An automatic voltage regulator or
stabilizer device that you use in your home uses a fuse to operate.
As an additional safety feature for consumers, electrical equipment man-
Figure 4.27 Voltage stabilizer.
ufacturers now use electrical cords that have a third wire, called a case
134
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
ground. To understand how this works, consider the drill being used in
Figure 4.28. A two-wire device that has one wire, called the "phase" (or
"hot" or "live") wire is connected to the high-potential (220 V) side of the
input power line, and the second wire is connected to ground (0 V). If the
high-voltage wire comes in contact with the case of the drill (Figure 4.28
(a)), a short circuit occurs. In this undesirable circumstance, the pathway
for the current is from the high-voltage wire through the person holding
the drill and to Earth, a pathway that can be fatal. Protection is provided by
a third wire, connected to the case of the drill (Figure 4.28 (b)). In this case,
if a short occurs, the path of least resistance for the current is from the
"Ouch!"
Motor
"Neutral"
120 V
I
Wall
Circuit
outlet
breaker
"Live"
I
Ground
(a)
"Neutral"
Motor
"Ground"
I
I
120 V
3-wire
Circuit
outlet
breaker
"Live"
I
Ground
(b)
Figure 4.28 The "phase" wire, at 220 V, always includes a circuit breaker for
safety. (a) When the drill is operated with two wires, the normal current path
is from the "phase" wire, through the motor connections, and back to ground
through the "neutral" wire. (b) Shock can be prevented by a third wire running
from the drill case to the ground.
4.11 Electrical safety in general and local context
135
high-voltage wire through the case and back to ground through the third
wire. The resulting high current will blow a fuse or trip a circuit breaker
before the consumer is injured.
Note: The color of wires represents electrical standards. In Ethiopia,
the "phase" wire is red, yellow, or blue, and the ground wire is greenish-
yellowish, and the neutral wire is black.
Key Concept
A grounding
Special power outlets called ground-fault interrupters (GFIs) or residual
plug (a three-
current devices (RCDs) are now being used in kitchens, bathrooms, base-
prong plug) uses a
ments, and other hazardous areas of new homes. They are designed to
dedicated ground-
protect people from electrical shock by sensing small currents (approx-
ing wire to ground
imately 5 mA and greater) leaking to ground. When current above this
objects that may
level is detected, the device shuts off (interrupts) the current in less than a
become conduc-
millisecond.
tors and thus
dangerous. A
In addition to these, the following are important safety tips to prevent
polarized plug
electrical accidents or shocks.
identifies the
ground side of the
Never use appliances with frayed or damaged electric cords.
line for use as a
grounding safety
Unplug appliances before working on them, such as when prying
feature.
toast out of a jammed toaster.
Avoid all water when using plugged-in appliances.
Never touch power lines with anything, including kite string and
ladders.
Always respect warning signs and labels.
136
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Section summary
Safety of an electrical installation could be ensured by proper
insulation, good earthling system and adopting adequate pro-
tection and control systems.
Electrical hazards can cause burns, shocks and electrocution
(death). You should follow proper rules and regulations to
avoid accident.
Qualified electricians are recommended to inspect electrical
equipments. In damp locations, inspect electric cords and
equipment in order to ensure they are in good condition; use
a ground-fault circuit interrupter (GFCI).
Review questions
1. Identify the factors that determine the damage caused to the
human body by an electric shock.
2. You are often advised not to flick electric switches with wet
hands; you have to dry your hands first. You are also advised
to never throw water on an electric fire. Why is this so?
4.12 Electric projects
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
draw an electric circuit diagram consisting of a battery, connecting
wires, resistors, a switch, and a bulb using their symbols;
construct an electric circuit using wires, resistors, switch and bulb.
You use electricity every day, but the electronic devices around you (like
electric motors that move things including lifts and escalators, washing
machines, food mixers and other home appliances) largely operate with-
4.12 Electric projects
137
out your being aware of how they do so. The "how" of these electronic
devices working is answered by electrical circuits.
As you already discussed in the previous sections, electrical circuits allow
Exercise 4.27
current to flow through our electronic devices to produce light, sound,
Did you remem-
and a variety of other effects. Of course, that is an easy statement to make
ber any electrical
but one that is much harder to explain or demonstrate. That is where
projects that you
classroom projects and lessons come in.
have undertaken?
Is there any tips
Thus, the best way to learn about circuits is through hands-on projects in
that you can share
which circuits are built and used. In this section, you will try to perform
us from your
some simple electrical projects using the concepts that you have learnt
experience?
earlier.
Project 4.1: A series lamp circuit
As you discussed earlier, in a series connection, components are connected
end to end, so that current flows first through one lamp and then through
the other. The lamps are strung together, end to end.
One drawback of series connections is that if one component fails in a
way that results in an open circuit, the entire circuit is broken and none
of the components will work. So, if either one of the lamps in the series
circuit burns out, neither lamp will work. That is because current must
flow through both lamps for the circuit to be complete.
In this project, you will build a simple circuit that connects two lamps
in series, like the one shown in Figure 4.29. The lamps are powered by a
pair of AA batteries. Then, you will use your multimeter to measure the
voltages at various points in the circuit.
Equipment and materials:
A small head screw driver
138
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
ON
Switch
Battery
OFF
Battery
+
H
+
Figure 4.29 (a) Series circuit (b) Series circuit diagram.
Wire cutters
Wire strippers
A multimeter
Two AA batteries
One battery holder
Two lamp holders
Two 3 V flashlight lamps
One 6-inch length of 22-gauge stranded wires.
Steps
1. Cut a 6 inch length of wire and strip 0.5 inch of insulation from each
end.
2. Attach the red lead from the battery holder to one end of the termi-
nals on one of the lamp holders.
4.12 Electric projects
139
3. Attach the black lead to one of the terminals on the other lamp
holder.
4. Use the 6 inch wire to connect the unused terminal of the first lamp
holder to the unused terminal of the second lamp holder.
5. Insert the batteries. This makes both lamps to lit. Notice that the
lamps are dim. This is because in a series circuit made with two
identical lamps, each of the two lamps sees only half the total voltage.
6. Remove one of the lamps from its holder. This makes the other lamp
goes out. This is because in a series circuit, a failure in any one
component breaks the circuit so that none of the other components
will work.
7. Replace the lamp you removed in step 6.
8. Set your multimeter to a DC voltage range that can read at least 3 V.
Note that you can measure the voltage seen by any component in a
circuit by setting your multimeter to an appropriate voltage range
and then touching the leads to both sides of the component.
9. Touch the leads to the two terminals on the first lamp holder. The
mutlimeter should read approximately 1.5 V (If you are using an
analog meter and the needle moves backwards, just reverse the
leads).
10. Touch the leads to the terminals on the other lamp holder. Again the
multimeter should read approximately 1.5 V.
11. Touch the red lead of the meter to the terminal that the red lead from
the battery is connected to and touch the black meter lead to the
terminal that the black battery lead is connected to. This measure
the voltage across both lamps combined. The meter will indicate 3
V.
140
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Project 4.2: A parallel lamp circuit
In the parallel connection, each lamp has its own direct connection to the
battery. This arrangement avoids the if one fails they all fail nature of series
connections. In a parallel connection, the components do not depend on
each other for their connection to the battery. Thus, if one lamp burns out,
the other will continue to light.
In this project, you will build a circuit that connects two lamps in parallel
like the one shown in Figure 4.30. The lamps are powered by a pair of
AA batteries. You will use your multimeter to measure voltages at various
points in the circuit.
Equipments and materials:
A small head screw driver
Wire cutters
Wire strippers
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
Bulb
ON
Switch
Switch
OFF
Battery
Battery
H
+
+
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.30 a) Parallel Circuit b) Parallel circuit diagram.
4.12 Electric projects
141
A multimeter
Two AA batteries
One battery holder
Two lamp holders
Two 3 V flashlight lamps
Two 6 inch length 22-gauge stranded wires
Steps:
1. Cut two 6 inch lengths of wire and strip of 0.5 inch of insulation from
each end.
2. Attach the red lead from the battery holder to one end of the termi-
nals on the first lamp holder.
3. Attach the black lead to the other terminals on the first lamp holder.
4. Use the two wires to connect each of the terminals on the first lamp
holder to the terminals on the second lamp holder. This wiring
connects the two lamp holders in parallel.
5. Insert the batteries. This makes the lamps light brighter than when
you connected them in series in Project 4.1.
6. Remove one end of the lamps. Notice that the other lamp remains
lit.
7. Replace the lamp you removed in step 6.
8. Set your multimeter to a DC voltage range that can read at least 3 V.
9. Touch the leads of your multimeter to the two terminals on the first
lamp holder. Make sure you touch the red meter lead to the terminal
that the red battery lead is connected to and the black meter lead to
the terminal that the black battery lead is attached to. Note that the
voltage reads a full 3 V.
142
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
10. Touch the meter, which leads to the terminals on the second lamp
stand. Note that the voltage again reads 3 V. When components
are connected in parallel, the voltage is not divided among them.
Instead, each component sees the same voltage. That is why the
lamps light at full intensity in the parallel circuit.
Project 4.3: Electric house project
In this project, in groups, you will construct and wire a model house
according to the requirements given below. You can use materials that are
available in your area.
The Building:
Your group will design and construct an electric house with separate
series, parallel, and complex circuits.
The house you build will contain at least the following areas: one
bedroom, one bathroom, a kitchen, a front door, and a living room/-
dining room area.
Each individual room will be illuminated by its own light.
Decorating
Your building is to be decorated neatly and should reflect the purpose of
the room.
Wiring:
To earn a full point, each circuit below must be completed. Each house
will be wired with 4-hour different circuits as follows:
A single outside light with a switch.
The living room area must have a "chandelier" with at least two
lights in a series circuit with a switch.
4.12 Electric projects
143
The house must have one parallel circuit consisting of a switch and
at least three lights.
The house must have one combination circuit consisting of two
switches and at least three lights.
Specifics:
Switches can be made from brads and paper clips.
Your house will be powered by AAA, AA, D, or 9 V batteries, so make
two obvious leads to attach your battery to during testing if you do
not supply your own batteries. You will need to use the AA, D, and 9
V in at least one circuit of your house. (You may not use the same
battery for every circuit in your house.)
Each circuit must be able to work independently from the others.
Insulated wire and lights will be provided.
You will have access to scissors, wire cutters and wire strippers.
The Circuit Diagram:
You must provide one diagram for the complete circuit in your building. It
must:
be labeled and be complete including all electrical parts for each
circuit;
use accurate circuit symbols;
be neat and drawn with a straight edge ruler;
fill an entire piece of paper.
144
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on static and current electricity unit
under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Coulomb's Law PhET Experiment.
2. Circuit Construction Kit: DC - Virtual Lab PhET Experiment.
3. Circuit Construction Kit: DC PhET Experiment.
4. Charges and Fields PhET Experiment.
5. Balloons and Static Electricity PhET Experiment.
6. Ohm's Law PhET Experiment.
7. Resistance in a Wire PhET Experiment.
End of unit summary
There are two types of charges in nature and they are called
positive and negative charges.
Charges with the same sign repel each other. Charges with
opposite signs attract each other.
Charging is the process of electrifying bodies, that is removing
from or adding charges to a body.
Electric charges can neither be created nor destroyed, but can
be transferred from one material to the other.
Charging by rubbing, charging by conduction, and charging
by induction are the different methods of charging a body.
An electroscope is a simple device used to study the properties
of electric charges. It enables us to determine both the sign
4.12 Electric projects
145
of the charge and the magnitude of the charge on a body.
It can also be used to identify whether a given material is a
conductor or an insulator.
Lightning is formed when charged water drops of one sign
(positive or negative) collect in one part of the cloud. There
is electrostatic discharge (in the form of sparks) which jumps
often from one cloud region to another, but sometimes from
the cloud to earth.
The magnitude of the force between two charges is given
by Coulomb's law, which states that the force between two
point charges is directly proportional to the product of the
two charges and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between the two.
The electric field defines the force per unit charge in the space
around a charge distribution.
Electric field lines start at positive charges and point away
from positive charges. They end in negative charges and point
toward negative charges.
Electric field lines never cross each other.
Open circuits do not allow an electrical current to flow through
the circuit. Closed circuits are complete and allow electricity
to flow through them.
The current through a given area of a conductor is the net
charge passing per unit time through the area.
To maintain a constant current, you must have a closed circuit
in which an external force moves electric charge from lower
to higher potential energy. The work done per unit charge by
the source in taking the charge from lower to higher potential
146
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
energy (i.e., from one terminal of the source to the other) is
called the voltage difference between the two terminals of a
source in a closed circuit.
Ohm's law: The electric current I flowing through a substance
is proportional to the voltage V across its ends, i.e., VαI or
V = RI, where R is called the resistance of the substance.
The resistance R of a conductor depends on its length L and
cross-sectional area A through the relation, R = p¹₄; where
p called resistivity which is a property of the material and
depends on temperature and pressure.
The equivalent resistance R of n resistors connected in series
is given by R=R₁+R₂+...+Rₙ
The equivalent resistance R of n resistors connected in parallel
is given +
An ammeter is a device used to measure the current in a cir-
cuit. It is connected in series to the element through which
the current flows.
A voltmeter is a device used to measure the potential differ-
ence in the circuit. It is connected in parallel to the element
through which potential drop is to be measured.
Precaution must be taken when working near electricity or
electrical equipments.
End of unit questions and problems
1. Describe how you can know charged bodies attract or repel
each other.
2. Why the inside of a car or building is a safe place to shelter
during storm?
4.12 Electric projects
147
3. State Coulomb's law.
4. What are essential parts of an electroscope? Draw an electro-
scope and label it.
5. State the law of conservation of charge
6. Explain about the different methods of charging a body.
7. List electric safety rules.
8. Two charges q₁ = 2 µC and q₂ = -4 µC are placed 20 cm apart.
Determine the magnitude and direction of the force that one
charge exerts over the other.
9. Two spheres; 4.0 cm apart, attract each other with a force of
1.2 X 10⁹ N. Determine the magnitude of the charge on each
to see if one has twice the charge (of the opposite sign) as the
other.
10. Two equal charges of magnitude 1.1 X 10⁷ C experience an
electrostatic force of 4.2 X 10⁴ N. How far apart are the centres
of the two charges?
11. Discuss the use of a lightning conductor that is often fitted to
the top of a building.
12. Why is not a bird sitting on a high-voltage power line electro-
cuted? Compare this with the situation in which a large bird
hits two wires simultaneously with its wings.
13. How is a voltmeter connected in the circuit to measure the
potential difference between two points?
14. List one way electric current is similar to water current and
one way it is different.
15. How does the current in a circuit change if the voltage is dou-
bled and the resistance remains unchanged?
148
Unit 4 Static and Current Electricity
16. A copper wire has diameter 0.5 mm and resistivity of 1.6 X
10⁻⁸ Ω m. What will be the length of this wire to make its
resistance 10 Ω? How much does the resistance change if the
diameter is doubled?
17. If aluminium and copper wires of the same length have the
same resistance, which has the larger diameter? Why?
18. The values of current I flowing in a given resistor for the corre-
sponding values of potential difference V across the resistor
are given below.
I (amperes)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
V (volts)
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
Plot a graph between V and I, and calculate the resistance of
that resistor.
19. When a 12 V battery is connected across an unknown resistor,
there is a current of 2.5 mA in the circuit. Find the value of the
resistance of the resistor.
20. A battery of 9 V is connected in series with resistors of 0.2 Ω,
0.3 Ω, 0.4 Ω, 0.5 Ω, and 12 Ω. How much current would flow
through the 12 Ω resistor?
21. How many 176 Ω, resistors (in parallel) are required to carry 5
A on a 220 V line?
22. Show how you would connect three resistors, each having a
resistance 6 Ω, so that the combination has a resistance of (i)
9 Ω, (ii) 4 Ω.
23. Why is the series arrangement not used for domestic circuits?
24. How does the resistance of a wire vary with its area of cross-
section?
4.12 Electric projects
149
25. Why copper and aluminium wires are usually employed for
electricity transmission?
26. You are often advised to not flick electric switches with wet
hands, dry your hand first. You are also advised to never throw
water on an electric fire. Why is this so?
27. Why is the resistance of wet skin so much smaller than dry, and
why do blood and other bodily fluids have low resistances?
28. What determines the severity of a shock? Can you say that a
certain voltage is hazardous without further information?
29. In view of the small currents that cause shock hazards and the
larger currents that circuit breakers and fuses interrupt, how
do they play a role in preventing shock hazards?
30. Suppose you plug an electric heater into the wall outlet. As
soon as you turn it on, all the lights in the room go out. Explain
what must have happened.
31. Why is it dangerous to use a fuse that is rated 30 A in a circuit
calling for a 15 A fuse?
dio
Unit 5
Magnetism
Introduction
Magnetism is an interaction that allows certain kinds of objects, which
are called magnets, that exert forces on each other without physically
touching. Humans have known about magnetism for thousands of years.
For example, lodestone is a magnetized form of the iron oxide mineral
magnetite. It has the property of attracting iron objects. Today magnetism
plays many important roles in our lives. In this unit, you will learn about
Brain storm-
some of the fundamental concepts related to a magnet, magnetic field and
ing question:
magnetic force including its simple applications.
Can you list the
different ways in
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
which magnetism
understand the nature and characteristics of magnets;
has played a part
in your life today?
understand what is meant by the magnetic field;
understand the concepts related to magnetic force;
solve problems related to magnetism;
appreciate simple applications of magnetism in your everyday life.
151
152
Unit 5 Magnetism
5.1 Magnet
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
identify various types of magnets based on their physical shapes;
Exercise 5.1
describe the properties of magnets.
Most probably,
Magnets have always been an awesome thing for humans, as they play an
you have been
familiar with a
important role in a wide range of devices that you use in your daily life. The
magnet. How
use of magnets was discovered by the ancient Greeks during the period
could you define
of Greek civilization. They found stones that were able to attract iron and
it? When was
nickel like other substances. This naturally occurring stone which was
a magnet first
discovered, then is called as 'lodestone'. This is something like a magnet.
discovered?
A magnet is a material or object that produces a magnetic field that is re-
sponsible for a force that pulls or attracts other materials. Magnets attract
objects made of iron or steel, such as nails and paper clips. Magnets can
also attract or repel other magnets.
Magnets can be made in various shapes and create their own persistent
magnetic field. The magnets that are commonly available in different
shapes are those indicated in Figure 5.1. These magnets of different shapes
Horseshoe Magnet
Ring Magnet
are used in various appliances used at home, like a tape recorder, radio,
motor, door-bell, head phones, etc. They are used in these appliances
to either hold or separate, control, elevate (lift) substances, by changing
electrical energy into mechanical energy (motors, loudspeakers) or me-
chanical into electrical energy (generators and microphones).
Bar Magnet
Cylinderical Magnet
Types of Magnets
Arc Magnet
Square Magnet
There are three categories of magnets. These are:
Figure 5.1 Magnets of different
1. Permanent Magnets: are made up of magnetic material (such as
shapes.
steel) that is magnetized and has its own magnetic field. They are
known as permanent magnets because they do not lose their mag-
netic property once they are magnetized. However, the strength
5.1 Magnet
153
depends on the nature of the material used in its creation. Perma-
nent magnets are used in speakers, mobile phones, cars, generators,
televisions, sensors, etc.
The following are the ways to demagnetize the permanent magnets:
Exposing magnets to extreme temperatures.
The magnetic attraction between the magnet's atoms gets loose
when they are hammered.
Striking one magnet with the other in an inappropriate manner
will reduce the magnetic strength.
2. Temporary Magnet: can be magnetized in the presence of a mag-
netic field. When the magnetic field is removed, these materials lose
their magnetic properties. Iron nails and paper-clips are examples
of temporary magnets.
3. Electromagnets: consist of a coil of wire wrapped around a metal
core made of iron. When the coil of wire conducts a current, a mag-
netic field is generated, making the material behave like a magnet.
Key Concept
The strength of the magnetic field can be controlled by controlling
Magnetic prop-
the electric current. Electromagnets are used in generators, motors,
erties exist when
transformers, loudspeakers, MRI machines, magnetic locks, etc.
the material is
magnetized.
Properties of magnet
It
Every magnet
has two poles:
The following are the basic properties of magnet:
North and South.
When a magnet is dipped in iron filings, you can observe that the
Like poles repel
iron filings cling to the end of the magnet as the attraction is greatest
and unlike poles
at the ends of the magnet. These ends are known as the poles of the
attract each other.
magnets.
Magnetic poles always exist in pairs. Thus, when a magnet is cut
into two pieces, both pieces will have the North Pole and the South
Pole.
154
Unit 5 Magnetism
S
N
S
N
Attraction
N
S
N
S
S
N
N
S
Repulsion
N
S
S
N
Figure 5.2 Properties of magnetic poles.
Whenever a magnet is suspended freely in mid-air, it always points
in a North-South direction. The pole pointing towards geographic
North is known as the North Pole, and the pole pointing towards
geographic South is known as the South Pole.
Like poles repel while unlike poles attract.
The magnetic force between two magnets is greater when the dis-
tance between them is smaller.
Section summary
A magnet has a North pole and a South pole.
Like magnetic poles repel each other; unlike poles attract each
other.
5.2 Magnetic Field
155
Review questions
1. What is a magnet? List its properties.
2. How could a magnet loses its magnetic properties?
3. State the rule for magnetic attraction and repulsion.
4. Describe how a temporary magnet differs from a permanent
magnet.
5. What are magnetic poles? Does magnetic mono-pole exist?
6. If you broke a magnet into two, would you have isolated North
and South poles? Explain.
5.2 Magnetic Field
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe what a magnetic field is;
state the properties of magnetic lines of force;
draw magnetic field lines around magnets.
AS you learnt in unit 4, an electric field is a region where an electric charge
experiences an attraction or repulsion force on other electric charge in
Exercise 5.2
the given region. In the same manner, a magnetic field is a field produced
Can you observe
by the magnet or electric charges in motion. So it is the region around
magnetic field
a magnetic material or moving electric charge within which the force of
lines through our
magnetism acts. Magnetic fields are represented by using magnetic field
naked eyes? Are
lines. It is a visual tool used to visualize the direction and strength of the
they similarities
magnetic field.
between magnetic
field lines and
Magnetic field lines can be drawn using a compass needle. The compass
electric field lines?
needle should be placed on a piece of paper near the magnet. Check the
156
Unit 5 Magnetism
direction in which the compass needle points and mark the direction.
Move the compass needle to different positions and mark the directions.
The lines joining the points shows the magnetic field lines.
Properties of magnetic field lines
In order to understand about the properties of magnetic field lines, try to
perform the following activity.
Activity 5.1
Field around a pair of bar magnets
Take two bar magnets and place them a short distance apart such
that they are repelling each other.
Place a sheet of white paper over the bar magnets and sprinkle
some iron filings onto the paper.
Give the paper a shake to evenly distribute the iron filings. In your
exercise book, draw both the bar magnets and the pattern formed
by the iron filings.
Repeat the procedure for two bar magnets attracting each other
and draw what the pattern looks like in this situation.
Make a note of the shape of the lines formed by the iron filings
as well as their size and direction for both arrangements of the bar
magnet.
What does the pattern look like when you place both bar magnets
side by side?
Exercise 5.3
What did you observe from the above activity?You have noticed that op-
What are the simi-
posite poles of a magnet attract each other and bringing them together
larities and differ-
causes their magnetic field lines to converge (come together). On the other
ences between an
hand, like poles of a magnet repel each other and bringing them together
electric field and a
causes their magnetic field lines to diverge (bend out from each other).
magnetic field?
The following is some more list of some important properties of magnetic
field lines.
5.2 Magnetic Field
157
Magnetic field lines never intersect with each other.
Exercise 5.4
Magnetic field lines form a closed-loop.
Determine where
Outside a magnet, magnetic field lines appear to emerge or start
the field around
from the North pole and merge or terminate at the South pole. Inside
a magnet is the
a magnet, the direction of the magnetic field lines is from the South
strongest and
pole to the North pole.
where it is the
weakest.
The closeness or density of the field lines is directly proportional to
the strength of the field. In areas where the magnetic field is strong,
the field lines are closer together. In a place where the field is weaker,
the field lines are drawn further apart.
Key Concept
The magnetic field is stronger at the poles because the field lines are
Magnetic field
denser near the poles.
lines are imagi-
nary lines used
to represent mag-
netic fields. They
describe the di-
N
S
N
S
rection of the
magnetic field
and the strength
(a)
of the magnetic
field.
S
N
N
S
Exercise 5.5
What are the simi-
larities and differ-
(b)
ences between an
electric field and a
Figure 5.3 Magnetic field lines plot for a bar magnet.
magnetic field?
The following is the discussion of the similarities and differences between
electric and magnetic fields.
158
Unit 5 Magnetism
Similarities between magnetic and electric fields
Electric fields are produced by two kinds of charges, positive and
negative. Magnetic fields are associated with two magnetic poles:
North and South, although they are also produced by charges (mov-
ing charges).
Like poles repel, but unlike poles attract each other.
The electric field points in the direction of the force experienced by
a positive charge. The magnetic field points in the direction of the
force experienced by the North pole.
Differences between magnetic and electric fields
Positive and negative charges can exist separately. The north and
south poles always come together. Single magnetic poles, known
as magnetic monopoles, have been proposed theoretically, but a
magnetic monopole has never been observed.
Electric field lines have definite starting and ending points. Magnetic
field lines are continuous loops. Outside of a magnet, the field is
directed from the North Pole to the South Pole. Inside a magnet, the
field runs from south to north.
Section summary
Magnetic field lines are the imaginary lines around a magnet
which gives us the pattern of magnetic field of the magnet.
Magnetic field lines don't start or end. They form a closed
loop. They flow from North pole to South pole outside the
magnet, while they flow from South pole to North pole inside
the magnet.
5.3 The Earth's magnetic field and the compass
159
Review questions
1. Draw a small bar magnet and show the magnetic field lines
as they appear around the magnet. Use arrows to show the
direction of the field lines.
2. Draw the magnetic field between two like magnetic poles and
then between two unlike magnetic poles. Show the directions
of the fields.
3. Determine where the field around a magnet is the strongest
and where it is the weakest.
4. Explain the magnetic field using the concept of magnetic field
lines.
5. Write down the properties of magnetic field lines.
5.3 The Earth's magnetic field and the compass
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 5.6
describe the Earth's magnetic field;
Does the Earth
explain the origin of the Earth's magnetic field and its importance
have a magnet?
What do you
for the life on Earth.
think?
Earth's Magnetic Field
As you learnt in the previous section, the magnetic field is the region
around a magnetic material or a moving electric charge. Earth has a huge
magnet that produces a magnetic field. The origin of the Earth's magnetic
field is thought to be deep within the Earth in the outer core layer. The
Earth's magnetic field, also known as the geomagnetic field, is the mag-
netic field that extends from the Earth's interior out into space and causes
a compass needle to rotate. The movement of molten iron in the outer
160
Unit 5 Magnetism
core is responsible for generating the Earth's magnetic field. The shape
of the Earth's magnetic field, is similar to that of a huge bar magnet tilted
about 11° from the Earth's geographic North and South poles. In Figure
Key Concept
5.4, you can see a representation of the earth's magnetic field which is very
similar to the magnetic field of a giant bar magnet. So the Earth has two
It
The Earth is
sets of North and South poles: geographic poles and magnetic poles.
surrounded by
a magnetic field
similar to the
Another interesting thing to note is that if you think of the earth as a big
field around a bar
bar magnet, and you know that magnetic field lines always point from
magnet.
North to South, then the compass tells us that what you call the magnetic
North pole is actually the South pole of the bar magnet.
Magnetic axis
A south magnetic
Axis of
pole is near the
rotation
Earth's north
South
North
geographic pole.
magnetic
pole
11°
geographic
pole
Geographic
equator
S
Magnetic
equator
N
A north magnetic
South
North
pole is near the
geographic
magnetic
Earth's south
pole
pole
geographic pole.
Figure 5.4 Earth's magnetic field.
5.3 The Earth's magnetic field and the compass
161
A compass
A compass is an instrument that is used to find the direction of a magnetic
Exercise 5.7
field. It can do this because a compass consists of a small metal needle
Have you ever
that is magnetized itself and that is free to turn in any direction. Therefore,
seen a compass?
in the presence of a magnetic field, the needle is able to line up in the same
If so what do
direction as the field.
you think is the
purpose of a
Compasses are mainly used in navigation to find directions on the Earth.
compass?
This works because the Earth itself has a magnetic field which is similar to
that of a bar magnets, as discussed above. The compass needle aligns with
the magnetic field direction and points North (or South). Once you know
where the North is, you can figure out any other direction. A picture of a
compass is shown in Figure 5.5.
N
The Earth's magnetic field also causes a compass needle to rotate. The
W
E
North pole of the compass needle points toward the Earth's magnetic pole,
OF
which is in the North. This magnetic pole is actually the magnetic South
S
OFF
002
160
pole. Earth's magnetic field is like that of a bar magnet with the magnet's
South pole near Earth's North pole.
Figure 5.5 Compass.
Some animals can detect magnetic fields, which helps them orient them-
selves and find directions. Animals that can do this include pigeons, bees,
monarch butterflies, sea turtles, and fish.
Section summary
Earth is surrounded by a magnetic field similar to the field
around a bar magnet.
Review questions
1. What is the evidence for the existence of the Earth's magnetic
field?
162
Unit 5 Magnetism
2. Explain why a compass will show you which direction is mag-
netic North.
5.4 Magnetic field of a current-carrying conduc-
tor
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the factors through which a magnetic field due to current-
carrying conductor depends on;
Calculate the magnetic field of a current-carrying conductor.
Exercise 5.8
Current is generally defined as the rate of flow of charge. You already know
List factors affect-
that stationary charges produce an electric field which is proportional
ing the strength
to the magnitude of the charge. Moving charges also produce magnetic
of magnetic field
fields which are proportional to the current, and hence, a current-carrying
around a straight
wire produces a magnetic effect around it. This magnetic field is generally
current-carrying
attributed to the sub-atomic particles in the conductor, for example, the
conductor.
moving electrons in the atomic orbitals.
As discussed above, a moving charge (or current), produces a magnetic
field. Figure 5.6 shows a long, straight section of wire carrying a current
odoo
I. Since there is current present in the wire, a magnetic field is produced
around the wire and is composed of closed concentric circles, as repre-
sented by the gray loops in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6 Magnetic field
The strength of a magnetic field, B, some distance d away from a straight
around a current-carrying wire.
wire carrying a current, I, can be found using the equation
B=HoI B
(5.1)
where, µ₀ = X Tm refers to the permeability of free space, I is the
5.4 Magnetic field of a current-carrying conductor
163
magnitude of the current, and d is the distance from the source current
to the magnetic field. The SI unit for magnetic field strength B is called
the Tesla (T) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Nikola Tesla (1856
- 1943). Another smaller unit, called the gauss (G), where 1 G = 10⁻⁴ T is
sometimes used. The strongest permanent magnets have fields near 2 T;
Activity 5.2
superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more. The Earth's
Sketch the mag-
magnetic field on its surface is only about 5 X 10⁻⁵ T or 0.5 G.
netic field pat-
tern of a steady
It should be noted that the distance d must be measured perpendicular to
electric current
the wire. A perpendicular distance measurement is shown in Figure 5.6.
flowing in a long
The strength of the field, B, decreases as the distance away from the wire,
straight wire.
d, increases.
Since magnetic field is a vector quantity, you need to also determine the
direction of the magnetic field. The direction of the magnetic field created
by a current-carrying wire takes the form of concentric circles and is per-
pendicular to the wire. But you have to be able to figure out if those circles
point clockwise or counter-clockwise. To do that, you use a right-hand
rule. If you wrap your right hand's fingers around the wire with your thumb
pointing in the direction of the current, then the direction in which the
fingers would curl will give the direction of the magnetic field. In Figure
5.7, the concentric lines represent the magnetic field lines.
Thus, a current in a long straight wire produces a magnetic field with cir-
cular field lines as may be verified by sprinkling iron fillings on a board
Figure 5.7 Right-hand rule
normal to the wire.
for a magnetic field around a
current-carrying wire.
Generally speaking, the magnetic field produced due to a current-carrying
conductor has the following characteristics:
It encircles the conductor.
It lies in a plane perpendicular to the conductor.
A change in the direction of the current flow reverses the direction
164
Unit 5 Magnetism
of the field.
Key Concept
JET A wire carrying
Example 5.1
an electric current
An infinitely long wire has a current of 3A passing through it. Calculate the
will produce a
magnetic field at a distance of 2 cm from the wire (µ₀ = 4π X 10⁻⁷ Tm).
magnetic field
with closed field
Solution:
lines surrounding
In this example, you are given with I3 A and d = 2 cm.
the wire.
You want to find the magnitude and direction of a magnetic field.
For infinitely long straight wire, the formula for the magnetic field is
B B=2πd
Substituting the given values into the equation gives
B = (4π X 2π x (0.02 m) 10⁻⁷ Tm) X = X 10⁻⁵ T
The direction of the magnetic field can be determined using the right-hand
rule.
Section summary
A magnetic field exists around any wire that carries current.
The strength of the magnetic field is directly proportional to
the magnitude of current and is inversely proportional to the
distance of the point from the wire.
The direction of the magnetic field can be obtained using the
right-hand rule.
5.5 Magnetic force on a moving charge placed in a uniform magnetic field
165
Review questions
1. What will be the strength of the magnetic field if the distance
from the current-carrying conductor is very large?
2. What are the factors on which a magnetic field due to a
current-carrying conductor depends?
5.5
Magnetic force on a moving charge placed in
a uniform magnetic field
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Exercise 5.9
describe the effects of magnetic fields on moving charges;
What is the mech-
determine the magnitude and direction of a magnetic force on a
anism by which
one magnet ex-
moving charge.
erts a force on
another?
When a charged particle passes through a uniform magnetic field, a mag-
netic force is exerted on them. If a charged particle is in motion in a
magnetic field with a speed or velocity (v), in the magnetic field (B), then
it will feel a force which is magnetic force (F). At the rest position, these
particles are unaffected by the magnetic fields, but as they begin to move,
Key Concept
the magnetic field pushes at them. Note that a uniform or steady magnetic
jer
Any moving
field is the region or field where it has equal magnitude of strength and
charged particle
same direction at each point.
creates its own
magnetic field
Consider a positively charged particle that is moving in a uniform mag-
and is affected
netic field. Then, the magnitude of the force (magnetic force) is directly
when it moves
proportional to the magnitude of the charge, the component of the ve-
through another
locity which is acting perpendicular to the direction of this field and the
magnetic field.
magnitude of the generated magnetic field.
F = qvBsin Θ
(5.2)
166
Unit 5 Magnetism
Here, q is the magnitude of the charge, vsin Θ is the component of the
velocity that is acting perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field and
the B is the magnitude of the applied magnetic field.
The magnitude of the force becomes zero, when the speed or velocity of
the particle and the magnetic field are parallel to each other, and reaches
maximum when the velocity of the particle and the magnetic field are
perpendicular to each other.
The direction of the magnetic force È is perpendicular to the plane formed
F
B
by v and B, as determined by the right-hand rule, which is illustrated in
Figure 5.8. It states that, to determine the direction of the magnetic force
on a positive moving charge, you point the thumb of the right-hand in the
ID
direction of v, the fingers in the direction of B, and a perpendicular to the
palm points in the direction of F.
Figure 5.8 Right-hand rule for
Example 5.2
a magnetic force on a moving
charge.
Determine the magnitude of the magnetic force of a 50 C charged particles
moving with the velocity of 3 m/s in the same direction to a magnetic field
of magnitude 1 T.
Solution:
You are given q= 50 C, v= 3 m/s, B = 1 T and Θ = 0°.
The required quantity is The magnitude of the magnetic force.
The magnitude of the force is obtained by
F = qvBsin Θ = 50 m/s 1 0° = 0
5.6 Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire
167
Section summary
The force a magnetic field exerts on a charged particle de-
pends on the velocity and charge of the particle and the
strength of the field.
The magnetic force is perpendicular to the plane formed by v
and B.
Review questions
1. Is it possible for the magnetic force on a charge moving in a
magnetic field to be zero?
2. An electron moves at 7.5 X 10⁶ m/s perpendicular to Earth's
magnetic field at an altitude where the field strength is 1.0 X
10⁻⁵ T. Calculate the magnetic force.
5.6 Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire
Exercise 5.10
In the previous
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
section, you have
state the relationship between magnetic force, current and magnetic
learnt how a mag-
field;
netic field exerts
a force on moving
calculate the magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor in a
charges. What
magnetic field;
about the mag-
determine the direction in which a current-carrying wire experiences
netic field around
the current-
a force in an external magnetic field.
carrying wire?
The force on a current-carrying wire is similar to that of a moving charge
Does it produce a
as expected since a charge carrying wire is a collection of moving charges.
force?
A current-carrying wire feels a force in the presence of a magnetic field.
These forces are transmitted to the material of the conductor, and the
conductor as a whole experiences a force distributed along its length. The
electric motor and the moving coil galvanometer both depend on their
168
Unit 5 Magnetism
Key Concept
operation on the magnetic force on wire carrying-currents.
When a
Consider a wire of length L where an electric current I flow through the
current-carrying
wire as shown in Figure 5.9. If this wire is placed in a magnetic field of
wire lies in a
magnetic field,
magnitude B, the magnitude of the force is directly proportional to the
magnetic force
current I in the wire, to the magnetic field B (assumed uniform), and to the
is exerted on the
length of wire exposed to the magnetic field. The force also depends on
moving charges
the angle between the current direction and the magnetic field as shown
within the con-
in Figure 5.9, being proportional to. Thus, the force on a wire carrying a
ductor.
current I with length in a uniform magnetic field B is given by:
F = ILBsin Θ
(5.3)
The direction of the magnetic force on a current-carrying wire in a mag-
netic field can be found using the right-hand rule: Point the fingers of
your right hand in the direction of B. Point your thumb in the direction of
B
0
the conventional current in the wire. The palm of your hand then faces
or pushes in the direction of the force acting on the wire, as illustrated in
L
Figure 5.10.
In general, the force on a current-carrying conductor is:
Figure 5.9 Current-carrying
wire in magnetic field.
i) always perpendicular to the plane containing the conductor and the
direction of the field in which it is placed and
ii) greatest when the conductor is at right angles to the field.
Example 5.3
A wire 25 cm long is at right angles to a 0.30 T uniform magnetic field. The
current through the wire is 6.0 A. What is the magnitude of the force on the
Figure 5.10 Right hand rule for
wire?
a magnetic force on a current-
carrying conductor.
Solution:
In this example, you are given L = 25 cm = 0.25 m, B = 0.3 T, Θ = 90° and I =
6 A.
5.6 Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire
169
You want to find the magnitude of the force.
The magnitude of the magnetic force can be calculated by
F = ILBsin Θ = 6A X 0.25 m X 0.3 T X sin 90° = 0.45 N.
Section summary
When a current carrying wire is placed in a magnetic field,
there exists a force on the wire that is perpendicular to the
plane formed by the field and the wire.
Review questions
1. Explain how the magnetic force is produced on a current-
carrying wire in a magnetic field.
2. List the factors that affect the magnitude of the force a current-
carrying wire experiences.
3. Describe how to use the right-hand rule to determine the di-
rection of a magnetic field around a straight current-carrying
wire.
4. A wire of length 400 m is in a 0.20 T magnetic field. If a 2.5 N
force acts on the wire, what is the value of the current in the
wire?
170
Unit 5 Magnetism
5.7 Magnetic force between two parallel current-
carrying wires
Exercise 5.11
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Explain how to
describe the effects of the magnetic force between two wires.
determine the
explain how parallel wires carrying-currents can attract or repel
direction of the
each other.
magnetic forces
between two
In section 5.4, you have learnt that a wire carrying a current produces
parallel wires?
magnetic field. Further, you also learnt that an external magnetic field will
exert a force on a current-carrying wire.
I₂
When two wires carrying a current are placed parallel to each other, their
magnetic fields will interact, resulting in force acting between the wires.
The magnitude of the force acting on each wire is equal, but the directions
are opposite. This is true even if the wires carry currents of different mag-
nitudes.
(a)
F₁
F2
Now, you will need to consider two cases for two parallel current-carrying
wires.
I₁
1. When current in both wires are in the same direction, you will need
d
to draw a diagram to get a clear idea of the particular situation.
Here, you have two parallel current-carrying wires, separated by a
particular distance d, such that one of the wires is carrying current
I₁ and the other is carrying I₂, which are in the same direction. The
direction of magnetic force is indicated in Figure 5.11 (a) and is found
using the right hand rule. In this case, two forces are acting toward
F1
F2
each other. Therefore, you can say that they are attractive. Therefore,
(b)
I₂
you can conclude that if the current in the two wires placed parallel
is in the same direction, the force acting on them will be perceived
Figure 5.11 Magnetic force
between two parallel wires
as attractive.
carrying currents (a) in the
same direction (b) in opposite
2. When the current in the two wires is going in opposite directions,
directions.
5.8 Applications of magnetism
171
you will need to draw a diagram to get a clear idea of the particular
situation. Here, you have two parallel current-carrying wires, sepa-
Key Concept
rated by a particular distance d, such that one of the wires is carrying
If the two con-
current I₁ and the other is carrying I₂, but in opposite directions.
ductors carry
The direction of magnetic force is indicated in Figure 5.11 (b) and is
current in the
found using the right hand rule. In this case, two forces are acting in
same direction,
opposition to each other. Thus, you can say that they are repulsive.
the wires attract
Therefore, you can conclude that if the current in the two conductors
each other. If the
placed parallel is in the opposite directions, the force acting on them
two wires carry
will be perceived as repulsive.
currents in op-
posite directions,
Section summary
they repel each
other.
The force between two parallel current-carrying conductors
is attractive if the currents are in the same direction, repulsive
if they are in opposite directions.
Activity 5.3
Review questions
Practice the right-
hand rule and
1. Two parallel wires carrying currents in the same direction
determine the
attract each other. Why?
direction of force
in Figure 5.11.
2. Is the force attractive or repulsive between the phase and
neutral lines hung from power poles? Why?
5.8 Applications of magnetism
Exercise 5.12
What do you
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
think are the ap-
describe some applications of magnetism.
plications of the
magnetism?
Magnets play a significant role in a wide range of devices including simple
toys, computers, credit cards, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) ma-
chines, and business equipment. The following is a discussion of some of
the applications of magnetism.
172
Unit 5 Magnetism
Health and medicine
Magnets are found in some commonly used medical equipment such as
MRIs. It uses powerful magnetic fields to generate a radar-like radio signal
from inside the body, using the signal to create a clear, detailed picture of
bones, organs and other tissue. An MRI magnet is very strong-thousands
of times more powerful than common magnets. Another medical use for
magnets is for treating cancer. A doctor injects a magnetically sensitive
fluid into the cancer area and uses a powerful magnet to generate heat in
the body. The heat kills the cancer cells without harming healthy organs.
In the home
Though it may not be obvious, most homes contain many magnets. Re-
frigerator magnets hold papers, bottle openers, and other small items to
the metal refrigerator door. A pocket compass uses a magnetic needle
Figure 5.12 MRI scanning machine.
5.8 Applications of magnetism
173
to show which way is north. The dark magnetic strip on the back of a
credit card stores data in much the same way as a computer's hard drive
does. Vacuum cleaners, blenders, and washing machines all have electric
motors that work on magnetic principles. You also find magnets in phones,
doorbells and children's toys.
Computers and Electronics
Many computers use magnets to store data on hard drives. Magnets alter
the direction of magnetic material on a hard disk in segments that then
represent computer data. Later, computers read the direction of each
segment of the magnetic material to "read" the data. The small speakers
found in computers, televisions, and radios also use magnets; inside the
speaker, a wire coil and magnet convert electronic signals into sound
vibrations.
Electric Power and Other Industries
Magnets offer many benefits to the industrial world. Magnets in electric
generators turn mechanical energy into electricity, while some motors use
magnets to convert electricity back into mechanical work. In recycling,
electrically-powered magnets in cranes grab and move large pieces of
metal, some weighing thousands of pounds. Mines use magnetic sorting
machines to separate useful metallic ores from crushed rock. In food
processing, magnets remove small metal bits from grains and other foods.
Farmers use magnets to catch pieces of metal that COWS eat out in the
N
field. The COW swallows the magnet with its food; as it moves through the
animal's digestive system it traps metal fragments.
040
Compasses and Navigation
S
180
Peoples use magnetic compasses for navigation purposes. They found
out magnets could direct needles and correlate with the North pole, and
Figure 5.13 Magnetic compass
they used that information to navigate. The early compasses were created
used for navigation.
with lodestone because magnets were not yet longer invented. Lodestone
174
Unit 5 Magnetism
comes from the mineral magnetite and is the handiest obviously-occurring
magnet. Modern day magnets, like neodymium magnets and uncommon
earth magnets, are crafted from a complicated process in which some
of the metals are forged together. This technique helps to cause them
to stronger and extra suitable for a way they are used today. Therefore,
lodestone in comparison to sturdy uncommon earth magnets is weaker.
Section summary
Magnetism has a number of applications from health to navi-
gation.
Review question
List other applications of magnetism not discussed here.
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on magnetism unit under the guidance
of your teacher.
1. Magnet and Compass PhET Experiment.
2. Generator PhET Experiment.
3. Magnets and Electromagnets PhET Experiment.
5.8 Applications of magnetism
175
End of unit summary
Every magnet has two poles: North and South. These are
inseparable. Like poles repel each other and unlike poles
attract each other.
The Earth also has a magnetic field.
A compass needle can be used to find the magnetic North
pole and help us find our direction.
A current-carrying conductor produces a magnetic field
around it. The right-hand rule is used to determine the direc-
tion of the magnetic field.
When a current-carrying conductor is placed in the magnetic
field, it experiences a magnetic force.
The magnitude of magnetic force on a moving charge q in a
magnetic field B is given by F= qvBsin Θ.
The magnitude of the magnetic force on a wire carrying a
current I with length in a uniform magnetic field B is given by
F= ILBsin Θ.
The force between conductors is attractive when the currents
flow in the same direction in the two wires. When the two
wires are carrying currents in opposite directions, they repel
each other.
End of unit questions and problems
1. What is a magnet?
2. How do magnets and their properties influence everyday life?
3. Describe what is meant by the term magnetic field.
4. Much like the static electric force, there is a magnetic force
176
Unit 5 Magnetism
between two magnets. How are the magnetic and electric
forces similar? How are they different?
5. What happens to the poles of a magnet if it is cut into pieces?
6. What happens when like magnetic poles are brought close
together? What about when unlike magnetic poles are brought
close together?
7. Draw the shape of the magnetic field around a bar magnet.
8. Explain how a compass needle indicates the direction of a
magnetic field.
9. Compare the magnetic field of the Earth to the magnetic field
of a bar magnet.
10. Explain the difference between the geographical North Pole
and the magnetic North pole of the Earth.
11. Draw magnetic field lines for two similar magnetic poles and
two dissimilar magnetic poles.
12. A wire 0.50 m long carrying a current of 8.0 A is at right angles
to a uniform magnetic field. The force on the wire is 0.40 N.
What is the strength of the magnetic field?
13. The current through a wire 0.80 m long is 5.0 A. The wire is per-
pendicular to a 0.60 T magnetic field. What is the magnitude
of the force on the wire?
14. An electric wire in the wall of a building carries a current of 25
A vertically upward. What is the magnetic field at a distance
of 10 cm from the wire?
15. Determine the magnitude and direction of magnetic force on
an electron traveling 8.75 X 10⁵ m/s horizontally to the East in
a vertically upward of magnetic field 0.75 T.
Unit 6
Electromagnetic Waves and
Geometrical Optics
Introduction
Light is one form of an Electromagnetic wave. Light lets us see things and
is responsible for our visual contact with our immediate environment. It
enables us to admire and adore various beautiful manifestations of nature.
You can use light rays to model mirrors, lenses, telescopes, microscopes,
and prisms. The study of how light interacts with materials is called optics.
Brainstorming
When dealing with light rays, you are usually interested in the shape of
Activity
a material and the angles at which light rays hit it. This kind of optics is
Do you remember
referred to as geometrical optics. This unit deals with topics related to
the definition of
Electromagnetic waves and geometrical optics.
wave that you
learnt in grade
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
9? Try to discuss
understand the concept of Electromagnetic waves;
in group and
tell your answer
understand the properties and transmission of light in various me-
of wave to your
dia and their applications;
teacher.
investigate the properties of light through experimentation and
illustration using diagrams and optical instruments;
predict the behavior of light through the use of ray diagrams;
appreciate the contributions of optics in our day to day life.
177
178
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.1 Electromagnetic (EM) waves
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the propagation of EM waves;
state sources of EM waves.
Exercise 6.1
A wave transfers energy from one place to another without transferring
What are the dif-
matter. Waves, such as water waves and sound waves, transfer energy by
ferent types of
making particles of matter move. The energy is passed along from particle
waves?
to particle as they collide with their neighbors.
Depending on their medium of propagation, waves are categorized into
Key Concept
mechanical waves and EM waves.
EM is a wave
Mechanical waves are the types of waves that use matter to transfer
that consists of
energy. They cannot travel in almost empty space between the Earth
oscillating electric
and the Sun.
and magnetic
fields, which radi-
An EM wave is a wave that can travel through empty space or through
ate outward from
matter. They are produced by charged particles, such as electrons,
the source at the
that move back and forth or vibrate. It is thus made of electric and
speed of light.
magnetic fields as shown in Figure 6.1. Both parts are called fields
and vibrate at right angles to the wave motion. Thus, EM waves are
transverse waves as you learnt in grade 9. In transverse waves, the di-
rection of oscillation is perpendicular to the direction of propagation
Exercise 6.2
of waves while in a longitudinal wave, the direction of oscillation
Did you recall the
is parallel to the direction of propagation of the wave. Recall that a
differences be-
wave on a rope is a transverse wave that causes the rope to move at
tween transverse
right angles to the direction the wave is traveling.
and longitudinal
waves?
Like all waves, an EM wave has a frequency and a wavelength. The num-
ber of times the electric and magnetic parts vibrate each second is the
frequency of the wave. The wavelength is the distance between the crests
or troughs of the vibrating electric or magnetic parts.
6.1 Electromagnetic (EM) waves
179
Electric field(E)
tw
Magnetic field (B)
Direction
Y
B
Direction
X
Z
too
tw
Figure 6.1 Electric field and magnetic field in an EM wave.
Radiant Energy from the Sun
The Sun emits EM waves that travel through space and reach Earth. The
energy carried by EM waves is called radiant energy. Almost 92 % of the
radiant energy that reaches the Earth from the Sun is carried by infrared
and visible light waves. Infrared waves make you feel warm when you sit
in sunlight and visible light waves enable you to see. A small amount of
the radiant energy that reaches Earth is carried by ultraviolet waves. These
are the waves that can cause sunburn if you are exposed to sunlight for too
long.
Section summary
EM waves are transverse waves made of vibrating electric and
magnetic fields.
Review questions
1. Explain how an EM wave propagates.
2. Do EM waves need a medium to travel through?
3. Describe the properties of EM waves.
180
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.2 EM Spectrum
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe what an EM spectrum is;
describe and explain the differences and similarities of the spec-
trum's of EM waves;
Exercise 6.3
What do you know
describe the uses and dangers of the spectrum's of EM waves.
about the EM
spectrum?
As shown in Figure 6.2, an EM spectrum is the complete range of EM wave
frequencies and wavelengths. At one end of the spectrum, the waves have
a low frequency, a long wavelength, and low energy. At the other end of
the spectrum, the waves have a high frequency, a short wavelength, and
high energy. All of the waves, from radio waves to visible light to gamma
rays, are the same kind of wave. They differ from each other only by their
frequencies, wavelengths, and energies.
You briefly describe these different spectrum's of EM wave, in order of
decreasing wavelengths.
Radio
Microwave
Infrared
Visible
Ultraviolet
X-Ray
Gamma Ray
Longer
Wavelength (m)
Shorter
10²
1
1
1
10⁻¹
10⁻²
10⁻³
10⁴
10⁻⁵
10⁻⁶
10⁻⁷
10 ⁸
10⁻⁹
10⁻¹⁰
10⁻¹¹
10⁻¹²
10⁻¹³
Lower
Frequency (Hz)
Higher
10⁶
107
10⁸
10
9
10
10
10
11
10¹²
10
13
10
14
10
15
10
16
1017
10
18
1019
10²⁰
10
21
Radio
Microwave
Infrared
Ultraviolet
X-Ray
Gamma Ray
Visible Light
700nm
600nm
500nm
400nm
Figure 6.2 The EM spectrum.
6.2 EM Spectrum
181
Radio waves
Radio waves are made by various types of transmitters, depending on the
Key Concept
wavelength. They are also given off by stars, sparks, and lightning, which
The EM spec-
is why you hear interference on your radio in a thunderstorm. They have
trum consists
the lowest frequencies in the EM spectrum, ranging from 500 kHz to about
of the following
1000 MHz and a wavelength of around 1 meter to thousands of meters.
types of radia-
tion: radio waves,
They are used mainly for communications purposes like police radio com-
microwaves, in-
munications, military aircraft radios and television transmissions. On
frared, visible,
the other hand, large doses of radio waves are believed to cause cancer,
ultraviolet, X-rays,
leukaemia and other disorders.
gamma-rays.
Gamma-rays have
Microwaves
the highest energy
and are the most
Microwaves are basically extremely high-frequency radio waves, and are
penetrating, while
made by various types of transmitters. In a mobile phone, they are made
radio waves have
by a transmitter chip and an antenna; in a microwave oven, they are made
the lowest energy
by a "magnetron". Their wavelength is usually a couple of centimeters.
and are the least
Stars also give off microwaves.
penetrating.
Microwaves cause water and fat molecules to vibrate which makes the
substances hot. Thus, you can use microwaves to cook many types of
food. Mobile phones use microwaves, which can be generated by a small
antenna. They are also used by traffic speed cameras, and for radar, which
is used by aircraft, ships and weather forecasters.
Prolonged exposure to microwaves is known to cause "cataracts" in your
eyes which is a clouding of the cornea. So do not make it a habit of pressing
your face against the microwave oven door to see if your food is ready.
Microwaves from mobile phones can affect parts of your brain as you are
holding the transmitter right by your head. The current advice is to keep
calls short. To avoid being harmed by the powerful radar units in modern
military planes, people who work on aircraft carrier decks wear special
suits which reflect microwaves.
182
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Infrared waves
Infrared waves are just below visible red light in the EM spectrum. You
probably think of Infrared waves as heat because they are given off by hot
objects and you can feel them as warmth on your skin. Infrared waves
are also given off by stars, lamps, flames and anything else that is warm
including you.
Infrared waves are used for many tasks, for example, as remote controls
for TVs and video recorders and physiotherapists use heat lamps to help
heal sports injuries. Infrared waves are used to see objects in the dark.
Police helicopters track criminals at night using cameras that can see in
the dark. Night sights for weapons sometimes use a sensitive infrared
detector. Weather forecasters use satellite pictures to see what is heading
our way. Some of the images they use were taken using infrared cameras,
because they show cloud and rain patterns more clearly.
Exercise 6.4
The danger from too much infrared radiation is very simple: it simply
What are the uses
makes you hot.
and dangers of
each of the EM
Visible Light
spectrum?
Our eyes can detect only a tiny part of the EM spectrum called visible light.
The frequency of visible light ranges between about 4 X 10¹⁴ Hz to 7 X 10¹⁴
Hz. Its wavelength in vacuum ranges between about 700 nm and 400 nm.
Visible light, emitted or reflected from objects around us gives us with
information about the world. The color of the visible spectrum will be
discussed in detail in Section 6.8 of this unit.
You use light to see things. As the Sun sends so much light towards our
planet, you have evolved to make use of those particular wavelengths in
order to sense our environment.
Too much light can damage the retina in your eye. This can happen when
you look at something very bright such as the Sun. Although the damage
6.2 EM Spectrum
183
AM
FM
TV
Radar
TV Remote
Light Bulb
Sun
X-ray machine
Radioctive Elements
Radio waves
Infrared
Ultraviolet
X-rays
Gamma rays
100m
1m
1cm
0.01cm
1000nm
10nm
0.01nm
0.0001nm
Visible spectrum
Figure 6.3 Visible spectrum.
can heal, if it is too bad, it will be permanent.
Ultraviolet rays
Ultraviolet (UV) rays covers wavelengths ranging from about 4 X 10⁻⁷ m
(400 nm) down to 6 X 10⁻¹⁰ m (0.6 nm). UV radiation is produced by special
lamps and very hot bodies. The sun is also an important source of UV light.
But fortunately, most of it is absorbed in the ozone layer in the atmosphere
at an altitude of about 40 to 50 km.
Uses for UV light include getting a sun tan, detecting forged bank notes in
shops and hardening some types of dental filling. You also see UV lamps
in discos where they make your clothes glow. When you mark your posses-
sions with a security marker pen, the ink is invisible unless you shine a UV
lamp at it. UV rays can be used to kill microbes. Hospitals use UV lamps to
sterilize surgical equipment and the air in operating theaters. Food and
drug companies also use UV lamps to sterilize their products. Suitable
doses of UV rays cause the body to produce vitamin D, and this is used by
doctors to treat vitamin D deficiency and some skin disorders.
184
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Large doses of UV can damage the retinas in your eyes, so it is important
to check that your sunglasses will block UV light. If your sunglasses do
not block UV, you will actually get more UV light on your retinas than if
you did not wear them. Large doses of UV cause sunburn and even skin
cancer. Fortunately, the ozone layer in the Earth's atmosphere screens us
from most of the UV given off by the Sun.
X-rays
X-rays are very high frequency waves and carry a lot of energy. They will
pass through most substances, and this makes them useful in medicine
and industry to see inside things. X-rays are given off by stars and strongly
by some types of nebula. When you use X-rays, you make them by firing
a beam of electrons at a "target". If you fire the electrons with enough
energy, X-rays will be produced.
X-rays are used by doctors to see the inside parts of a patient. X-rays are
also used in airport security checks to see inside your luggage. They are
also used by astronomers as many objects in the universe emit X-rays,
which you can detect using suitable radio telescopes.
X-rays can cause cell damage and cancers. This is why Radiographers in
hospitals stand behind a shield when they X-ray their patients.
Gamma rays
Gamma rays are given off by stars and by some radioactive substances.
They are extremely high frequency waves and carry a large amount of
energy. They pass through most materials and are quite difficult to stop;-
you need lead or concrete in order to block them out.
Because gamma rays can kill living cells, they are used to kill cancer cells
without having to resort to difficult surgery. This is called "Radiotherapy"
and works because cancer cells cannot repair themselves like healthy cells
6.2 EM Spectrum
185
can when damaged by gamma rays. In industry, radioactive "tracer" sub-
stances can be put into pipes and machinery, then you can detect where
the substances go. This is basically the same use as in medicine. Gamma
rays kill microbes and are used to sterilize food so that it will keep fresh for
longer. This is known as "irradiated" food. Gamma rays are also used to
sterilize medical equipment.
Gamma rays cause cell damage and can cause a variety of cancers. They
cause mutations in growing tissues and hence, unborn babies are espe-
cially vulnerable.
Section summary
The EM spectrum is made up of a broad range of frequencies
of EM radiation.
Each type of the EM spectrum have their own benefits and
side effects.
Review questions
1. Mention one source of EM waves.
2. Arrange the following types of EM radiation in order of in-
creasing frequency: infrared, X-rays, UV rays, visible light, and
gamma.
3. Discuss on the use of each type of EM spectrum.
4. Describe the dangers of each type of EM spectrum.
186
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.3 Light as a wave
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
illustrate the propagation of light;
describe the medium of propagation of light;
Exercise 6.5
describe the speed of light waves.
Does light require
In the previous section, you learnt that light is a form of EM wave. Light is,
a medium to
travel?
thus, another type of wave that carries energy. The light that humans can
see is called a 'visible light'.
Medium of propagation of light
Like other waves, light waves can travel through matter. Although it travels
through matter, it is different from waves like water and sound waves. This
is because light is an EM wave and it can pass through a vacuum. That is
Key Concept
why you can see light from the moon, distant stars, and galaxies.
It As light is an
EM wave, it can
Speed of light
travel in a vacuum
as well as through
An EM wave, including light, is special because, no matter what the fre-
materials such
quency, it all moves at a constant velocity (in a vacuum), which is known
as air, water, and
as the speed of light. The speed of light has the symbol c and is equal to
glass.
2.99792458 X 10⁸ m/s ≈ 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s.
In reality, nothing travels faster than the speed of light. Thus, in empty
space, light travels at a speed of about 300,000 kilometers. Light travels so
fast that light emitted from the Sun travels 150 million km to Earth in only
Exercise 6.6
about eight and a half minutes. Even though light travels incredibly fast,
How do you know
stars other than the Sun are so far away that it takes years for the light they
emit to reach Earth.
that light trav-
els through a
vacuum?
On the other hand, when light travels through matter, it interacts with the
atoms and molecules in the material and slows down. As a result, light
6.3 Light as a wave
187
travels fastest in empty space, and slowest in solids. In glass, for example,
light travels about 197,000 km/s.
Because all EM waves in a vacuum have the same speed c (i.e., speed of
Key Concept
light), it follows that:
It
EM waves
in general and
c=Xxf =
(6.1)
light in par-
where Л is the wavelength of the EM wave, and f is the frequency of the
ticular travel
EM wave. Thus, the greater the frequency of an EM wave, the smaller its
with a speed of
3.00 X 10⁸ m/s in a
wavelength becomes.
vacuum.
Example 6.1
Find the frequency of red light with a wavelength of 700 nm.
Solution:
You are given that A = 700 nm and c = 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s. You are asked to find
the frequency.
You can obtain the frequency by rearranging the formula c = 1xf, to yield
10⁻⁹n Hz
Example 6.2
An FM radio station broadcasts EM radiation at a frequency of 103.4 MHz.
Calculate the wavelength of this radiation.
Solution:
In this example, you are given f = 103.4 MHz and c = 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s. What
you want to find is the wavelength, Л.
From the expression c = 1xf, X you can easily derive for Л. Thus,
188
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Propagation of light
Exercise 6.7
A source of light such as a light bulb gives off light rays that travel away
from the light source in all directions just as the rock hitting the pond
If you drop a rock
causes waves to form in the water as in Figure 6.4 (b). However, while the
on the smooth
water waves spread out only on the surface of the pond, light waves spread
surface of a pond,
what would hap-
out in all directions from the light source as it is indicated in Figure 6.4 (a).
pen?
To understand the direction of propagation of a light wave, look at light
entering a room through a small opening in a wall. You will note the
motion of dust particles, which essentially provide simple evidence that
light travels in a straight line. An arrow headed straight line represents the
direction of propagation of light and is called a ray.
Exercise 6.8
How is light prop-
Light rays are drawn using straight lines with arrow heads and are used
agated?
to show the path that light travels. A collection of rays is called a beam.
Light rays are, therefore, narrow beams of light that travel in a straight line.
You can use the idea of a light ray to indicate the direction through which
light travels. A ray diagram is a drawing that shows the path of light rays.
In Figure 6.5, the light rays from the object enter the eye, and the eye sees
the object.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4 (a) Light moves away in all directions from a light source, (b) Ripples
spread out on the surface of water.
6.3 Light as a wave
189
light
analyze
observe
reflection
of the light
object
Figure 6.5 Light rays from the object to the eyes.
The most important thing to remember is that you can only see an object
when light from the object enters our eyes. The object must be a source of
light (for example, a light bulb) or else it must reflect light from a source
(for example, the moon) and the reflected light enters our eyes.
Section summary
Light travels in all directions from its source, in straight lines
with arrows to show the path of light.
Light rays are not real. They are merely used to show the path
that light travels.
Like all forms of EM waves, light can travel through empty
space as well as through matter.
In vacuum, light travels with a speed of 3.00 X 10⁸ m/s.
Review questions
1. Are light rays real? Explain.
2. Give evidence to support the statement: "Light travels in
190
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
straight lines". Draw a ray diagram to prove this.
3. Explain how light wave propagates.
4. Do EM waves need a medium to travel through?
5. What is the speed of light? What symbol is used to refer to the
speed of light? Does the speed of light change?
6. Calculate the frequency of an EM wave with a wavelength of
400 nm.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
Exercise 6.9
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
When you smile
state laws of reflection and refraction;
infront of a mirror,
solve problems based on the laws of reflection and refraction;
you see your own
face smiling back
identify area of application of these laws in your locality and/or
at you. Do you
elsewhere.
know the reason
behind it?
Reflection of light
When you look in a mirror, you see your image because of the reflection of
light rays on the mirror. Thus, when a ray of light approaches a smooth
polished surface and the light ray bounces back, it is called the reflection
Perpendicular
to surface
of light. The incoming light ray is called the incident ray. The light ray
Incident ray
Reflected ray
Θ₁
Θᵣ
moving away from the surface is the reflected ray. The most important
characteristic of these rays is their angles in relation to the reflecting sur-
face. These angles are measured with respect to the normal of the surface.
Surface
The normal is an imaginary line perpendicular to the surface. The angle
of incidence, Θᵢ, is measured between the incident ray and the surface
Figure 6.6 A light ray strikes a
normal. The angle of reflection, Θᵣ, is measured between the reflected ray
surface and is reflected.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
191
and the surface normal. This is shown in Figure 6.6.
When a light ray strikes a surface and is reflected, as in Figure 6.6, the
reflected ray obeys the law of reflection. According to the law of reflection,
i. Θᵢ = Θᵣ and
Key Concept
Reflection is
ii. The incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidence
the change in
and the reflected ray all lie in the same plane.
direction of light
These laws are applicable to all types of reflections, i.e., specular and dif-
rays at a surface
fuse reflection. The following is the discussion of the distinction between
that causes them
these two types of reflection.
to move away
from the surface.
Specular Reflection and Diffuse Reflection
The reflection of light from a smooth shiny surface, as in Figure 6.7 (a), is
referred to as specular reflection. In this type of reflection, all the reflected
light moves in the same direction. In contrast, if a surface is rough, as in
Figure 6.7 (b), the reflected light is sent out in a variety of directions, giving
rise to diffuse reflection. For example, when the surface of a road is wet,
the water creates a smooth surface and headlights reflecting from the road
undergo specular reflection.
Exercise 6.10
The law of reflec-
tion is true for
any surface. Does
this mean that
(a)
(b)
when parallel rays
approach a sur-
Figure 6.7 (a) Specular and (b) diffuse reflection.
face, the reflected
rays will also be
Refraction of light
parallel?
In the first part of this section, you studied light reflecting off various sur-
faces. Light seems to travel along straight-lines in a transparent medium.
192
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
In this subsection, you will learn about the refraction of light. Let us start
our discussion by considering the apparent displacement of a pencil partly
immersed in water using the following activity:
Activity 6.1
1. Fill a large, opaque drinking glass or cup with water.
2. Place a pencil in the water at an angle.
3. Looking directly down into the cup from above, observe the
Figure 6.8 Refraction of light.
straw where it touches the water as shown in Figure 6.8.
4. Placing yourself so that the pencil angles to your left or right,
slowly back away about 1 T. Observe the pencil as it appears
above, at and below the surface of the water.
Exercise 6.11
5. Describe the pencil's appearance from above.
What happens
when light
6. Compare the pencil's appearance above and below the water's
passes through a
surface in step 4.
medium? Does it
still move along
Have you noticed how the light reaching you from the portion of the pencil
a straight line
inside water seems to come from a different direction compared to the
path or change its
part above water. This makes the pencil appear to be displaced at the
direction?
interface. These observations indicate that light does not travel in the
same direction in all media.
normal to surface
incident ray
reflected ray
Like all waves, the speed of light is dependent on the medium through
which it is traveling. When light moves from one medium into another
Θ,
01
Medium 1
(for example, from air to glass), the direction of propagation of light in the
second medium changes. This phenomenon is known as the refraction
Medium 2
of light. Refraction is therefore the bending of light as it moves from one
Θ₂
optical medium to another.
refracted ray
Figure 6.9 Ray showing the
Glass, water, ice, diamonds and quartz are all examples of transparent
refraction of light.
media through which light can pass. The speed of light in each of these
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
193
materials is different. The speed of light in water, for instance, is less than
the speed of light in air; the speed of light in glass is less than the speed
of light in water. When light moves from a material in which its speed is
higher to a material in which its speed is lower, such as from air to glass,
the ray is bent toward the normal, as shown in Figure 6.10 (a). On the other
hand, if the ray moves from a material in which its speed is lower to one in
which its speed is higher, as in Figure 6.10 (b), the ray is bent away from
the normal. If the incident ray of light is parallel to the normal, then no
refraction (bending) occurs in either case.
Normal
Normal
Key Concept
Θ₁ > Θ₂
Θ₁ < Θ₂
Refraction is
v₁
Θ₁
v₁
Θ₁
the bending of
light as it travels
Air
Glass
from one medium
Glass
Air
V₂ > v₁
to another.
V₂ < v₁
V₂
Θ₂
Θ₂
V₂
JE
Refraction oc-
curs when light's
Figure 6.10 Bending of a light ray (a) toward the normal and (b) away
velocity changes.
from the normal.
The following are the laws of refraction of light:
The incident ray, the refracted ray, and the normal to the interface of
Exercise 6.12
two transparent media at the point of incidence all lie in the same
Explain why light
plane.
bends when it
passes from one
The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the
medium to an-
angle of refraction is constant. This law is also known as Snell's law
other.
of refraction. If Θ₁ is the angle of incidence and Θ₂ is the angle of
refraction as shown in Figure 6.11, then,
sin Θ₁
= constant
(6.2)
sin Θ₂
This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first. Let us study refractive index in some detail.
194
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
The Refractive Index
Exercise 6.13
The speed of light and the degree of bending of the light depend on the
Why does light
refractive index of the material through which the light passes. You can
travel faster
think of the refractive index as a measure of how difficult it is for light to
through air than
get through a material.
water?
Consider a ray of light traveling from medium 1 into medium 2, as shown
in Figure 6.11.
Θ₁
Medium 1
n₁,V₁
n₂,V₂
Medium 2
Θ₂
Figure 6.11 Ray showing the refraction of light between different
medium.
Let v₁ be the speed of light in medium 1, and v₂ be the speed of light in
medium 2. The refractive index of medium 2 with respect to medium 1
is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium 1 and the speed of
light in medium 2. This is usually represented by the symbol n₂₁ which is
expressed in an equation as:
n₂₁ = speed speed of of light light in in medium medium 2 1 = V₂ V₁
(6.3)
By the same argument, the refractive index of medium 1 with respect to
medium 2 is represented as n₁₂ and it is given by
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
195
n₁₂ = speed speed of of light light in in medium medium 2 1 = V₁ V₂
(6.4)
If medium 1 is vacuum or air, then the refractive index of medium 2 is con-
sidered with respect to vacuum. This is called the absolute refractive index
(or simply the refractive index) of the medium. It is simply represented
as n. If c is the speed of light in a vacuum and is the speed of light in the
medium, then, the refractive index of the medium n is given by:
speed of light in vacuum c
Key Concept
n =
=
(6.5)
speed of light in medium V
The absolute
refractive index of
The refractive index of different materials is given in Table 6.1. From the
a material is the
table, you can see that the refractive index of water, nw = 1.33. This means
ratio of the speed
that the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light in water
of light in a vac-
is equal to 1.33.
uum to its speed
in the medium.
Table 6.1 Absolute refractive index of some material mediums
Material medium
Refractive index
Material medium
Refractive index
Air
1.0003
Canada Balsam
1.53
Ice
1.31
Water
1.33
Rock salt
1.54
Alcohol
1.36
Kerosene
1.44
Carbon disulphide
1.63
Fused quartz
1.46
Dense flint glass
1.65
Turpentine oil
1.47
Ruby
1.71
Benzene
1.5
Sapphire
1.77
Crown glass
1.52
Diamond
2.42
In Figure 6.11 above, if a light ray is incident on the surface between these
materials with an angle of incidence Θ₁, the refracted ray passes through
the second medium with an angle of refraction Θ₂. Snell's law which was
discussed above can thus be written as follows:
n₁sinΘ₁=n₂sinΘ₂
(6.6)
196
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
where n₁ = refractive index of material 1, n₂ = refractive index of material 2,
Θ₁ = angle of incidence and Θ₂ = angle of refraction. Remember that angles
of incidence and refraction are measured from the normal, which is an
imaginary line perpendicular to the surface.
Example 6.3
If a light ray with an angle of incidence of 35° passes from water to air, find
the angle of refraction using Snell's Law.
Solution:
As depicted in Table 6.1, the refractive index is 1.33 for water and about 1
for air. You are also given the value of the angle of incidence, i.e., 35°. So
you can use Snell's law to find the value for the angle of refraction.
n₁sin Θ₁ = Θ₂
1.33 X sin 35° = 1 Θ₂
sin Θ₂ = 1.33 X 0.57 = 0.763
Θ₂ = (0.763) = 49.7°
In this example, since the light ray passes from a medium of high refractive
index to a medium of low refractive index, the light ray is bent away from
the normal.
Total internal reflection
Exercise 6.14
What happens to
When light passes from a dense medium (larger index of refraction) to a
the refracted ray
less dense medium (smaller index of refraction), for example, from water
when the angle
to air, the refracted ray bends away from the normal, as in Figure 6.10 (a).
of incidence is
As the angle of incidence increases, the angle of refraction also increases.
increased?
When the angle of incidence reaches a certain value, called the critical
angle Θc, the angle of refraction is 90°. Then, the refracted ray points along
the surface, as shown in Figure 6.12 (b). When the angle of incidence
exceeds the critical angle, as in Figure 6.12 (c), there is no refracted light.
All the incident light is reflected back into the medium from which it came,
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
197
Refracted
O₂
ray
Air (n₂=1)
n₂
Θ₂ = 90°
n₂
Water
n₁
(n₁=1.3)
n₁
Incident
Θ
Θc
Θc
Θ₁
Θc
Incident
ray
Incident
Total
Reflected
ray
internal
ray
ray
reflection
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.12 The critical angle and total internal reflection.
a phenomenon called total internal reflection.
For total internal reflection to take place, the following two conditions
must be satisfied.
Light must travel from an optically denser medium (i.e., a medium
having a high refractive index) to an optically rarer medium (i.e., a
medium having a lower refractive index). It does not occur when
light propagates from a less dense to a denser medium, for example,
from air to water.
The angle of incidence in the denser medium must be greater than
the critical angle.
Now you shall learn how to derive the value of the critical angle for two
given media. The process is fairly simple and involves just the use of Snell's
Law that you have already studied. To recap, Snell's Law states:
n₁sinΘ₁=n₂sinΘ₂
(6.7)
For total internal reflection, you know that the angle of incidence is the
critical angle (i.e., Θ₁ = Θᶜ). You also know that the angle of refraction at
the critical angle is 90° (i.e., Θc = 90° ). You can then write Snell's law as:
n₁sin Θc = n₂ 90°
198
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Solving for Θc gives:
Total internal reflection is a powerful tool since it can be used to confine
light. One of the most common applications of total internal reflection is
in fibre optics. Optical fibres are usually thinner than a human hair. The
construction of a single optical fibre is shown in Figure 6.13. When light
is incident on one end of the fibre at a small angle, it undergoes multiple
total internal reflections along the fibre. The light finally emerges with
undiminished intensity at the other end. Even if the fibre is bent, this
process is not affected.
Cladding
n₂
O2
Cladding
n=1
Core
Core
E
n₂
Cladding
(a) A light in glass fiber pipe
(b) Light emerging from a bundle of glass fibers.
Figure 6.13 Light is guided along a fibre by multiple internal reflec-
tions.
Optical fibres are most common in telecommunications, because informa-
tion can be transported over long distances with minimal loss of data. The
minimized loss of data gives optical fibres' an advantage over conventional
cables. Data is transmitted from one end of the fibre to another in the form
of laser pulses.
Optic fibres are also used in medicine in endoscopes. The main part of
an endoscope is the optical fibre. Endoscopes are used to examine the
inside of a patient's stomach by inserting the endoscope down the patient's
throat. Other medical applications of optical fibres' are in neurosurgery
and the study of the bronchi.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
199
Example 6.4
A particular glass has an index of refraction of n = 1.52. What is the critical
angle for total internal reflection for light leaving the glass and entering air
for which n = 1.00?
Solution:
You are given n₁ = 1.52 and n₂ = 1.00.
Using the expression for Θᶜ,
The Dispersion of Light: Prisms and Rainbows
Before discussing the dispersion of light, let us first go back to the refraction
Exercise 6.15
of light through a prism. The inclined refracting surfaces of a glass prism
How could the
show exciting phenomena. Let us find it out through the following activity.
white light of the
Activity 6.2
sun give us vari-
jer Take a thick sheet of cardboard and make a small hole or narrow
ous colors of the
slit in its middle.
rainbow?
Allow sunlight to fall on the narrow slit. This gives a narrow beam
of white light.
Now, take a glass prism and allow the light from the slit to fall on
one of its faces as shown in Figure 6.14.
Turn the prism slowly until the light that comes out of it appears
on a nearby screen.
Key Concept
What do you observe? You will find a beautiful band of colors.
The prism can
Why does this happen?
split the incident
white light into a
Notice the colors that appear at the two ends of the color band. What is
band of colors.
the sequence of colors that you see on the screen? The various colors seen
are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green, Yellow, Orange and Red as shown in Figure
6.14. The acronym VIBGYOR will help you to remember the sequence of
colors.
200
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Red
Orange
Yellow
White light
Green
Blue
Indigo
Violet
Glass Prism
Figure 6.14 Dispersion of white light by a glass prism.
The band of colored components in a light beam is called its spectrum.
The splitting of light into its component colors is called dispersion. You
have seen that white light is dispersed into its seven color components
by a prism. Why do you have these colors? Different colors of light bend
at different angles with respect to the incident ray, as they pass through
a prism. The red light refracts the least, while the violet light refracts the
most. Thus, the rays of each color emerge along different paths and thus
become distinct. It is the band of distinct colors that you see in a spectrum.
Figure 6.15 Rainbow in the sky.
6.4 Laws of reflection & refraction
201
The rainbow is a familiar example of dispersion, in this case the dispersion
of sunlight. A rainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky after a
rain shower (Figure 6.15). It is caused by the dispersion of sunlight by tiny
water droplets present in the atmosphere. A rainbow is always formed in
a direction opposite to that of the Sun. The water droplets act like small
prisms. They refract and disperse the incident sunlight, then reflect it
internally, and finally refract it again when it comes out of the raindrop.
Due to the dispersion of light and internal reflection, different colors reach
the observer's eye.
Section summary
1. Light rays reflect off surfaces. The incident ray shines in on
the surface and the reflected ray is the one that bounces off
the surface. The surface normal is the perpendicular line to
the surface where the light strikes the surface.
2. The angle of incidence is the angle between the incident ray
and the surface normal, and the angle of reflection is the angle
between the reflected ray and the surface normal.
3. The law of reflection states the angle of incidence is equal to
the angle of reflection and that the incident, the reflected and
the normal lie in the same plane.
4. Specular reflection takes place when parallel rays fall on a
surface and they leave the object as parallel rays.
5. Diffuse reflection takes place when parallel rays are reflected
in different directions.
6. Refraction is the bending of light that occurs because light
travels at different speeds in different materials. It obeys the
laws of refraction.
7. Refractive index is a material property that describes how the
material affects the speed of light traveling through it.
202
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
8. Total internal reflection takes place when light is reflected
back into the medium because the angle of incidence is
greater than the critical angle. The critical angle is the an-
gle of incidence where the angle of reflection is 90°. The light
must shine from a dense to a less dense medium.
9. A prism can be used to split the incident white light into a
band of visible colors.
Review questions
1. A ray of light strikes a surface at 25° to the surface. Draw a ray
diagram showing the incident ray, reflected ray, and surface
normal. Find the angle of reflection.
2. State the law of reflection.
3. Explain how light is reflected from rough and smooth surfaces.
4. State Snell's Law.
5. Describe what is meant by the refractive index of a medium.
6. A ray of light strikes the interface between air and diamond. If
the incident ray makes an angle of 30° with the interface, cal-
culate the angle made by the refracted ray with the interface.
7. A ray of light traveling in air enters obliquely into water. Does
the light ray bend towards the normal or away from the nor-
mal? Why?
8. You are given kerosene, turpentine and water. In which of
these does the light travel fastest? Use the information given
in table 6.1.
9. A ray of light travels from silicon to water. If the ray of light in
the water makes an angle of 69° to the surface normal, what
is the angle of incidence in the silicon?
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
203
10. What are the conditions that must be satisfied for total inter-
nal reflection to occur?
11. Define what is meant by the critical angle when referring to
total internal reflection. Include a ray diagram to explain the
concept.
12. Why a Diamond Sparkles?
13. Will light traveling from diamond to silicon ever undergo total
internal reflection?
14. When white light strikes a prism, which color of light is re-
fracted the most and which is refracted the least?
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
apply the laws of reflection and refraction;
describe image formation as a consequence of reflection and refrac-
tion;
perform calculations based on the law of reflection and refraction;
distinguish between real and virtual images;
Exercise 6.16
Did you glance in
In this section, you shall study about the different types of mirrors and
the mirror before
lenses. You will use the laws of reflection to understand how mirrors form
leaving for school
images while you will use the laws of refraction to understand the images
this morning?
formed by lenses.
Mirror
A mirror is a reflective surface that does not allow the passage of light
and instead bounces it off, thus producing an image. Plane and spherical
204
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
mirrors are the two types of mirrors.
Plane Mirrors
Exercise 6.17
A mirror that has a flat reflective surface is called a plane mirror.
How does a plane
mirror form an
Image formation by a plane mirror
image?
If you place a candle in front of a plane mirror, you will see two candles.
The actual, physical candle is called the object and the picture you see
in the mirror is called the image. The object is the source of the incident
rays. The image is the picture that is formed by the reflected rays. In a
plane mirror, your image looks much the same as it would in a photograph.
In order to understand how a plane mirror forms an image, let us do the
following activity.
Activity 6.3
1. Stand one step away from a large mirror.
2. What do you observe in the mirror? This is called your image.
3. What size is your image? Bigger, smaller or the same size as
your actual size?
4. How far is your image from you? How far is your image from
the mirror?
5. Is your image upright or upside down?
6. Take one step backwards. What does your image do? How far
are you from your image?
7. Lift your left arm. Which arm does your image lift?
What did you notice from the above activity? The formation of an image
by a plane mirror is illustrated in the Figure 6.16. The object is the blue
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
205
arrow, and you locate the image by finding the position where at least two
rays intersect after leaving the same point on the object (arrow head) and
reflecting off the mirror.
Mirror
The rays that originate from the arrow head are labeled A and B, while the
A
A'
reflected rays are labeled A' and B'. Ray A that leaves the arrow head and
B
hits the mirror at an angle of incidence of zero reflects directly back (ray A').
Θ
Ray B hits the mirror at an angle and is reflected at an angle of reflection
Object
Θ
Image
that is equal to the angle of incidence (law of reflection); the reflected ray
B
is labeled B'. Notice that the reflected rays A' and B' do not converge, but
diverge (spread apart after reflection). In this case, the image is found
Figure 6.16 Image formation in
the plane mirror.
by extending the reflected rays back to find the point where they appear
to come from. The point where they intersect is then the location of the
image of the arrow head (shown in yellow), as shown in Figure 6.16. This
type of image is called a virtual image.
Key Concept
Thus, the image of an object in a plane mirror appears to be behind the
The image formed
mirror. You also find that the virtual image is located at the same distance
by a plane mirror
behind the mirror as the object distance. Also the height of the image is
is:
identical to the height of the object and is upright. The image size is the
virtual.
same as the object size and is upright. Although mirrors do not produce
the same dis-
an inverted image, left and right are inverted. The image of a right hand is
tance behind the
a left hand.
mirror as the ob-
ject is in front of
Number of images formed by two plane mirrors inclined to
the mirror.
laterally in-
each other
verted. This
If two plane mirrors are placed inclined to each other at an angle Θ, the
means that the
number of images formed by mirrors is
image is inverted
from side to side.
360° Θ if (360°) is an even integer.
the same size
as the object.
upright.
≈ (360), if Θ is an odd integer.
206
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
For example, 5 images are formed by two mirrors at a 60° angle. Two
mirrors inclined to each other at different angles may provide the same
number of images. Fore example, for any value of Θ between 90° and 120°,
the number of maximum images formed is n = 3. This in turn implies that
if Θ is given, n is unique but if n is given, Θ is not unique.
On the other hand, the number of images seen may be different from the
number of images formed and depends on the position of the observer
relative to the object and mirrors. For instance, if Θ= 120°, the maximum
number of images formed will be 3 but the number of images seen may be
1, 2 or 3 depending on the position of the observer.
Uses of plane mirrors
A plane mirror is used
in looking glasses,
in construction of kaleidoscope, telescope, sextant, and periscope,
for seeing round the corners,
as deflector of light, etc.
Spherical Mirrors
Some mirrors are not flat. A spherical mirror is formed by the inside
(concave) or outside (convex) surfaces of a sphere. Thus, a concave mirror
has a surface that is curved inward, like the bowl of a spoon. Unlike plane
mirrors, concave mirrors cause light rays to come together, or converge. A
convex mirror, on the other hand, has a surface that curves outward, like
the back of a spoon. Convex mirrors cause light waves to spread out, or
diverge. Examples of a concave and a convex mirror are shown in Figure
6.17.
The following are some of the few important terms used to describe spher-
ical mirrors.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
207
Principal axis
Principal axis
P
C
P
F
F
C
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.17 Spherical mirrors.
The center of the sphere, of which the mirror is apart is called the
center of curvature (C) of the mirror and the radius of this sphere
defines its radius of curvature (R).
The middle point P of the reflecting surface of the mirror is called its
pole.
The straight line passing through the center of curvature and the
pole is said to be the principal axis of the mirror.
The circular outline (or periphery) of the mirror is called its aperture.
Aperture is a measure of the size of the mirror.
A beam of light incident on a spherical mirror parallel to the prin-
cipal axis converges to or appears to diverge from a common point
after reflection. This point is known as principal focus (F) of the
mirror.
The distance between the pole and the principal focus gives the focal
length (f) of the mirror.
For spherical mirrors of small apertures, the radius of curvature is
found to be equal to twice the focal length. You put this as R = 2f.
This implies that the principal focus of a spherical mirror lies midway
between the pole and center of curvature.
208
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
1
2
Ray diagrams used to form images by spherical mirrors
4
You can study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by drawing ray
3
diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed in front of a
C
4
spherical mirror. In order to locate the image of an object, any two of the
2
3
following rays can be considered for locating the image.
1
1. Ray striking the pole: A ray of light striking the pole of the mirror at
Figure 6.18 Rays used to form
an angle is reflected back at the same angle on the other side of the
image by concave mirror.
principal axis (Ray number 1 in Figures 6.18 and 6.19).
2
2. Parallel ray: For a concave mirror, the ray parallel to the principal
2
axis is reflected in such a way that after reflection it passes through
3
3
the principal focus (Ray number 2 in Figure 6.18). But for a convex
mirror, the parallel ray is so reflected that it appears to come from
C
4
the principal focus (Ray number 2 in Figure 6.19).
4
3. Ray through center of curvature: A ray passing through the center
Figure 6.19 Rays used to form
of curvature hits the mirror along the direction of the normal to
image by convex mirror.
the mirror at that point and retraces its path after reflection (Ray
number 3 in Figures 6.18 and 6.19).
Exercise 6.18
4. Ray through focus: A ray of light heading towards the focus or inci-
dent on the mirror after passing through the focus returns parallel
How can you lo-
to the principal axis (Ray number 4 in Figures 6.18 and 6.19).
cate the image
formed by a con-
Remember that in all the above cases, the laws of reflection are followed.
cave mirror for
At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that
different positions
the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
of the object? Are
the images real or
virtual? Are they
a) Image formation by a concave mirror
enlarged, dimin-
ished or have the
The intersection of at least two of the above four reflected rays gives the
same size?
position of the image of the object. Thus, any two of the above rays can be
considered for locating the image. Using the above rules of ray diagrams,
the image formed for the different positions of an object is given in Figure
6.20.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
209
ImageF
P
P
C
F
Object
C
Object
Object at infinity
Object beyond C
Object
Object
€
P
C
F
Image
F
Image
Object at C
Object between F and P
Object
Object
C.
Image
C
P
F
Object between C and F
Object at F
Figure 6.20 Formation of an image by a concave mirror.
Table 6.2 Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the
object
Position of the
Position of the
Size of the im-
Nature of the im-
object
image
age
age
At infinity
At the focus F
Highly
dimin-
Real and inverted
ished,
point-
sized
Beyond C
Between F and
Diminished
Real and inverted
C
At C
At C
Same size
Real and inverted
Between C and
Beyond C
Enlarged
Real and inverted
F
At F
At infinity
Highly enlarged
Real and inverted
Between P and
Behind the mir-
Enlarged
Virtual and erect
F
ror
210
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Activity 6.4
Draw neat ray diagrams for each position of the object shown
in Figure 6.20.
You may choose any two of the rays mentioned in the previous
Key Concept
sub section for locating the image.
JV
The proper-
ties of the image
Compare your diagram with those given in Figure 6.20.
produced by a
Describe the nature, position, and relative size of the image
concave mirror
formed in each case.
depend on the
location of the
Tabulate the results in a convenient format.
object.
Uses of concave mirrors
Exercise 6.19
Explain why
Concave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights and vehicles
concave mir-
headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are often used as
rors are used
shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The dentists use concave
in flash lights
mirrors to see large images of the teeth of their patients. Large concave
and automobile
mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce heat in solar furnaces.
headlights.
b) Image formation by convex mirror
You studied the formation of the image using a concave mirror. Now you
shall study the formation of images by a convex mirror. Let us first illustrate
this using an activity.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
211
Activity 6.5
Take a convex mirror. Hold it in one hand.
Hold a pencil in the upright position in the other hand.
Observe the image of the pencil in the mirror. Is the image
erect or inverted? Is it diminished or enlarged?
Move the pencil away from the mirror slowly. Does the image
become smaller or larger?
Repeat this activity carefully. State whether the image will
move closer to or farther away from the focus as the object is
moved away from the mirror.
What did you noticed from this activity? Consider two positions of the
object when studying the image formed by a convex mirror. The first
position is when the object is at infinity and the second is when the object
is at a finite distance from the mirror. The ray diagrams for the formation
of an image by a convex mirror for these two positions of the object are
shown in Figure 6.21 (a) and (b), respectively. The results are summarized
in table 6.3.
P
F
C
Object between
P
Image
infinity and the pole
F
C
Object at
infinity
Figure 6.21 Formation of an image by a convex mirror.
212
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Table 6.3 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex
mirror
Position of the object
Position of the image
Size of the image
Nature of the image
At infinity
At the focus F, behind
Highly
dimin-
Virtual and erect
the mirror
ished,
point-
sized
Between infinity and Between P and F, be- Diminished
Virtual and erect
the pole P of the mir-
hind the mirror
ror
Uses of convex mirrors
Convex mirrors are commonly used as rear-view (wing) mirrors in vehicles.
These mirrors are fitted on the sides of the vehicle enabling the driver to
see traffic behind him or her to facilitate safe driving. Convex mirrors are
preferred because they always give an erect, though diminished, image.
Also, they have a wider field of view as they are curved outwards. Thus,
convex mirrors enable the driver to view a much larger area than would be
possible with a plane mirror.
Mirror Formula and Magnification
In spherical mirrors, the distance of the object from its pole is called the
object distance (u). The distance of the image from the pole of the mirror
is called the image distance (v). You already know that the distance of the
principal focus from the pole is called the focal length (f).
There is a relationship between these three quantities given by the mirror
formula, which is expressed as
v+1=1
(6.8)
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
213
R
Mirror
h
C
Image
Object
F
h'
V
u
Figure 6.22 u, v, f, h and h' for a mirror.
On the other hand, the magnification produced by a spherical mirror gives
the relative extent to which the image of an object is magnified with respect
to the object's size. Thus, the magnification m produced by a spherical
mirror is given by
m = height height of ofthe the image object (h') (h) = h' h
(6.9)
The magnification m is also related to the object distance (u) and image
distance (v). It can be expressed as
Magnification (m) =-=-- h' h u V
(6.10)
These formulas are valid for spherical mirrors in all positions of the object.
While substituting the numerical values for u, v, f, and R in the mirror
formula for solving problems, you must use the sign convention indicated
in Table 6.4.
214
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Table 6.4 Sign conventions for spherical mirrors
Quantity
Positive when
Negative when
Object location, u
object is in front of mirror
object is in back of
(real object)
mirror (virtual object)
Image location, v
image is in front of mirror
image is in back of
(real image)
mirror (virtual image)
Image height, h'
image is upright
image is inverted
Focal length, f
mirror is concave
mirror is convex
Magnification, m
image is upright
image is inverted
Example 6.5
A convex mirror used for rear-view on an automobile has a radius of cur-
vature of 3.00 T. If a bus is located at 5.00 m from this mirror, find the
position, nature and size of the image.
Solution:
You are given radius of curvature, R = 3.00 m and object distance, u=+ =
5.00 m; The focal length is f = R/21 = 3.00 2 = - 1.50m (as the principal focus
of a convex mirror is behind the mirror).
You want to find the value for the image distance, v and height of the image,
h'.
Using the mirror equation,
1 1 1
v+u f'
1
1
1
1
1
-5.00
-
1.50
=
=
=
v
ƒ
u
1.50
+5.00
7.50
.`. v = -7.50 6.50 = -1.15m
Therefore, the image is 1.15 m at the back of the mirror.
a (-1.15m)
The image is thus virtual, erect and smaller in size by a factor of 0.23.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
215
Example 6.6
An object, 6.0 cm in size, is placed at 25.0 cm in front of a concave mirror
of 15.0 cm focal length. At what distance from the mirror should a screen
be placed in order to obtain a sharp image? Determine the nature and the
size of the image.
Solution:
The given quantities are object size, h = + 6.0 cm, object distance, и = + 25.0
cm and focal length, and f = + 15.0 cT.
You are asked to find the image distance, v and image size, h'.
Since 1+1=1,
1
1
1
1
1
5.00 - 3.00
=
=
=
v ƒ u 15.0 25.0 75
.`. v = 37.5 m
The screen should be placed at 37.5 cm in front of the mirror. The image is
real. Also,
Magnification
Solving for h' gives
h' = u = (37.5 (25.0cm) (6.0 cm) = 6.0 cm
Thus, the height of the image is - 6.0 cT. The negative sign implies that the
image is inverted and enlarged.
Lenses
Exercise 6.20
If you have ever used a microscope, telescope, binoculars, or a camera,
What is a lens?
you have worked with one or more lenses. A lens is a curved piece of
How does it bend
transparent material that is smooth and regularly shaped so that when
light rays?
light strikes it, the light refracts in a predictable and useful way.
A transparent material bound by two surfaces of which one or both are
spherical forms a lens. This means that a lens is bound by at least one
spherical surface. In such lenses, the other surface would be plane. A lens
216
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Exercise 6.21
Have you ever
may have two spherical surfaces bulging outwards. Such a lens is called
touched the
a double convex lens. It is simply called a convex lens. It is thicker at the
surface of a mag-
middle as compared to the edges. Convex lenses converge light rays, as
nifying glass with
shown in Figure 6.23 (a). Hence, convex lenses are also called converging
your hand? Is
lenses. Similarly, a double concave lens is bounded by two inwardly curved
it plane surface
spherical surfaces. It is thicker in the edges than at the middle. Such lenses
or curved? Is it
diverge light rays as shown in Figure 6.23 (b) and are also called diverging
thicker in the
lenses. A double concave lens is simply called a concave lens.
middle or at the
edges?
F
F
Axis
F
Key Concept
f
Concave lenses,
f
cause light to di-
Figure 6.23 (a) Converging action of a convex lens, (b) diverging
verge, and convex
action of a concave lens.
lenses cause light
A lens, either a convex lens or a concave lens, has two spherical surfaces.
to converge.
Each of these surfaces forms a part of a sphere. The centers of these
spheres are called the centers of curvature (C) of the lens. Since there
are two centers of curvature, you may represent them as C₁ and C₂. An
imaginary straight line passing through the two centers of curvature of
a lens is called its principal axis. The central point of a lens is its optical
Exercise 6.22
center (O). A ray of light through the optical center of a lens passes without
What happens
suffering any deviation. The effective diameter of the circular outline of a
when parallel
spherical lens is called its aperture.
rays of light are
incident on a
In order to look for the phenomenon that happens when parallel rays of
lens?
light are incident on a lens, try to do the following activity.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
217
Activity 6.6
Hold a convex lens in your hand. Direct it towards the Sun.
Focus the light from the Sun on a sheet of paper. Obtain a
sharp bright image of the Sun.
Hold the paper and the lens in the same position for a while.
Keep observing the paper. What happened? Why?
Caution: Do not look directly at the Sun or through a lens while
performing this activity as it may cause damage to your eyes.
The paper begins to burn producing a smoke. It may even catch fire after a
while. Why does this happen? The light from the Sun constitutes parallel
rays of light. These rays were converged by the lens at the sharp bright
spot formed on the paper. This caused the paper to burn.
In Figure 6.23 (a), several rays of light traveling parallel to the principal
axis are falling on a convex lens. These rays, after refraction from the lens,
are converging to a point on the principal axis. This point on the principal
axis is called the principal focus of the lens. On the other hand, in Figure
6.23 (b), several rays of light parallel to the principal axis are falling on a
concave lens. These rays, after refraction from the lens, are appearing to
diverge from a point on the principal axis. This point on the principal axis
is called the principal focus of the concave lens.
If you pass parallel rays from the opposite surface of the lens, you get
another principal focus on the opposite side. The letter F is usually used to
represent the principal focus. However, a lens has two principal foci. They
are represented by F₁ and F₂. The distance of the principal focus from the
optical center of a lens is called its focal length (f).
218
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Ray diagrams used to form image in lenses
You can represent image formation by lenses using ray diagrams. Ray
diagrams will also help us to study the nature, position and relative size of
the image formed by lenses. For drawing ray diagrams in lenses, like those
of spherical mirrors, you consider any two of the following rays:
1. A ray of light from the object, parallel to the principal axis, after
refraction from a convex lens, passes through the principal focus on
the other side of the lens as shown in Figure 6.24 (a). In the case of
a concave lens, the ray appears to diverge from the principal focus
located on the same side of the lens as shown in Figure 6.24 (b).
2. A ray of light passing through a principal focus, after refraction from
a convex lens, will emerge parallel to the principal axis. This is shown
in Figure 6.24 (a). A ray of light appearing to meet at the principal
focus of a concave lens, after refraction, will emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is shown in Figure 6.24 (b).
3. A ray of light passing through the optical center of a lens will emerge
without any deviation. This is illustrated in Figure 6.24 (a) and Figure
6.24 (b).
1
3
Image
Object
F
2
F
(a)
1
2
3
Object
Image
F
(b)
Figure 6.24 Ray diagram for (a) Convex lens (b) Concave lens.
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
219
(a) Image formation by convex lenses
Lenses form images by refracting light. Let us study this for a convex lens
Exercise 6.23
first by doing the following activity.
How do lenses
form images?
Activity 6.7
What is their
Take a convex lens of some focal length.
nature?
Draw five parallel straight lines, using chalk, on a long table
such that the distance between the successive lines is equal
to the focal length of the lens.
Place the lens on a lens stand. Place it on the central line such
that the optical center of the lens lies just over the line.
The two lines on either side of the lens correspond to F and
2F of the lens, respectively. Mark them with the appropriate
letters, for example, 2F₁, F₁, F₂ and 2F₂ respectively.
Place a burning candle, far beyond 2F₁ to the left. Obtain a
clear sharp image on the opposite side of the lens on a screen.
Note down the nature, position and relative size of the image.
Repeat this activity by placing the object just behind 2F₁, be-
tween F₁ and 2F₁ at F₁, between F₁ and O. Note down and
tabulate your observations.
What did you notice? Have you noticed that the nature, position, and
relative size of the image depend on the location of the object? The ray
diagrams for the image formation in a convex lens for a few positions of the
object are shown in Figure 6.25. Table 6.5 summarizes the nature, position,
and relative size of the image formed by a convex lens for various positions
of the object.
220
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Object
F2
2F₂
2F₁
F₁
o
F2
2F₂
2F₁
F₁
Image
Object
Object at infinity
Object beyond 2F
Object
O
F2
Object
2F₂
O
F₂
2F₂
2F₁
F1
2F₁
F₁
Image
Image
Object between F and 2F
Object at 2F
Object
O
Object
2F₁
F1
2F2
2F₁
F1
F2
2F₂
Object at F
Object between 0 and F
Figure 6.25 The position, size and nature of the image formed by a convex lens
for various positions of the object.
Table 6.5 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex
lens for various positions of the object
Position of the object
Position of the image
Size of the image
Nature of the image
At infinity
At the focus F₂
Highly
dimin-
Real and inverted
ished,
point-
sized
Beyond 2F₁
Between F₂ and 2F₂
Diminished
Real and inverted
At 2F₂
At 2F₂
Same size
Real and inverted
Between F₁ and 2F₁
Beyond 2F₂
Enlarged
Real and inverted
At Focus F₁
At infinity
Infinitely large
Real and inverted
or Highly en-
larged
Between focus F₁
On the same side of
Enlarged
Virtual and erect
and optical center O
the lens as the object
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
221
(b) Image formation by concave lenses
Let us now do an activity to study the nature, position and relative size of
the image formed by a concave lens.
Activity 6.8
Take a concave lens. Place it on a lens stand.
Place a burning candle on one side of the lens.
Look through the lens from the other side and observe the
image. Try to get the image on a screen, if possible. If not,
observe the image directly through the lens.
Note down the nature, relative size and approximate position
of the image.
Move the candle away from the lens. Note the change in the
size of the image. What happens to the size of the image when
the candle is placed too far away from the lens?
What conclusions can you draw from this activity? A concave lens will
always give a virtual, erect, and diminished image, irrespective of the
position of the object. The ray diagrams representing the image formation
in a concave lens for various positions of the object are shown in Figure
6.26.
2F,
F1
0
2F,
object
F1
image
0
Figure 6.26 Image formed by a concave lens.
The summary of the above activity is given in table 6.6 below.
222
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Table 6.6 Nature, position, and relative size of the image formed by a concave
lens for various positions of the object
Position of the object
Position of the image
Size of the image
Nature of the image
At infinity
At focus F₁
Highly
dimin-
Virtual and erect
ished, point-sized
Between infinity and
Between focus F₁,
Diminished
Virtual and erect
optical center O of
and optical center O
the lens
Lens formula and magnification
As there is an equation for spherical mirrors, there is also a similar equation
for lenses. This equation gives the relationship between object distance
(u), image distance (v) and the focal length (f). It is expressed as
и 1 + v 1 = f 1
(6.11)
h
O
Image
Object
F
h'
+
f
V
u
Figure 6.27 u, v and f in a lens.
The magnification produced by a lens, similar to that for spherical mirrors,
is defined as the ratio of the height of the image (h) and the height of the
object (h). Thus, the magnification (m) produced by the lens is given by,
m=h' m h
(6.12)
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
223
Table 6.7 Sign conventions for lenses
Quantity
Positive when
Negative when
Object location, и
object is in front of lens
object is in back of
(real object)
lens (virtual object)
Image location, v
image is in back of lens
image is in front of
(real image)
lens (virtual image)
Image height, h'
image is upright
image is inverted
Focal length, f
converging lens
diverging lens
R₁ and R₂
center of curvature is in
center of curvature is
back of lens
in front of lens
The magnification produced by a lens is also related to the object distance
u, and the image distance v. This relationship is given by
(6.13)
The above lens and magnification formula are general and is applicable to
any spherical lens in any situations. While putting numerical values for
solving problems relating to lenses into the above equations, you need to
be careful to use the sign conventions indicated in table 6.7.
Example 6.7
A concave lens has a focal length of 15 cT. At what distance from the lens
should the object be placed so that it forms an image at 10 cm from the
lens? Also, find the magnification produced by the lens.
Solution:
In this example, image distance v= 10 cm and focal length f = 15 cT.
You want to find the value for the object distance, и and magnification, m.
Since 1+1=1,
111
1
1
-2+3
1
=
=
=
=
u f v -15.0 -10.0 30 30
v = 30 cm
224
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Thus, the object distance is 30 cT.
Magnification +0.33
The positive sign shows that the image is erect and virtual. The image is
one-third the size of the object.
Thus, a concave lens always forms a virtual, erect image on the same side
of the object.
Example 6.8
A 2.0 cm tall object is placed perpendicular to the principal axis of a convex
lens of 10 cm focal length. The distance of the object from the lens is 15 cT.
Find the nature, position, and size of the image. Also find its magnification.
Solution:
You are given height of the object, h = + 2.0 cm, focal length, f = + 10 cm
and object distance, and u=+ 15 cT.
The required quantity is the value for the image distance, v and height of
the image, h'.
Since
111
v u =
1111 13-2
=
=
=
v f u 10 15 30
.`. v = +30cm
The positive sign of v shows that the image is formed at a distance of 30 cm
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
225
on the other side of the optical center. The image is real and inverted.
Magnification = и = (2) (30) (15) +30 = -6.0cm
Thus, the magnification is
The negative signs of m and h' show that the image formed is inverted and
real. It is formed below the principal axis. Thus, a real, inverted image, 4
cm tall is formed at a distance of 30 cm on the other side of the lens. The
image is two times enlarged.
Section summary
The image formed by a plane mirror is virtual, erect and of
the same size as that of the object such that the object and its
image appear to be equidistant from the mirror.
A convex mirror is a diverging mirror in which the reflective
surface bulges towards the light source. The image formed
by convex mirrors is smaller than the object but gets larger as
they approach the mirror.
A concave mirror has a reflective surface that is curved inward
and away from the light source. The image formed by a con-
cave mirror shows different image types depending on the
distance between the object and the mirror.
The lens which is thick in the middle and thin at the edges
is called a convex lens whereas the lens which is thin in the
middle and thick at the edges is called a concave lens.
Convex lens is also known as a converging lens as it converges
the parallel rays of light at a point after refraction.
226
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Concave lens is also known as diverging lens as it diverges the
parallel beam of light after refraction.
The type of image formed by a convex lens depends on the
position of the object that can be placed at different positions
in front of the lens. However, a concave lens always produces
a virtual, erect and diminished images.
The mirror as well as lens equation expresses the quantitative
relationship between the object distance, the image distance
and the focal length.
Review questions
1. List the five properties of an image created by reflection from
a plane mirror.
2. If a stool 0.5 m high is placed 2 m in front of a plane mirror,
how far behind the plane mirror will the image be and how
high will the image be?
3. Find the number of images formed by an object placed be-
tween two plane mirrors inclined at 30°.
4. Define the principal focus of a concave mirror.
5. The radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is 20 cm. What is
its focal length?
6. Name a mirror that can give an erect and enlarged image of
an object.
7. Why is a convex mirror preferred as a rear-view mirror in
automobiles?
8. So far, you have studied the image formation by a plane mirror,
a concave mirror, and a convex mirror. Which of these mirrors
will give the full image of a large object?
6.5 Mirrors and lenses
227
9. An object 1 cm high is placed 4 cm from a concave mirror. If
the focal length of the mirror is 2 cT, find the position and
size of the image. Is the image real or virtual? Calculate the
magnification.
10. An object 2 cm high is placed 4 cm from a convex mirror. If
the focal length of the mirror is 4 cT, find the position and
size of the image. Is the image real or virtual? Calculate the
magnification.
11. A concave mirror produces a three times magnified (enlarged)
real image of an object placed 10 cm in front of it. Where is
the image located?
12. In each case, state whether a real or virtual image is formed
by a convex lens:
(a) Much further than 2F₁
(b) Just further than 2F₁
(c) At 2F₁
(d) Between 2F₁ and F₁
(e) At F₁
(f) Between F₁ and O.
13. An object stands 50 mm away a convex lens (focal length 40
mm). Use ray diagrams to determine the position of the image.
Is it enlarged or minimized; upright or inverted?
14. An object 6 cm high is 10 cm from a concave lens. The image
formed is 3 cm high. Find the focal length of the lens and the
distance of the image from the lens.
15. An object is 20 cm from a concave lens. The virtual image
formed is three times smaller than the object. Find the focal
length of the lens.
228
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
describe the human eye in relation to lenses;
list simple optical instrument in use in your locality;
explain the physics behind the operation of optical instruments.
The human eye
Exercise 6.24
How does a hu-
The human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs. It
enables us to see the wonderful world and the colors around us. Of all the
man eye form an
image?
sense organs, the human eye is the most significant one, as it enables us to
see the beautiful, colorful world around us.
Sclera
Retina
Iris
Optic nerve
Cornea
Pupil
Macula
Lens
Ciliary body
Retinal blood
and muscle
vessels
Conjunctiva
Vitreous body
Figure 6.28 Basic elements of human eye.
The human eye is like a camera. Its lens system forms an image on a
light-sensitive screen called the retina. Light enters the eye through a thin
membrane called the cornea. It forms the transparent bulge on the front
surface of the eyeball, as shown in Figure 6.28.
The eyeball is approximately spherical in shape with a diameter of about
2.3 cT. Most of the refraction of the light rays entering the eye occurs at
the outer surface of the cornea. The crystalline lens merely provides the
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
229
finer adjustment of the focal length required to focus objects at different
Key Concept
distances on the retina. You find a structure called the iris behind the
The human
cornea. Iris is a dark muscular diaphragm that controls the size of the
eye consists of a
pupil. The pupil regulates and controls the amount of light entering the
lens system that
eye. The eye lens forms an inverted real image of the object on the retina.
focuses images
The retina is a delicate membrane with an enormous number of light-
on the retina,
sensitive cells. The light-sensitive cells get activated upon illumination
where the optic
and generate electrical signals. These signals are sent to the brain via the
nerve transfers
optic nerves. The brain interprets these signals, and, finally, processes the
the messages to
information so that you perceive objects as they are.
the brain.
Power of accommodation
Exercise 6.25
The eye lens is composed of a fibrous, jelly-like material. The ciliary mus-
If you try to read
cles can modify to some extent its curvatures. The change in the curvature
a printed page
of the eye lens can thus change its focal length. When the muscles are re-
by holding it very
laxed, the lens becomes thin. Thus, its focal length increases. This enables
close to your eyes,
us to see distant objects clearly. When you are looking at objects closer
what happens to
to the eye, the ciliary muscles contract. This increases the curvature of
the image you
see?
the eye lens. The eye's lens then becomes thicker. Consequently, the focal
length of the eye lens decreases. This enables us to see nearby objects
Key Concept
clearly. The ability of the eye's lens to adjust its focal length is called accom-
The minimum
modation. However, the focal length of the eye's lens cannot be decreased
distance, at which
below a certain minimum limit.
objects can be
seen most clearly
If you try to read a printed page by holding it very close to your eyes, you
without strain, is
may see the image being blurred or feel strain in the eye. To see an object
called the least
comfortably and distinctly, you must hold it at about 25 cm from the eyes.
distance of dis-
For a young adult with normal vision, the near point is about 25 cT. The
tinct vision. It is
farthest point up to which the eye can see objects clearly is called the far
also called the
point of the eye. It is infinity for a normal eye. You may note here that a
near point of the
normal eye can see objects clearly that are between 25 cm and infinity.
eye.
230
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Defects of vision and their correction
Exercise 6.26
Sometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation. In
Have you encoun-
such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and comfort-
tered peoples who
ably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects of the eye.
have defects in
There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision.
their vision?
(a) Myopia/near-sightedness
A person with myopia can see nearby objects clearly but cannot see distant
objects distinctly. A person with this defect has the far point nearer than
infinity. Such a person may see clearly up to a distance of a few meters.
In a myopic eye, the image of a distant object is formed in front of the
retina and not at the retina itself (Figure 6.29 (a)) . This defect may arise
due to (i) excessive curvature of the eye lens, or (ii) elongation of the
eyeball. This defect can be corrected by using a concave lens of suitable
power. A concave lens of suitable power will bring the image back on to
the retina. This is illustrated in Figure 6.29 (b).
Relaxed Lens
Object
Far point
Image in
(a)
Front of
retina
Diverting lens
Object
Far point
Image
(b)
at retina
Figure 6.29 (a) Short-sightedness. (b) Short-sightedness corrected by
diverging lens.
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
231
(b) Hypermetropia/far-sightedness
A person with hypermetropia can see distant objects clearly but cannot see
nearby objects distinctly. The near point, for the person, is farther away
from the normal near point (25 cm). Such a person has to keep reading
material much beyond 25 cm from the eye for comfortable reading. This is
because the light rays from a close by object are focused at a point behind
the retina, as shown in Figure 6.30 (a). This defect arises either because (i)
the focal length of the eye lens is too long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too
small. This defect can be corrected by using a convex lens of appropriate
power. Eye glasses with converging lenses provide the additional focusing
power required for forming the image on the retina. This is illustrated in
Figure 6.30 (b).
Contracted Muscle
Key Concept
Myopia, hy-
permetropia and
presbyopia are
Near
Object
Point
(a)
Image behind
defects of vision.
retina
They can be cor-
Converging
rected with an
lens
appropriate lens.
Near
Object
Image
Point
(b)
at retina
Relaxed Lens
Figure 6.30 (a)Long-sightedness. (b) Long-sightedness corrected by
converging lens.
(c) Presbyopia
The power in accommodation of the eye usually decreases with age. For
most people, the near point gradually recedes. Without corrective eye-
glasses, they have difficulty seeing nearby objects comfortably and clearly.
This defect is called presbyopia. It arises due to the gradual weakening of
232
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
the ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the eye lens. Sometimes,
a person may suffer from both myopia and hypermetropia. Such people
often require bi-focal lenses. A common type of bi-focal lens consists of
both concave and convex lenses. The upper portion consists of a concave
lens. It facilitates distant vision. The lower part is a convex lens. It facili-
tates near vision. Nowadays, it is possible to correct the refractive defects
with contact lenses or through surgery.
Do you know that your eyes can live even after our death? By donating
your eyes after you die, you can light the life of a blind person.
Optical instruments
Activity 6.9
A number of optical devices and instruments have been designed utilizing
the reflecting and refracting properties of mirrors and lenses. Periscope,
In group, please
kaleidoscope, binoculars, camera, telescopes, and microscopes are some
try to list the dif-
examples of optical devices and instruments that are in common use. Our
ferent types of
eye is, of course, one of the most important optical devices that the nature
optical instru-
has endowed us with. You have already studied the human eye. You now
ments that you
go on to describe the principles of operation of the microscope and the
know.
telescope.
Simple microscope
Exercise 6.27
A simple magnifier or microscope is a converging lens of small focal length
(Figure 6.31). In order to use such a lens as a microscope, the lens is held
What do you
near the object, one focal length away or less, and the eye is positioned
think is a simple
close to the lens on the other side. The idea is to get an erect, magnified
microscope?
and virtual image of the object at a distance so that it can be viewed
comfortably, i.e., at 25 cm or more.
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
233
Key Concept
The image
formed by a mag-
nifying glass is
erect, magnified
and virtual.
Activity 6.10
In groups, try to
discuss how a
Figure 6.31 A simple microscope.
compound micro-
scope magnifies
Compound microscope
objects. Infer
how the image
A simple microscope has a limited maximum magnification for realistic
produced by a
focal lengths. For much larger magnifications, one has to use two lenses,
compound mi-
one compounding the effect of the other. This is known as a compound
croscope would
microscope.
be different if
the eyepiece lens
A compound microscope has, therefore, more than one objective lens,
were removed
from the micro-
each providing a different magnification. Figure 6.32 shows how a micro-
scope forms an image. An object, such as an insect, is placed close to a
scope.
convex lens called the objective lens. This lens produces an enlarged im-
Key Concept
age inside the microscope tube. The light rays from that image then pass
through a second convex lens called the eyepiece lens. This lens further
The objec-
tive lens in a
magnifies the image formed by the objective lens. By using two lenses, a
compound micro-
much larger image is formed than a single lens can produce.
scope forms an
enlarged image,
which is then
magnified by the
eyepiece lens.
234
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Telescopes
Exercise 6.28
Have you heard
Just as microscopes are used to magnify very small objects, telescopes are
about the func-
used to examine objects that are very far away. Much of what is known
tions of a tele-
about the Moon, the Solar system and the distant universe has come from
scope?
images and other information gathered by telescopes.
Two fundamentally different types of telescopes exist. The first type, the
refracting telescope, uses a combination of lenses to form an image. The
simplest refracting telescopes use two convex lenses to form an image of
a distant object. Just as in a compound microscope, light passes through
an objective lens that forms an image. That image is then magnified by
an eyepiece, as shown in Figure 6.33. Like the compound microscope,
the refracting telescope shown has an objective and an eyepiece. The two
Exercise 6.29
lenses are arranged so that the objective forms a real, inverted image of a
What do you think
are the differ-
EYEPIECE
COARSE
ADJUSTMENT
ences between
a telescope and
a compound mi-
BODY TUBE
croscope? Would
you please try
FINE
to think of how
ADJUSTMENT
telescopes make
distant objects
OBJECTIVE
visible?
LENS
STAGE
MIRROR
JOINT
Figure 6.32 A compound microscope.
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
235
distant object very near the focal point of the eyepiece.
An important difference between a telescope and a microscope is the size
Key Concept
of the objective lens. The main purpose of a telescope is not to magnify an
It
A refracting
image. A telescope's main purpose is to gather as much light as possible
telescope is made
from distant objects. The larger an objective lens is, the more light that
from an objec-
can enter it. This makes images of far away objects look brighter and more
tive lens and an
detailed when they are magnified by the eyepiece. With a large enough
eyepiece. The ob-
objective lens, it is possible to see stars and galaxies that are many trillions
jective lens forms
of kilometers away. Figure 6.33 shows a refracting telescope.
an image that is
magnified by the
The second type, the reflecting telescope, can be made much larger than
eyepiece.
refracting telescopes. Reflecting telescopes have a concave mirror instead
of a concave objective lens to gather the light from distant objects. As
shown in Figure 6.34, the large concave mirror focuses light onto a sec-
ondary mirror that directs it to the eyepiece, which magnifies the image.
Exercise 6.30
Explain why the
objective lens
of a refracting
telescope is much
larger than the
objective lens
of a compound
microscope.
Figure 6.33 Refracting telescope.
236
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
Exercise 6.31
Explain why the
concave mirror
of a reflecting
telescope can be
made much larger
than the objective
Figure 6.34 Reflecting telescopes gather light by using a concave
mirror.
lens of a refracting
Because only the one reflecting surface on the mirror needs to be made
telescope.
carefully and kept clean, telescope mirrors are less expensive to make and
maintain than lenses of a similar size. Also, mirrors can be supported not
only at their edges but also on their backsides. They can be made much
larger without sagging under their own weight.
Key Concept:
Section summary
Light entering
The simple defects of vision, i.e., long and short sight, are
the telescope
attributed to the inability of the eye lens to focus images of
tube is reflected
near and far objects on the retina. Simple lenses enable these
by a concave
defects to be corrected.
mirror onto the
secondary mirror.
The function of optical instruments is to extend the perfor-
An eyepiece is
mance of the human eye in a variety of ways.
used to magnify
The magnifying glass creates an enlarged, erect and virtual
the image formed
image of an object placed closer to the lens than the focal
by the concave
mirror.
point.
The compound microscope is an instrument for looking at
very small objects by using an objective to produce an en-
larged real intermediate image which is then further enlarged
6.6 Human eye and optical instruments
237
by an eyepiece used as a magnifying glass.
The telescope is an instrument for looking at distant objects.
A large objective lens (in the refracting telescope) or concave
mirror (in the reflecting telescope) collects light from the ob-
ject to form a reduced real intermediate image at the focus.
As in the microscope, this image is enlarged by an eyepiece
acting as a magnifying glass.
Review questions
1. What is meant by the power of accommodation of the eye?
2. A person with a myopic eye cannot see objects beyond 1.2
m clearly. What should be the type of corrective lens used to
restore proper vision?
3. What is the far and near points of the human eye with normal
vision?
4. A student has difficulty reading the blackboard while sitting
in the last row. What could be the defect the child is suffering
from? How can it be corrected?
5. List other optical instruments that you are familiar with and
discuss how they work.
6. Why is a normal eye not able to clearly see the objects placed
closer than 25 cm?
7. What is the difference between simple and compound micro-
scopes?
8. Distinguish between the refracting and reflecting telescope.
9. A person needs a lens of power -5.5 dioptres for correcting
his distant vision. For correcting his near vision, he needs a
238
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
lens of power +1.5 dioptre. What is the focal length of the lens
required for correcting (i) distant vision, and (ii) near vision?
10. What type of telescope is there in Entoto Observatory center?
What is its purpose?
6.7 Primary colors of light and human vision
Exercise 6.32
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
Which of the col-
list the primary colors of light;
ors of visible light
describe the relation between primary color and human vision.
spectrum are
considered as the
Light travels into the eye to the retina, located on the back of the eye. The
primary colors of
retina is covered with millions of light receptive cells called cones (which
light?
are sensitive to color) and rods (which are more sensitive to intensity).
When these cells detect light, they send signals to the brain. Most people
have three kinds of cone cells, and every color stimulates more than one
cone. Their combined response produces a unique signal for each color,
and millions of different colors can be distinguished this way. These cells,
Sclera
Choroid
Retina
Cornea
Light
Pupil
Lens
Optic nerve
Iris
Cones
and Rods
Ciliary body
Figure 6.35 Rod and cone cells in the retina of the eye detect light
and send signals to the brain.
6.7 Primary colors of light and human vision
239
working in combination with connecting nerve cells, give the brain enough
information to interpret and name colors. You are able to "see" an object
when light from the object enters your eyes and strikes these photorecep-
tors.
Different wavelengths of light are perceived as different colors. For exam-
Key Concept
ple, light with a wavelength of about 400 nm is seen as violet, and light with
Light receptors
a wavelength of about 700 nm is seen as red. However, it is not typical to
within the eye
see light of a single wavelength. You are able to perceive all colors because
transmit mes-
there are three sets of cones in your eyes: one set that is most sensitive to
sages to the brain
red light, another that is most sensitive to green light, and a third that is
which produces
most sensitive to blue light.
the familiar sensa-
tions of color.
The colors of red, green, and blue light are classically considered the pri-
mary colors because they are fundamental to human vision. All other
colors of the visible light spectrum can be produced by properly adding
different combinations of these three colors. Moreover, adding equal
amounts of red, green, and blue light produces white light and, therefore,
these colors are also often described as the primary additive colors.
Key Concept
Section summary
Red, green
Red, green and blue are the primary colors of light.
and blue are the
primary colors.
Rods and cones are the two major types of light-sensing cells
(photoreceptors) in the retina.
Review questions
1. List the three primary colors of light.
2. What are the two types of photoreceptors found in the retina
of the human eye called, and which type is sensitive to colors?
240
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
6.8 Color addition of light
Exercise 6.33
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
What do you think
recognize how additive colors affect the color of light;
is the definition of
add primary colors.
color addition?
The additive color system reproduces colors by adding the primary col-
Yellow
ors of light: red, green, and blue. All the colors that can be produced by
a three-color additive system are combinations of these three primary
Red
Green
colors. When mixed together in various proportions, the additive color
White
primaries of red, green, and blue give us the range of colors that you see.
So red, green and blue are therefore called the additive primary colors.
Magenta
Blue
Cyan
The addition of the primary colors of light can be demonstrated using a
light box. The light box illuminates a screen with the three primary col-
Figure 6.36 The different com-
binations of colors produced by
ors: red, green and blue. The lights are often in the shape of circles. The
the primary colors of light.
result of adding two primary colors of light is easily seen by viewing the
overlap of the two or more circles of primary light. The different combi-
nations of colors produced by red, green and blue are shown in Figure 6.36.
Key Concept
In the areas where two primary colors overlap, a secondary color appears.
Combinations
When overlapped, green and blue create cyan. Blue and red produce
of two of the pri-
magenta. Red and green produce yellow. Thus,
mary colors follow
the rules of addi-
Red + Green = Yellow
tive color mixing
Red+ Blue = Magenta
so as to produce
Blue + Green = Cyan
the secondary
colors of light:
Yellow, magenta and cyan are sometimes referred to as secondary colors
cyan, magenta,
of light since they can be produced by the addition of equal intensities of
and yellow.
two primary colors of light. When added in equal proportions, red, green,
and blue result in white light. The absence of all three colors results in
black.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
241
The addition of these three primary colors of light with varying degrees
of intensity will result in the countless other colors that you are familiar
(or unfamiliar) with. So, all the other colors can be produced by different
combinations of red, green and blue.
Color addition principles have important applications to color television,
color computer monitors and on-stage lighting at the theaters. A digital
projector also works using the additive systems. Each of these applications
involves the mixing or addition of colors of light to produce a desired ap-
pearance.
Section summary
The combination of the three primary colors of light with
equal proportions produce white light.
All the other colors of light can be produced by different com-
binations of red, green and blue.
Review questions
1. What colors did you get when you added red and blue, red
and green, green and blue lights?
2. What type of applications did color addition of light have?
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
Exercise 6.34
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
What do you think
is the definition of
describe color subtraction of light using filters.
color subtraction?
The previous lesson focused on the principle of color addition. In this
section, you will learn about color subtraction. The colors that are ab-
sorbed are 'subtracted' from the reflected light that is seen by the eye. A
black objects absorbs all colors where as a white object reflects all colors.
242
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
A blue objects reflects blue and absorbs all other colors. The primary and
secondary colors of light for the substractive colors are opposite to the
colors addition as shown in Figure 6.37. The following illustrates color
subtraction.
Yellow
Cyan - Blue = (Green + Blue) - Blue = Green
Yellow - Green = (Red + Green) - Green = Red
Red
Green
Magneta - Red = (Red + Blue) - Red = Blue
Black
Magenta
Yellow, magenta and cyan are considered as the subtractive primary colors
Cyan
Blue
while red, green and blue are the secondary subtractive colors. On the
other hand, the complimentary colors are the colors that are absorbed by
the subtractive primaries. Cyan's complement is red; magenta's comple-
Figure 6.37 Color subtraction.
ment is green; and yellow's compliment is blue.
Pigments are substances which give an object its color by absorbing certain
frequencies of light and reflecting other frequencies. For example, a red
pigment absorbs all colors of light except red which it reflects. Paints and
inks contain pigments which give the paints and inks different colors. A
filter is also defined as a substance or device that prevents certain things
from passing through it while allowing certain other things to pass. Color
Key Concept
filters allow only certain colors of light to pass through them by absorbing
all the rest. When white light shines on a red filter, for example, the orange,
It The subtractive
yellow, green, blue, and violet components of the light are absorbed by the
primary colors
filter allowing only the red component of the light to pass through to the
are obtained by
other side of the filter.
subtracting one of
the three additive
primary colors
The following shows the color subtraction of light using filters or pigments.
from white light.
i. Yellow filter (or a pigment) absorbs blue light and transmits red and
green light. Red and green light together are seen as yellow.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
243
red
red
blue
White Light
Yellow Light
green
green
Yellow filter
Figure 6.38 Color subtraction using yellow filter.
ii. Magenta filter (or a pigment) absorbs green light and transmits red
and blue light. Blue and red light together are seen as magenta.
red
red
blue
blue
White Light
Magenta Light
green
Magenta filter
Figure 6.39 Color subtraction using magneta filter.
iii. Cyan filter (or pigment) absorbs red light and transmits blue and
green light. Blue and green light together are seen as cyan.
red
blue
blue
White Light
=
Cyan Light
green
green
Cyan filter
Figure 6.40 Color subtraction using cyan filter.
iv. Yellow filter (or a pigment) absorbs blue and Magenta filter (or a
pigment) absorbs green and reflect the red light.
244
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
red
red
blue
Red Light
White Light
green
green
Yellow filter
Magenta filter
Figure 6.41 Color subtraction using yellow and magneta filters.
V. Yellow filter (or a pigment) absorbs blue and cyan filter (or a pigment)
absorbs red and reflect the green light.
red
red
blue
Green Light
White Light
green
green
Yellow filter
Cyan filter
Figure 6.42 Color subtraction using yellow and cyan filters.
vi. Magenta filter (or a pigment) absorbs green and cyan filter (or a
pigment) absorbs red and reflect the blue light.
red
red
Blue Light
blue
blue
White Light
green
Magenta filter
Cyan filter
Figure 6.43 Subtraction using magneta and cyan filters.
When you mix colors using paint, or through the printing process, you are
using the subtractive color method. Subtractive color mixing means that
one begins with white and ends with black; as one adds color, the result
gets darker and tends to black.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
245
Section summary
Subtractive primary colors filter out all light when combined.
Review questions
1. What colors of light are absorbed by a green pigment?
2. Which combination of colors of light gives magenta?
3. Which combination of colors of light gives cyan?
4. If yellow light falls on an object whose pigment absorbs green
light, what color will the object appear?
5. If yellow light falls on a blue pigment, what color will appear?
Virtual Labs
On the soft copy of the book, click on the following link to per-
form virtual experiments on electromagnetic waves and geomet-
rical optics unit under the guidance of your teacher.
1. Geometric Optics PhET Experiment.
2. Bending Light PhET Experiment.
3. Color Vision PhET Experiment.
4. Radio Waves & Electromagnetic Fields PhET Experiment.
Unit summary
The ray model of light describes the path of light as straight
lines.
The speed of light in a vacuum is 2.99792458 X 10⁸ ml s = 3.00 X
246
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
10⁸ m/s. The speed of light is different in different materials.
Like all forms of electromagnetic waves, light can travel
through vacuum as well as through matter.
EM spectrum, the entire distribution of EM radiation accord-
ing to frequency or wavelength. The entire EM spectrum, from
the lowest to the highest frequency (longest to shortest wave-
length), includes all radio waves (e.g., commercial radio and
television, microwaves, radar), infrared radiation, visible light,
ultraviolet radiation, X-rays, and gamma rays.
Reflecting surfaces obey the laws of reflection. The refracting
surfaces obey the laws of refraction.
A light ray travelling obliquely from a denser medium to a
rarer medium bends away from the normal. A light ray bends
towards the normal when it travels obliquely from a rarer to a
denser medium.
The refractive index of a transparent medium is the ratio of
the speed of light in a vacuum to that in the medium.
Mirrors and lenses form images of objects. Images can be
either real or virtual, depending on the position of the object.
The focal length of a spherical mirror is equal to half its radius
of curvature.
A compound microscope uses a convex objective lens to form
an enlarged image that is further enlarged by an eyepiece.
A refracting telescope uses a large objective lens and an eye-
piece lens to form an image of a distant object.
A reflecting telescope uses a large concave mirror that gathers
light and an eyepiece lens to form an image of a distant object.
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
247
The human eye mainly senses red, green and blue, and the
brain interprets combinations of these into all the colors you
see.
The most common set of primary colors is red, green and blue.
When red, green and blue light are mixed or added together
with the proper intensity, white light is obtained.
Additive color synthesis occurs when three light zones (red,
green, and blue) are mixed with optimum intensity and then
white light is generated. Additive color synthesis: green + red
= yellow, blue + red = magenta, blue + green = cyan.
Subtractive synthesis occurs by mixing the basic material col-
ors (cyan, magenta and yellow). If all three colors are mixed, a
black color is created. They are mixed with: yellow + magenta
= red, yellow + cyan = green, magenta + cyan = blue.
End Unit questions
1. You are looking at a burning candle. Draw the path of light
that enables you to see that candle.
2. Explain why you need to protect yourselves from ultraviolet
radiation from the Sun.
3. List some advantages and disadvantages of using X-rays.
4. Write a short essay on a type of electromagnetic waves. You
should look at the uses, advantages and disadvantages of your
chosen radiation.
5. List the EM spectrum in order of increasing wavelength.
6. Do the reflected rays that contribute to forming the image
from a plane mirror obey the law of reflection?
248
Unit 6 Electromagnetic Waves and Geometrical Optics
7. Copy and complete the following concept map.
Light
is an
is reflected by
is refracted by
that can
that can
that can
travel in
be
be
8. The image formed by a concave mirror is observed to be vir-
tual, erect and larger than the object. Where should be the
position of the object?
9. You wish to obtain an erect image of an object, using a concave
mirror of 15 cm focal length. What should be the range of
distance of the object from the mirror? What is the nature
of the image? Is the image larger or smaller than the object?
Draw a ray diagram to show the image formation in this case.
10. Name the type of mirror used in the following situations.
(a) Headlights of a car.
(b) Side/rear-view mirror of an automobile.
(c) Solar furnace. Support your answer with reason.
11. A concave lens of focal length 15 cm forms an image 10 cm
from the lens. How far is the object placed from the lens?
Draw the ray diagram.
12. An object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex mirror
of 15 cm focal length. Find the position and nature of the
image.
13. The magnification produced by a plane mirror is +1. What
does this mean?
6.9 Color subtraction of light using filters
249
14. An object 5.0 cm in length is placed at a distance of 20 cm in
front of a convex mirror of radius of curvature 30 cT. Find the
position of the image, its nature, and its size.
15. An object of size 7.0 cm is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave
mirror of 18 cm focal length. At what distance from the mirror
should a screen be placed, so that a sharp focused image can
be obtained? Find the size and the nature of the image.
16. One-half of a convex lens is covered with a black paper. Will
this lens produce a complete image of the object? Verify your
answer experimentally. Explain your observations.
17. An object 5 cm in length is held 25 cm away from a converging
lens of focal length 10 cT. Draw the ray diagram and find the
position, size and nature of the image formed.
18. A convex lens produces a virtual image which is four times
larger than the object. The image is 15 cm from the lens. What
is the focal length of the lens?
19. Compare and contrast primary light colors and primary pig-
ment colors.
20. Determine the colors that are reflected from an object that
appears black.
21. What color do the following shirts appear to the human eye
when the lights in a room are turned off and the room is com-
pletely dark? A) red shirt B) blue shirt C) green shirt.
22. The cover of a book appears to have a magenta color. What
colors of light does it reflect and what colors does it absorb?